Title       : Computational Problems in DNA Sequencing, and Regulatory and Sequence Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a9974498

Award Number: 9974498
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1292456            (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Tompa tompa@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Karp  (Principal Investigator former)
              Walter L. Ruzzo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Genome Projects and similar efforts are generating vast amounts of data, but
              many challenges still remain in sequencing and mappng of large genomes.
              Analysis of these data is also still in its infancy, and refined tools and
              methodologies are sorely needed. This project aims to provide mathematical and
              computational improvements in response to several key challenges in the
              assembly and analysis of genomic data, loosely
categorized into mapping and
              sequencing, regulatory analysis, and discovery of sequence motifs. 

Although
              algorithms for physical mapping and sequencing have been studied for years,
              there are still no fully satisfactory practical solutions to support current
              mapping and sequencing efforts as they move to newer technologies, longer and
              more repeat-rich targets, and dramatically higher throughputs. This project
              will algorithms and software for assembly of physical maps, with particular
              emphasis on increasing robustness and decreasing the need for human
              intervention. It also will investigate algorithms and analysis for novel
              sequencing strategies that have the potential to reduce cost and increase
              throughput, accuracy, and speed of sequencing and resequencing.

One of the
              central goals in molecular biology and genetics is to elucidate the function of
              genes. This goal is going to become more dominant as more raw genomic
              information accumulates. By observing the level of expression of a gene in
              different phases in the organism life cycle, different tissues, or different
              disease stages, one can get important clues to understanding the gene's role,
              with significant potential diagnostic and therapeutic applications. This
              project will provide analytical and algorithmic tools for several problems
              arising in gene expression analysis. In many cases, one cannot elucidate the
              functions of individual genes without attacking the more general problem of
              understanding regulatory pathways--systems of interacting genes and proteins
              controlling fundamental cellular processes. Again, the technology for gathering
              relevant data currently far outstrips the capabilities of computational tools
              for their analysis. This project will study algorithms for designing and
              interpreting expression array experiments involving gene knockouts and other
              perturbations that, in concert with a priori biological knowledge, allow
              putative pathways to be verified (or refuted) and perhaps even
              inferred.

Another area where data gathering capabilities outstrip those of
              our analytical tools is sequence analysis. A recurrent approach in sequence
              analysis is identification of sequence motifs--approximately repeated patterns
              in DNA or protein sequence data. Such similarities are often the key to
              identifying functionally important features such as protein binding sites on
              DNA sequences. As one example of the potential utility of such tools, they
              might help bridge an important gap in regulatory studies such as those outlined
              above. When analysis of expression array data reveals large sets of coregulated
              genes, a natural next step is to look for common motifs in regions near these
              genes, potentially binding sites for regulatory proteins. Identification of
              these proteins would then suggest dependencies in the regulatory pathways for
              the genes under study. This project will  study key problems related to finding
              motifs and assessing their statistical significance, including subtle sequence
              signals involving long patterns with inserted and deleted residues.

