Title       : Molecular Genetics of Conidial Morphogenesis in Neurospora Crassa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9974608

Award Number: 9974608
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Ebbole   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Fungi provide model eukaryotic systems for molecular studies of the cellular
              processes regulating growth and development.  Neurospora crassa and many other
              fungal species produce asexual spores, called conidia, that are an important
              means of dispersal.  The goal of this research is to define the molecular basis
              of this simple developmental process.  Several genetic loci regulate conidial
              development in N. crassa and the fluffy gene is the best characterized of
              these.  The predicted fluffy protein has sequence similarity to Gal4-type
              transcription factors.  The primary objective of the work is to characterize
              the function of fluffy.   The fluffy protein has regions suggesting it is a
              transcription factor.  This will be tested.  Fluffy's role as a regulator of
              morphogenesis will be tested by expression of fluffy from a heterologous
              promoter. The genetic requirements for fluffy-induced gene activation will be
              determined by examination of conidiation-induced gene expression in
              developmental mutants.  Physiological changes are known to accompany
              development and the relationship between metabolic state and development has
              been a topic of interest in N. crassa for over 30 years.   The results of the
              proposed research will provide a deeper understanding of how N. crassa
              regulates conidiation.  Nutrients, light and the circadian clock all contribute
              to regulation of the timing and abundance of conidia production.  Elucidation
              of the mechanisms that regulate conidiation will provide a foundation for
              understanding how signal transduction pathways responding to different
              environmental signals operate together to control cellular differentiation. A
              second objective of the proposed research is to examine the relationship
              between physiological changes and development.  This project will take
              advantage of a new technology, transcriptional profiling through analysis of
              microarrays, to assess the metabolic changes that occur in response to elevated
              expression of fluffy.   

Filamentous fungi are a diverse group of organisms
              with a tremendous impact on society.  Fungi play important roles in the decay
              and recycling of organic material.  They are also important pathogens of plants
              and animals and are used in industrial production of enzymes, chemicals, and
              pharmaceuticals.  A better understanding of the physiology and development of
              filamentous fungi is important to the goal of manipulating fungi for the
              purpose of increasing productivity and human health.  This project will
              integrate the molecular events regulating conidiation with physiological events
              associated with development and responses of fungi to environmental signals.

