Title       : Mechanisms of Kinesin-Cargo Interactions in Drosophila Melanogaster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2001   
File        : a9974835

Award Number: 9974835
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331185             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph G. Gindhart joseph.gindhart@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to identify the essential mechanisms used by
              eukaryotic cells to control the transport and location of subcellular
              structures and macromolecules within the cell.  Such movement and regulation of
              subcellular location is absolutely critical to the life of the cell. 
              Eukaryotic cells have exceptional transport requirements for the movement of
              membrane-bound organelles among intracellular compartments, maintaining the
              position of intracellular compartments in the cytosolic space, ensuring proper
              distribution of genetic material at cell division, and changing cell shape. 
              Eukaryotes have evolved a specialized class of proteins, called molecular
              motors, that are responsible for many intracellular transport phenomena.
              Molecular motors are enzymes that, through the energy of ATP hydrolysis,
              generate forces sufficient for movement along actin and microtubule
              cytoskeletal tracks. Molecular motors bind to intracellular cargoes such as
              chromosomes, organelles, and cytoskeletal elements. Subsequent binding of the
              motor-cargo complex to the cytoskeletal tracks facilitates active directional
              movement within the cytoplasm.  Although much is known about how actin and
              microtubule motors transform the energy of ATP hydrolysis into work, the
              cellular mechanisms controlling motor-cargo interactions, directional movement
              within the cell, and dissociation of the motor-cargo complex upon arrival at
              its cellular "destination" are largely unknown. This investigation will address
              the extremely important question of how the microtubule-based motor protein,
              kinesin, "knows" which subcellular element to move, to where, and when. Current
              plausible hypotheses propose that protein receptors on the surface of kinesin's
              intracellular cargoes mediate kinesin-cargo interactions. In addition, previous
              investigations suggest that kinesin may be a target of
              phosphorylation-dependent signaling pathways, thereby suggesting a mechanism
              for controlling kinesin-dependent motility in response to the transport
              requirements of the cell. To test these hypotheses, the genetically-tractable
              and well-characterized model organism, the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster,
              will be employed.  Proteins that bind to Drosophila kinesin will be identified
              and characterized. First, the yeast two-hybrid system will be used to screen
              Drosophila cDNA libraries for genes that encode kinesin-associated proteins
              (KAPs). Sequence analysis and in vitro binding experiments will determine which
              genes merit further attention. Drosophila genetic tools will be used to
              identify mutations in KAP-encoding genes to study their in vivo function, as
              well as possible genetic interactions with kinesin mutations. KAP-specific
              antisera will be generated and used to study the subcellular localization of
              kinesin-associated proteins, both in fixed tissue and subcellular fractions.
              Preliminary experiments have identified the kinesin binding protein KAP94E,
              which will be analyzed further. Second, membrane-bound KAPs will be identified
              by affinity purification of kinesin from Drosophila extracts enriched for
              kinesin cargoes such as mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi complex, and
              vesicles. By forwarding the analysis of the structure and function of kinesin
              receptors and regulatory molecules, these investigations have the potential to
              unravel the mechanisms controlling kinesin-dependent intracellular transport,
              and, more generally, will provide testable models that inform future
              investigations of molecular motor function and regulation.






