Title       : Dynamic Models of Xyloglucan Conformation in the Primary Cell Walls of Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a9974673

Award Number: 9974673
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. York will@ccrc.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9974673
York

 
Experiments will be performed to investigate the
              molecular conformations and dynamic properties of xyloglucan, a hemicellulosic
              polysaccharide that interacts with cellulose to form a load-bearing network in
              the primary cell walls of higher plants.  Preliminary calculations suggest that
              the backbone of this polysaccharide is twisted in solution and that the
              backbone is flattened upon association with microcrystalline cellulose.  This
              hypothesis has far-reaching implications with respect to the mechanisms by
              which plant cell walls assemble and expand during cell differentiation. 
              Spectroscopic evidence that allows this hypothesis to be tested will be
              recorded and analyzed.  Specific model compounds, including 13C-enriched alkyl
              oligoglycosides, will be prepared for this purpose from the 13C-enriched
              polysaccharide by a chemoenzymatic approach that utilizes both enzyme-catalyzed
              transglycosylation reactions and chemically catalyzed glycosylation reactions. 
              The molecular conformations and dynamics of these compounds will be probed by
              measuring a range of NMR parameters, including residual dipolar splitting that
              is observed in magnetically oriented anisotropic media.  The spectroscopic data
              will be evaluated by comparing measured spectral parameters to those predicted
              by molecular dynamics simulations.  The results will be used to develop
              realistic models of the conformational properties of xyloglucan
              oligosaccharides.  These models will be extended to describe the polysaccharide
              by additional molecular dynamics simulations that will be performed using
              computational methods specifically designed for this purpose.

Analysis of
              the conformational and dynamic properties of xyloglucan will provide insight
              into the molecular mechanisms leading to the assembly and growth of the plant
              cell wall.  These are fundamentally important processes that govern the
              development of every plant cell, ultimately determining the sizes and shapes of
              these cells and thereby defining the morphology of the entire plant.  It is
              clear that the plant cell controls these processes by producing specific
              enzymes that modify the chemical structure and topology of the cell wall
              polysaccharides.  However, only a few of these enzymes have been isolated and
              characterized, and the specific details of their effects on the polysaccharide
              networks in the cell wall are not well understood.  The analyses performed
              during this study will lead to the development of new theoretical models
              describing how these polysaccharides are interconnected, how these
              interconnections are generated, and how plant enzymes affect these
              interconnections as the cell grows.  This in turn will facilitate the
              development of new tools for controlling the growth and development of plants,
              which could have substantial benefits, including improvements in the yields of
              commercially important crops. 
