Title       : Molecular Genetics of Amino Acid Biosynthesis in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2002  
File        : a9974451

Award Number: 9974451
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald R. Fink fink@wi.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Whitehead Inst Biomed Res
	      Nine Cambridge Center
	      Cambridge, MA  021421479    617/258-5215

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1112,1116,1136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal is to identify the signal transduction pathway(s) by which the plant
              hormone auxin (IAA) promotes plant tropisms. In gravitropism, the root bends
              towards the center of the earth. The polar transport hypothesis, posits an
              efflux transporter that pumps IAA up from the root tip to the side of the root
              closest to the center of the earth. There, the IAA inhibits the elongation of
              the cells, whereas those on the opposite side elongate, with the result that
              the root bends down and navigates back on course.  Analysis of the agravitropic
              mutant, eirl, and the EIR1 gene suggests that it is the pump predicted by the
              polar transport model. The EIR1 protein, expressed only in the root has
              similarities to some bacterial efflux pumps. Experiments have been designed to
              provide direct evidence for the function of EIR1 in polar transport.
              Remarkably, yeast cells carrying the plant EIR1 gene are resistant to some
              inhibitors presumably because they pump out the compound. Mutants of the EIRl
              gene that enhance and inhibit effiux will be generated in yeast, a system which
              provides a unique tool to probe this pathway in plants. The role of EIR1 in
              asymmetric transport of IAA from the root tip to the elongation zone will be
              tested by determining whether there is asymmetric localization of EIR1 in the
              plasma membrane of root cells. Genetic screens for suppressors and enhancers of
              eirl should identify the upstream and downstream genes that transduce the
              signal for gravitropism. These suppressors will permit construction of the
              gravitropism signal transduction pathway.

Molecular analysis of the other
              family members of EIR paralogs will determine whether these are the IAA pumps
              responsible for the effects of auxin on tropisms in other tissues. These genes
              will be cloned, and the clones used as probes for various insertion libraries
              to identify mutants. In addition transgenic plants containing dominant negative
              mutations in these EIR1 paralogs (validated in the yeast assay), will be used
              to construct transgenic plants, which will then be analyzed for tropism
              defects.

Cell expansion will also be studied by identifying leaf expansion
              mutants via the activation tagging method in an etrl-6 ein4-4 double mutant.
              etrl-6 ein4-4 strains have less expanded cells than wild type, which permits
              the identification of mutants with both larger or smaller leaves. Analysis of
              the cell size of leaf epidermal cells will distinguish whether the defect is in
              cell expansion or cell division. A genetic pathway for cell expansion will be
              constructed using the mutants obtained from this screen.

Other experiments
              designed to delineate the pathway of lateral root formation involve cloning the
              gene encoding ALF4. alf4 mutations block lateral root formation both by
              endogenous and exogenous IAA. In addition, a novel approach is described to
              engineer transgenic plants resistant to high salt.

