Title       : GOALI: A Multidisciplinary Industry-University Partnership to Assess the
               Processes Controlling Chemical-Mechanical Polishing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a9974381

Award Number: 9974381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $549998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Beaudoin steve.beaudoin@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James B. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karey Holland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard J. Borucki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Veronica A. Burrows  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP) is a technology of tremendous interest to
              the semiconductor manufacturing community.  It transforms wafers with varying
              surface topography into wafers with locally and globally flat surfaces.  During
              CMP, a wafer is pressed face-down against a rotating polishing pad that is
              covered with an aqueous suspension of abrasive particles (slurry).  Chemical
              and materials engineering faculty at Arizona State University will work with
              industry engineers from Motorola, Rodel, and SpeedFam-IPEC to develop
              fundamental descriptions of key chemical and mechanical polishing phenomena,
              and will combine these descriptions into unified, experimentally validated
              models of CMP processes.  Polishing of SiO2 and Cu surfaces will be studied
              using these models.  Molecular dynamic simulations of the interactions between
              slurry particles and the wafer surfaces will be performed, as well as the
              reactions that occur on and within thin films during CMP.  Surface spectroscopy
              studies will be performed to assess the rates of surface passivation and
              dissolution reactions occurring during CMP, and the rate of slurry penetration
              into the wafer surfaces will be assessed. These fundamental chemical and
              physical descriptions will be combined with existing finite element removal
              rate models that are based on stress effects to produce unified CMP process
              models.  

The project is expected to provide the identification and
              quantification of the physical and chemical phenomena of CMP and expression of
              these results in fundamental models.  The models will be useful to industry in
              the optimization and development of polishing protocols for semiconductor
              wafers.  

