Title       : Determination of the Exact Symmetry of the Pairing State in Sr2RuO4
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a9974327

Award Number: 9974327
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330817             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ying Liu liu@phys.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chang-Chyi Tsuei  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9974327
Liu

Experimental evidence for an unconventional (e.g. an odd parity
              (spin-triplet or p-wave)) pairing state in Sr2RuO4 has been growing. Such a
              system is the only known layered perovskite superconductor (Tc = 1.3 - 1.5K)
              that does not contain copper. This GOALI program brings together researchers
              from Penn State, IBM, JPL, and Kyoto University to carry out definitive
              experimental work that will address some key issues on this exciting new
              material.  The main thrust is to determine the parity (even or odd) of the
              pairing state in Sr2RuO4 through phase-sensitive experiments on
              single-crystal-based structures using a scanning SQUID probe. In/Sr2RuO4 (or
              Pb/Sr2RuO4) junctions will be studied to further our understanding of Josephson
              coupling between a conventional s-wave and an unconventional superconductor.
              Au/Sr2RuO4 (or Ag/Sr2RuO4) metallic contacts will be used to search for novel
              surface-bound states associated with the Andreev process. Tunneling
              measurements on superconducting single crystals of Sr2RuO4 which are aimed at
              the understanding of the mechanism of superconductivity in this material will
              be continued to determine the energy gap of Sr2RuO4. In carrying out this work,
              scientists at Penn State, IBM, and JPL will be able to exchange ideas in a
              collaborative environment and be actively involved in the training of graduate
              students at all stages.  Students in turn will have the opportunity to gain
              first hand experience working in very different settings including academic,
              industrial, and NASA research laboratories. This environment will provide them
              with a broader perspective when planning their future careers.
%%%
Recently
              Sr2RuO4, the only known layered perovskite superconductor (Tc = 1.3 - 1.5K)
              that does not contain copper, has attracted much attention in the
              superconductivity research community.  In particular, experimental evidence for
              an unconventional, likely odd-parity (spin-triplet or p-wave) pairing state
              found in Sr2RuO4 has generated much excitement on this new superconducting
              material.  The goals of this GOALI program are to determine the exact symmetry
              of the superconducting pairing state in Sr2RuO4 through phase sensitive and
              tunneling experiments and to study the Josephson coupling between an
              unconventional and a conventional s-wave superconductor.  In carrying out these
              research activities, a productive, long-term partnership between Penn State,
              IBM, and JPL will be established to train students for our future generation of
              scientists and engineers. Students in turn will have the opportunity to gain
              first hand experience working in very different settings including academic,
              industrial, and NASA research laboratories. Such an environment will provide
              them with a broader perspective when planning their future careers. This GOALI
              project is supported jointly by the Division of Materials Research (Condensed
              Matter Physics Program) and the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (MPS/OMA).
***

