Title       : Algorithms for Simulation of Macromolecular Diffusion and Association
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2000  
File        : a9974555

Award Number: 9974555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399552             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Skeel skeel@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shankar Subramaniam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              

DBI 9974555, Skeel, U of I, Urbana Champaign. Algorithms for simulation of
              macromolecular Diffusion and Association


Project Summary

The research
              objective of this proposal is to advance computational methodology and develop
              software for modeling dffusional encounters between macromolecules. A number of
              biomolecular association reactions in the cell are controlled by steered
              dffusion. Understanding the nature of the encounter in molecular detail will
              provide insights into underlying mechanisms of association. This has
              implications for protein engineering and design as well as regulation for
              several cellular processes. The proposed research will enable simulations of
              diffusional processes in molecular detail. Especially targeted is the
              calculation of diffusion-limited reaction rates. To improve computational
              tools, the work has as its aims (i) to develop a more detailed mathematical
              description of the biomolecular simulation, (ii) to construct more efficient
              algorithms for solving the equations, and (iii) to implement the methods in
              well designed software that runs on parallel computers. More specifically, it
              is proposed to develop more detailed representations of the biomolecules'
              geometry, the distribution
of electric charge, and hydrodynamic interactions.
              Algorithms are to be devised and implemented for more rapid calculation of
              trajectories of Brownian motion and more selective generation of them. Software
              is to be written that embodies the enhanced capabilities and runs effciently in
              parallel on both distributed and shared-memory computers. This activity is to
              include the further education of personnel in challenging interdisciplinary
              work. It will make available documented software, and the capability will also
              become available as part of the Web-based Biology Workbench
              (http://biology.ncsa.uiuc.edu).

