Title       : Regulation of Organic Osmolyte Channel Activity in Fish Erythrocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a9974350

Award Number: 9974350
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon Goldstein Leon_Goldstein@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
9974350
Goldstein		
All cells need to maintain their volume constant in
              order to survive and function normally.  However, changes in cell volume take
              place during both physiological and pathological stresses occurring in the
              cell's environment.  Dr. Goldstein's research proposal is directed at
              determining the mechanisms operating in the cells' membranes to return volume
              back to normal following the environmental disturbances.

His previous work
              has suggested that following changes in cell volume a specific protein in the
              cell membrane, named band 3, is activated to restore cell volume back to normal
              in red blood cells. Similar proteins are found in most cells within the body. 
              In the current research proposal he and his colleagues will determine how band
              3 operates as a volume regulatory protein and whether it operates alone or in
              conjunction with other proteins in the cell membrane to regulate cell volume. 
              They will employ modern cellular physiological and molecular biological
              techniques to answer these critical questions.

Another important question,
              which they will investigate in this proposal, is how changes in cell volume
              activate the band 3 protein in the cell membrane.  They have partially
              identified the biochemical pathway that causes band 3 activation during our
              previous studies.  Now, using a highly sophisticated new analytical technique,
              they plan to identify what part of the band 3 molecule is changed during
              activation and which enzymes in the cell interior effect these changes.

The
              research described above will make a significant contribution to our
              understanding of how not only red blood cells but also other cells in the body,
              such as brain cells, cope with disturbances such as stroke in their
              environment.  Hopefully, better therapies will be able to be developed to treat
              these disturbances as a result of these studies and related ones from other
              laboratories.





