Title       : GOALI: Modeling Electroporation-Mediated Drug Delivery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9974185

Award Number: 9974185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27419              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wanda Krassowska wanda.krassowska@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,5345,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9974185
Krassowska
This proposal seeks funding for an extended, six month
              visit by Dr. Wanda Krassowska, an Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering
              at Duke University, to Genetronics, Inc.  A drug delivery company, Genetronics
              specializes in developing technology and hardware that uses electroporation to
              deliver life-saving drugs or beneficial genes to patients.  Electroporation is
              a broad-based technique in which strong electrical shocks are used to create
              pores in the cell membrane that enable biologically active molecules to enter
              the cell interior.  Even though it is used quite extensively in biotechnology
              and medicine, electroporation is essentially empirical and its theoretical
              understanding lags behind practical applications.  The PI has recently
              developed a model of electroporation that, in contrast to previous models, is
              very inexpensive to solve numerically.  This feature makes it an ideal tool to
              study electroporation in systems that exhibit significant spatial variations, a
              feature occurring in nearly all experimental and clinical  settings. 
              Therefore, the objective of the PI's visit to Genetronics is to explore
              potential practical applications of this model in the area of
              electroporation-mediated drug delivery.

The PI and the co-investigators from
              Genetronics have identified three possible areas in which the use of the model
              can impact the design of new devices and therapies: (1) the role of pulse
              shape, strength, duration, and frequency on pore creation and uptake of active
              molecules; (2) cell survival during electroporation with very long, low
              intensity pulses; and (3) multi-pulse protocols for delivery of DNA and drugs
              into cells.

The PI will be responsible for implementing the model on the
              company computer and customizing it for a particular application.  The
              industrial collaborators will  contribute to the model development by supplying
              information on the objectives of the electroporation treatment, the geometry of
              the preparation, shock protocols, and drug characteristics

The Genetronics
              scientists will also evaluate how well the model reproduces, explains, and
              predicts experimental results and will provide the PI with the feedback for the
              next stage of model development.  If, as a result of the collaboration proposed
              in this application, the model will be able to predict the transfer of drugs
              and genetic material to cells, it will substantially advance the scientific
              foundations of the electroporation-mediated drug delivery.


