Title       : Control of Neuronal Growth & Synaptogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a9974641

Award Number: 9974641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $575000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hollis T. Cline cline@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              During development, many brain regions establish 'maps' in which inputs are
              organized so that correlated activity converges on common target nerve cells,
              the neurons.   Activity coming from the eye is crucial in regulating the
              formation of a spatial map of the external visual world.  The incoming nerve
              fibers, called afferent axons, make functional contacts called synapses on the
              receiving parts, called dendrites, of target neurons.  Physiological activity
              regulates how the axon terminals and the dendrites develop their detailed
              morphology, and regulates the strength of the synaptic connections; without
              vision, these connections do not form properly.  This project uses
              pharmacological manipulations with a novel microscopic technology of time-lapse
              confocal imaging of cellular structures as they develop in the brain of
              tadpoles.  Tests analyze how synaptic strength affects synaptic structure, and
              how the neurotransmitter molecule called GABA and a molecular receptor called
              the NMDA receptor regulate development of structure and function.
   Results
              will provide valuable new information on regulatory mechanisms controlling
              development at the molecular level in the living brain.  This project also
              provides substantial training for students from the high school to postdoctoral
              level.

