Title       : Propagation of Light in Photonic Band Structure Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a9974353

Award Number: 9974353
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227390             (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Watson ghw@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9974353
Watson

Photonic band structure effects in periodic dielectric arrays
              will be investigated by spectroscopic, interferometric, and light scattering
              measurements in the visible and near infrared.  Work on colloidal crystals
              fabricated from microsphere dielectric particles will be continued with an
              emphasis on more fully understanding their defect states.  The primary new
              initiative in this project will be development of photopolymeric approaches for
              fabrication of photonic band gap structures suitable for study of linear and
              nonlinear optical effects and possible device applications.  This approach will
              employ optical microscopy in combination with laser excitation and should
              provide advantages over fabrication of desired photonic structures by other
              means.
%%%
Photonic band gap crystals belong to a new class of materials in
              which propagation of electromagnetic waves is forbidden over a certain range of
              frequencies.  Ready availability of such materials would open up the
              possibility of many device applications, especially in the optical regime. 
              These include devices associated with quantum optics and the confinement and
              control of light such as lasers, LEDs, and microcavities.  This project is
              fundamental in nature but has the potential to have practical impact on
              photonic devices, widespread in application in modern technology.  Students
              participating in this project will gain strong backgrounds in optical physics
              and laser spectroscopy as well as condensed matter physics, in high demand in
              industrial and national laboratories.
***

