Title       : Nitrate Assimilation under Elevated CO2 and Leaf N2O Emissions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9974927

Award Number: 9974927
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $456907             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold J. Bloom ajbloom@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1181,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The PIs have found that high carbon dioxide levels interfere with the ability of
              wheat plants to use nitrate fertilizer as a nitrogen source. Were this a
              general phenomenon, it would offer a mechanistic explanation for several other
              unresolved issues including (a) why the stimulation of photosynthesis by high
              carbon dioxide levels declines over time, (b) why high carbon dioxide levels
              inhibit plant respiration, and (c) why nitrogen availability determines
              ecosystem response to carbon dioxide enrichment. The PIs have also discovered
              that wheat leaves emit significant amounts of nitrous oxide, a greenhouse gas
              that has an effect approximately 250 times greater than carbon dioxide and that
              contributes to ozone degradation in the upper atmosphere. The PIs preliminary
              results indicate that leaf nitrous oxide emissions could account for as much as
              12% of the nitrous oxide generated worldwide.

The proposed research will
              survey a range of plant types for carbon dioxide inhibition of nitrate
              assimilation and leaf nitrous oxide emissions to determine whether they are
              common occurrences. It will evaluate some of the possible mechanisms behind
              this inhibition. It will assess the importance of several possible sources of
              nitrous oxide emissions including shoot nitrate assimilation, root nitrate
              assimilation, and production by microbes around the root. It will evaluate
              these phenomena in the field through a collaboration with an ongoing study that
              is examining soil nitrous oxide emissions from wheat fields in the Yaqui Valley
              of Mexico. The results of this research will be far-reaching, providing
              fundamental information on the mechanisms responsible for plant responses to
              elevated carbon dioxide as well as for greenhouse gas emissions from
              plants.


