Title       : The Performance of Iterative Search Strategies for Maximum-Likelihood Estimation
               of Phylogeny from DNA Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a9974124

Award Number: 9974124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128976             (Estimated)
Investigator: John (Jack) M. Sullivan jacks@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Swofford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9974124
Sullivan and Swofford
	The construction or estimation of phylogenetic
              branching structure (trees) from DNA sequence data, whether for organisms or
              their constituent genes, is increasingly important in a wide array of
              biological studies. Maximum-likelihood (ML) estimation methods are also
              increasingly being used to construct phylogenetic trees because of several
              desirable statistical properties of the methods, including the capacity to
              modify parameters of nucleotide substitution that are thought to influence the
              rates and patterns of DNA base changes. Realistic models describing the process
              of nucleotide substitution are now available for use in calculating likelihood
              values; for example, all six reversible nucleotide substitution types can be
              allowed to evolve at a unique relative rate, base frequencies can deviate from
              equality, and different sites (and different codon positions) can be allowed to
              evolve at different rates. The most complex time-reversible models currently in
              use thus incorporate the estimation of ten parameters to describe the process
              of nucleotide substitution, in addition to the calculation of branch lengths
              for the tree under examaination. The penalty in this complexity is the sheer
              computational time required to calculate the maximum likelihood score, which
              becomes prohibitive for nearly all researchers working with more than 20
              species in an analysis. Yet, gene-sequencing and genomic sequencing projects
              are underway for vastly more species, and the analysis of these huge datasets
              requires improvement in maximum-likelihood search methods.
	Dr. Jack Sullivan
              at the University of Idaho, working with his colleague Dr. David Swofford, is
              exploring the option of parallel processing of ML searches using the widely
              available software package PAUP*, in order to conduct iterative searches on the
              huge numbers of possible trees from large datasets. A multi-step approach will
              start with published datasets and trees for phylogenies involving small numbers
              of taxa, then move to larger numbers of taxa, and then add simulation studies
              on the iterative-search strategy focused on a target dataset of 50 or so taxa.
              The general goal is to improve upon current ML methods for finding both the
              optimum tree structure and the optimal combination of topology, branch lengths,
              and parameters of the model for nucleotide substitution during evolutionary
              change of a group.


