Title       : Plant Vacuole Biogenesis and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9974429

Award Number: 9974429
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $362134             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Rogers bcjroger@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1114,1132,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Mammalian, or yeast and plant cells contain lysosomes or vacuoles,
              respectively, that function as lytic or digestive compartments.  Plant cells
              uniquely, however, also store many complex metabolic products and proteins in
              vacuoles.  Plant storage vacuoles differ from lytic vacuoles with respect to
              the protein composition of their membranes as well as their lumenal contents. 
              Additionally, a vesicular pathway unique to plant cells traffics from Golgi to
              protein storage vacuoles, while clathrin coated vesicles, as in yeast and
              mammalian cells, traffic from Golgi to lytic vacuoles.  
	In contrast to yeast
              vacuoles, plant vacuole membranes contain very large amounts (up to 50% of the
              membrane protein) of Tonoplast Intrisic Proteins (TIPs).  TIPs have aquaporin
              activity, but the large amounts present appear to be in great excess over what
              would be needed for water transport.  It has been shown previously that
              specific TIP isoforms are associated with specific vacuole functions:  Protein
              storage vacuoles that store seed-type storage proteins are marked by alpha-
              plus delta-TIP; vacuoles that store different types of proteins, vegetative
              storage proteins, and vacuoles that store pigments are marked by delta-TIP
              alone or by delta- plus gamma-TIP; lytic vacuoles that are normally present and
              contain acidic pH and active proteases are marked by gamma-TIP alone;
              autophagic vacuoles that are induced when plant cells are starved appear to be
              marked with a form of alpha-TIP alone.
	It has been hypothesized that TIP
              isoforms in some way determine the interior environment of vacuoles and thereby
              determine vacuole functions.  Additionally, the fact that plant cells must
              maintain functionally distinct vacuoles as well as separate vesicular pathways
              to each indicate that lytic and storage vacuoles are distinct organelles, not
              simply two extreme poles of one organelle.  This distinction is of substantial
              importance, because the separate organelle hypothesis requires that plant cells
              maintain separate pathways for flow of membrane proteins to generate and
              maintain the different organelles.  Additionally, it means that plant cells
              have unique mechanisms for biogenesis of additional organelle members of the
              endomembrane system.  As each of the three TIP isoforms can be found separately
              on vacuoles within one cell, it is possible that as many as three distinct
              plant vacuole organelles may exist.
	The goal is to test various parts of
              these hypotheses.  The role of TIP isoforms in determining vacuole function
              will be tested by knocking out expression of only delta-TIP in transgenic
              petunia and tomato plants.  If delta-TIP is required for vacuole storage
              functions, such knockout plants should lack flower petal pigments, and tomato
              plants should not be able to accumulate and store certain protease inhibitors,
              vegetative storage proteins that function as defense molecules, in leaves and
              flower petals.  Additionally, the form of alpha-TIP that is associated with
              autophagic vacuoles will be identified and cloned to determine its difference,
              if any, from alpha-TIP in protein storage vacuoles.  This also will potentially
              be a target for knockout experiments.
	The second series of experiments deals
              with biochemical characterization of tonoplast membranes purified from three
              functionally distinct vacuoles:  protein storage vacuoles, vacuoles storing
              vegetative storage proteins, and lytic vacuoles.  From yeast and mammalian
              studies, the concept has emerged that identity of organelles within the
              secretory pathway is defined biochemically by the presence of a unique syntaxin
              protein on each organelle membrane.  The syntaxins present on each vacuole type
              will be purified, cloned and characterized as a test of the functionally
              distinct vacuole as a unique organelle hypothesis.  
	These studies will
              provide new information about processes by which plant cells establish and
              maintain functionally distinct vacuoles.  They may also provide new insights
              into mechanisms for organelle biogenesis.

