Title       : Neuroendocrine Control of Amphibian Metamorphosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a9974672

Award Number: 9974672
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Denver rdenver@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Developing animals respond to variation in their habitat by altering their rate
              of development and/or their morphology; i.e., they exhibit developmental
              plasticity. One mechanism by which plasticity is expressed is through
              activation of the neuroendocrine system, which transduces environmental
              information into a physiological response. Recent findings of ours with
              amphibians and others with mammals show that the primary vertebrate stress
              neuropeptide, corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) is essential for adaptive
              developmental responses to environmental stress. For instance, CRH dependent
              mechanisms cause accelerated metamorphosis in response to habitat desiccation
              stress in some amphibian species, and intrauterine fetal stress syndromes in
              humans precipitate preterm birth. The objectives of the proposed research are
              to analyze the cellular and molecular mechanisms of CRH signaling during
              vertebrate development. Tadpoles of the South African clawed frog Xenopus
              laevis will be used as the model organism. The results of these studies will
              provide basic information on the molecular and functional organization of this
              essential developmental regulatory system. Furthermore, these studies should
              lay a foundation for understanding the mechanistic basis of developmental
              responses to changes in the physical and chemical environment. Basic knowledge
              gained from these studies should allow a more informed and detailed
              understanding of normal pathways of endocrine control, knowledge that will be
              essential to elucidating the mechanisms by which environmental endocrine
              disrupters act to alter developmental processes. Such a goal is particularly
              cogent given recent reports of worldwide declines in amphibian populations and
              concerns over the effects of hormone mimicking industrial compounds on the
              development of humans and wild animals.


