Title       : Soil Chemical Analysis in classic Maya Household Archaeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9974302

Award Number: 9974302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137587             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Terry richard_terry@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Payson Sheets  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Houston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Takeshi Inomata  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Richard Terry and his collaborators
              will develop the techniques of phosphate and trace element analysis and apply
              them to a series of Mayan archaeological sites. For many years archaeologists
              and soil scientists have recognized that specific human activities such as food
              preparation and trash discard leave a chemical imprint in the soil and attempts
              have been made to work from chemical effect to behavioral cause.  Dr. Terry has
              developed a field lab method of phosphate analysis using Mehlich II extraction
              and a colorimeter. This quick inexpensive method which can be conducted in the
              field provides high precision, quantitative data and allows researchers to
              conduct analysis of phosphate on an unprecedented scale. Trace elements such as
              Cu, Fe, Hg, Mn, Pb, and Zn are often associated with craft and ritual
              activities. In the course of  ongoing fieldwork at three Mayan sites, soil
              samples from relevant areas will be collected and these elements measured at
              the Brigham Young University soil laboratory through nitric-perchloric acid
              digestion and inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry. The use
              of trace element analysis in archaeology has been far more limited than
              phosphate tests and the systematic application of this method should open new
              possibilities in the study of past behavior. 

Field operations will have
              three major components. First, ethnoarchaeological studies will be conducted at
              a currently used house near the site of Aguateca Guatemala and in a nearby Maya
              village. Dr. Terry and colleagues will examine the correlation between soil
              chemical signatures and known activities. Second, soil analysis will be applied
              in the excavation of rapidly abandoned structures at three Mayan archaeological
              sites. Work at Aguateca and Ceren, El Salvador, has clearly demonstrated that
              both were abandoned rapidly. Structures at both sites contain numerous
              artifacts left in situ, providing ideal archaeological situations to examine
              the correlation between chemistry data and past behavior. At the site of
              Piedras Negras, gradually abandoned structures will offer a trial case to test
              the utility of soil chemistry data to in artifact-poor surroundings. 

This
              research is important for several reasons. It will shed new light on how
              prehistoric Mayan peoples patterned their activities. It will also help to
              develop techniques of potential value in a wide range of archaeological
              situations. 

