Title       : The Invertebrate 2Na+/1H+ Antiporter: Physiology, Molecular Biology, and Role in
               Heavy Metal Sequestration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2001      
File        : a9974569

Award Number: 9974569
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $406000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Ahearn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The proposed 4-year investigation is a request for funds to continue studying
              ion transport mechanisms of crustacean hepatopancreatic epithelial cells. 
              Previous studies by Dr. Ahearn identified an apparently unique invertebrate
              cation exchanger on the epithelial brush border membranes of gastrointestinal
              epithelial cells from arthropods and echinoderms which was amiloride-sensitive,
              electrogenic and exchanged either 2 Na+ or 1 Ca2+ for 1 H+.   This transporter
              was shown to be involved in a number of biological activities of the crustacean
              hepatopancreas that included 1) transepithelial cation transport, 2) proton
              secretion, 3) intracellular calcium storage during the molt cycle, and 4) heavy
              metal detoxification.  This transport system was one of three apical proteins
              involved in the influx of luminal calcium from food and appears to be
              responsible for the uptake of potentially toxic heavy metals as well.  The
              electrogenic, brush border 2 Na+/1H+ exchanger works in conjunction with an
              electroneutral, basolateral 1Na+/1H+ exchanger to monitor intracellular pH and
              sodium concentration.  In the proposed continuation of this project, he would
              like to use a combination of membrane vesicle techniques and molecular biology
              to further characterize the functional roles that the 2Na+/1H+ and 1Na+/1H+
              antiporters have in crustacean hepatopancreatic biology and to determine the
              gene nucleotide sequences of these two invertebrate exchangers.  He will
              undertake three different lines of research over the next grant cycle to attain
              these goals: 1) The investigation of cellular regulatory mechanisms controlling
              the functions of each transporter for comparison with what is currently known
              about Na+/H+ exchangers of mammals: 2) The application of PCR and expression
              cloning techniques to determine both gene sequences; and 3) The continued
              investigation of the transport processes for divalent cations by this organ
              system by describing the mechanisms for heavy metal uptake across the brush
              border and basolateral membranes and how these cations are sequestered in
              mitochondria and lysosomes as part of a detoxification process common to many
              invertebrates.  From these physiological and molecular studies, he should be
              able to clarify the functional role(s) of these antiporters in ion transport
              regulation and sequestration and compare their gene sequences with those of the
              analogous mammalian Na+/H+ antiporter isoforms.

