Title       : Improved Discretization Methods for Modeling Wavefront Conduction in Nonuniform
               Cardiac Tissue
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1999 
File        : a9974533

Award Number: 9974533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313553             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig S. Henriquez ch@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9218,9263,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Investigations into the relative roles of tissue structure and
              membrane
Excitability recovery on creating conditions for arrhythmias in the
              heart have proven to
be extremely challenging.  Computer models of wavefront
              propagation have been
important to the inquiry by allowing effects to be
              isolated and by providing access to
some of the parameters that cannot be
              monitored or controlled in a given experimental
setup. Due to limitations in
              the traditionally employed numerical methods, however,
these computer models
              have either ignored or greatly simplified the effects of structural
and
              geometrical non-uniformities on the activation process. Consequently,
              most
mechanisms for arrhythmogenesis derived from them are generally based on
              the
effects of non-uniformities of membrane properties in tissue with assumed
              uniform
material properties. For macroscopic models of the heart to have
              greater predictive
ability they must be able to incorporate the effects of
              diseased-induced tissue structure
inhomogeneities on conduction and potential
              timecourses.  The objectives of this 
proposal are to develop improved
              discretization schemes for robustly modeling
conduction in regions with
              spatially varying material and membrane properties. These
objectives will be
              accomplished by creating a unified meltherhatical and computational
framework
              for simulation that will allow different numerical methods to be
              directly
compared. The simulation system, BIDOSIM, will use a module-based
              paradigm from
which a single "sun-time environment" can be created.  This
              approach will allow any advances made in any one component to lead directly to
              an advancement of the whole
program.  This modularity will thus enable
              developers from different disciplines to focus
on their own area of expertise
              (i.e model description, numerical integration methods,
parallelization)
              without needing to simultaneously work on the other areas.  BIDOSIM
will be
              used to evaluate the use of structured and unstructured finite volume
              methods,
that involve quadrilateral and triangular grids, to discretize the
              computational domains
of interest. The speed, accuracy and ability of both
              types of methods will be examined
using explicit and implicit time stepping
              algorithms.  To ensure that the spatial
discretization methods are able to
              accommodate any advances in the dynamical models of the ion fluxes across the
              membrane state-of-the-art kinetic models, such as the Lucfludy II ventricular
              and Nygren atrial models, will be evaluated over a range of physiological
              conditions.  Finally, strategies for using spatially adaptive gridding in
              regions with abrupt changes in tissue properties, such as those expected in
              diseased myocardium, will be developed.  Such adaptation will allow
              significantly fewer grid points and enable the ability to distinguish better
              artifact from true behavior.  The development of the overall software package
              will be enhanced through feedback from an outside group of users and
              dissemination will be facilitated through partnerships with two national
              centers, NCSA and the Center for Bioelectric Field Simulation.

