Title       : Evolution and Developmental Processing of Micronuclear Genes in Hypotrichous
               Ciliates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a9974680

Award Number: 9974680
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $426998             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Prescott prescotd@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ciliated protozoa possess a transcriptionally inactive germline nucleus
              (micronucleus) and a transcriptionally active somatic nucleus (macronucleus)
              within the same cell. After two cells mate, a new macronucleus develops from a
              micronuclear fusion product in each mating partner, and the old macronucleus
              disintegrates. In ciliates of the hypotrich group, DNA sequences are
              extensively amplified, cut, spliced, eliminated, and reordered during the
              60-hour development of a macronucleus.  The development of a macronucleus in
              hypotrichs begins with the formation of polytene chromosomes, from which tens
              of thousands of DNA sequences are spliced out and destroyed. Subsequently, the
              polytene chromosomes are transected through all interbands with elimination of
              more DNA sequences and release of gene-size DNA molecules, each containing a
              single transcription unit. Telomeres are synthesized on the ends of each of the
              gene-size molecules. The gene-size molecules undergo several rapid rounds of
              replication to produce the mature, transcriptionally active macronucleus with
              average gene copy numbers of ~1000. Overall, in macro-nuclear development ~95%
              of micronuclear DNA sequence complexity is eliminated.  Most of the eliminated
              micronuclear DNA consists of long spacers between successive genes or groups of
              genes. However, some of the eliminated DNA consists of multiple, short AT-rich
              sequences called internal eliminated segments (IESs) that are spliced out of
              genes during macronuclear development. Five of the 12 micronuclear genes that
              have been completely or partially characterized are scrambled; blocks of
              sequence called macronuclear destined segments (MDSs), which are separated by
              IESs, are out of order and in some instances, inverted compared to the
              transcriptionally functional macronuclear versions of the genes. Removal of
              IESs in all genes and splicing of all MDSs in scrambled and nonscrambled genes
              during macronuclear development requires ~200,000 recombinations in the
              DNA.
Three strategies will be used to study evolutionary and developmental DNA
              events in hypotrichs. 1) Evolution of IES number, position, and structure in
              the four micronuclear genes encoding b telomere binding protein, a telomere
              binding protein, actin I and DNA polymerase a in a series of seven hypotrich
              species. Defining evolutionary relationships among the seven species with
              ssrDNA sequences will show whether IESs are lost and/or gained in which species
              during evolution, how IESs evolve, and how scrambling patterns evolve. The
              study includes mutagenesis to induce changes in micronuclear gene structure,
              particularly to test the mutational model of shifting of IESs along DNA. 2) The
              sequences of approximately 45 randomly collected clones of different
              macronuclear DNA molecules will be analyzed to estimate the percentage of
              macronuclear DNA molecules that actually encode genes. 3) The temporal order of
              DNA processing events will be tracked by PCR of individual anlage at known
              points of development.

These profound modifications of hypotrich germline
              DNA expand appreciation both of the extent to which DNA may be manipulated as a
              part of evolution and of the intricacy with which an organism is able to
              reconfigure its DNA sequences during development.  Insight into telomere
              formation may also result. 

