Title       : ToxR/S and Unsaturated Fatty Acid Regulation in Photobacterium profundum Strain
               SS9
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a9974528

Award Number: 9974528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas H. Bartlett dbartlett@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly A. Bidle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1156,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Bartlett
The ToxR/S regulon is widely distributed among bacteria of the family
              Vibrionaceae. However, little is known about the nature or even the number of
              genes regulated by these proteins, except for some genes involved in human
              colonization and pathogenesis which have been acquired by horizontal gene
              transfer in Vibrio cholerae. Recent experiments in the investigator's lab
              indicate that ToxR and ToxS influence the ability of the deep-sea bacterium
              Photobacterium profundum strain SS9 to respond to changes in pressure and to
              grow at elevated pressure. Furthermore, in this organism, ToxR/S, together with
              the cyclic AMP receptor protein (CRP), appears to modulate the levels of
              unsaturated fatty acids (UFA's). It has previously been suggested that UFA's
              may be important factors in the adaptation of the membrane to elevated pressure
              and to decreased temperature.  During this project the investigator will
              characterize the ToxR/S regulon in general, and the pressure and temperature
              regulation of UFA's in particular,  in SS9. The connection between toxRS gene
              expression and growth inhibition at elevated pressure will be clarified. ToxR/S
              regulated genes will be identified using both genetic and molecular screening
              strategies. A subset of these genes will then be sequenced, their
              transcriptional regulation characterized, and their functions ascertained
              through mutant studies. Additional studies will specifically explore the
              possibility of transcriptional, translational, and posttranslational regulation
              of UFA's by pressure and temperature. Transcriptional regulation of genes whose
              products govern the levels of cis-vaccenic acid and eicosapentaenoic acid will
              be determined as a function of temperature and pressure in various regulatory
              protein mutant backgrounds. Finally, the regulation of the activity of
              0-ketoacyl-ACP synthase II, which is required for high pressure and low
              temperature regulation of cis-vaccenic acid levels, will be examined through
              kinetic analyses.

Despite the fact that the deep sea represents the largest
              part of our planet where life is found, little is known about the adaptations
              of organisms to this cold environment where the water pressure can exceed
              15,000 pounds per square inch. In this project a bacterial species isolated
              from the bottom of the ocean will be used for genetic and physiological
              experiments to address the control of membrane components (unsaturated fatty
              acids) which are required for its growth and survival at low temperature and
              high pressure. The possibility that an enzyme responsible for making
              unsaturated fatty acids in this microorganism possesses unique characteristics
              suiting it to deep-sea conditions will be explored. The investigator will seek
              to  identify additional cell functions which help the organism adjust to high
              pressure. The results will be of use in understanding the adaptation of life to
              extreme environments and will provide new information about how cells maintain
              proper membrane function. 

