Title       : Redox-Triggered Protein Folding Probed by Fluorescence Decay Kinetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9974477

Award Number: 9974477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay R. Winkler winklerj@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry B. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1968,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB 9974477
Winkler

In its native state, a protein adopts a discrete
              conformation, or fold, that is believed to represent the most stable structure
              for the constituent polypeptide.  Certain chemicals or elevated temperatures
              can disrupt the native fold of a protein, producing a heterogeneous ensemble of
              unfolded polypeptides with a broad distribution of end-to-end distances, and a
              large number of conformations.  A continuing challenge in protein-folding
              research is understanding how such a heterogeneous ensemble evolves into a
              collection of neatly folded proteins.  The development of suitable probes of
              the folding process is of paramount importance.  An effective folding probe
              must report not just on the populations of unfolded, intermediate, and folded
              forms, but also should provide information about the structural homogeneity of
              these entities.  Fluorescent protein-folding probes can be engineered to
              provide both population and heterogeneity information for a polypeptide
              ensemble through measurements of energy-transfer kinetics.  In this research
              program, fluorescence decay kinetics will be measured during protein-folding
              reactions in order to characterize the evolution of the unfolded ensemble into
              the folded protein.  The goal is the development and utilization of materials
              and methods for evaluation of polypeptide structure and heterogeneity during
              the entire course of protein folding from triggering to formation of folded
              protein.

The complex process of protein folding involves dynamics on time
              scales that range from picoseconds to minutes.  Elucidating the key events in
              folding and identifying any partially folded intermediates are major goals of
              theoretical and experimental work.  Two limiting folding mechanisms can be
              envisioned.  Owing to the conformational heterogeneity of unfolded proteins,
              each polypeptide might follow a different path to the folded structure.  In
              this parallel-folding limit, the kinetics of the transformation will be
              heterogeneous.  If, however, only a small number of viable paths lead to the
              folded structure, then the folding kinetics will be simpler, perhaps even
              resembling those of a two-state transformation.  Methods for distinguishing
              between these limiting mechanisms will be developed in this research program. 
              In the long term, these studies will provide a view of polypeptide structure at
              each stage of the protein-folding transformation. This project is supported by
              the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
              Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the  Inorganic,
              Bioinorganic and Organometallic  Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry
              in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.
