Title       : Computational Approaches to Virus Phylogenetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a9974525

Award Number: 9974525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429384             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Mindell mindell@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Goldstein  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              DBI 9974525, Goldstein, Richard, University of Michigan. Computational
              Approaches to Virus phylogenetics

Project Summary

Viruses are important
              agents affecting the health and genomic evolution of almost all life forms, in
              addition to providing experimental models in many areas of basic and applied
              research. An important aspect of understanding the origin, transmission, and
              evolution of these viruses is dependent on our ability to understand their
              phylogenetic history. Unfortunately, our knowledge of this history has been
              hampered by a lack of understanding of how to model viral genomic evolution.
              While much work has been done by analyzing the evolution of viral DNA
              sequences, there are many advantages in modeling evolutionary change of the
              expressed proteins at the amino acid level. Generating accurate models for
              amino acid substitutions has, however, proven problematic. One of the
              challenges in developing an accurate model is dealing with the problem of "site
              heterogeneity", the qualitative and quantitative variation in substitution
              rates at different locations in a protein and in different proteins. In recent
              work, the PIs have developed a theoretical framework for modeling the
              substitution process in a way that takes into account the context-dependence of
              selective pressure while actually reducing the number of adjustable parameters
              to be determined. In this project the PIs will continue to develop these
              methods, and apply these methods to address basic questions in viral
              evolution.
Specific projects will include:
Continued development and
              refinement of models of the substitution process in protein
              evolution.
Development of more efficient optimization methods for adapting
              these models to specific proteins and protein types.
Validation of these
              models through analysis of simulated data as well as analysis of proteins from
              organisms with a known phylogenetic history.
Applying these methods to a set
              of questions including the phylogeny of HIV1 subtypes and lentivirus
              genera.
Interpretation of the results to better understand the process of
              molecular evolution in viruses.

