Title       : Collecting and Utilizing Gubernatorial Approval Ratings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9974176

Award Number: 9974176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51171              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Niemi niemi@rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thad L. Beyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lee Sigelman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Considerable progress has been made in understanding the public approval of the
              performance of the head of government (or, in some countries, the governing
              party).  In the United States and some other countries, "popularity" polls are
              conducted monthly, if not more often, yielding sufficient data for time-series
              analyses of the properties, causes, and consequences of public approval.  Yet a
              superb set of testing sites for understanding this aspect of executive
              politics, the 50 American states, is not being utilized, even though pollsters
              have been inquiring about gubernatorial performance sporadically since the
              1950s and fairly regularly since the mid-1980s.

Gubernatorial approval has
              not been totally ignored in the research literature.  At this point, though,
              attempts to test models of gubernatorial popularity across a large
              cross-section of states are in their infancy, and much remains to be done. 
              Likewise, state election models could well be reformulated and retested by
              incorporating gubernatorial approval rates, and models could be tested that are
              currently inestimable.

The primary reason why data on gubernatorial approval
              has been underutilized is that no comprehensive file of these data has been
              available.  However, one of the PIs has made an excellent start by assembling
              gubernatorial approval ratings for all 50 states, more that 1500 ratings in
              all.  Funding, at present, will fill in gaps to determine whether additional
              poll results are available; if so, to access them; to create an integrated
              gubernatorial approval data file; and to hold a conference focused on
              gubernatorial approval research.

To accomplish these goals, it is necessary
              to contact as many as 50 polling organizations.  It is also important to
              inquire about early polls, especially those from periods prior to the 1980s. 
              No less important is to establish a more or less automatic mechanism for
              obtaining future poll results.  Finally, the data collection currently exists
              on paper.  Support is provided to develop this into a system appropriate for
              electronic storage.

The data and conference will contribute to work in at
              least tow areas.  First, they will enhance understanding of executive approval
              and the relationship between approval and elections.  Second, they will
              contribute to the study of state politics, where some forms of research, such
              as on gubernatorial approval, have been limited to the study of one or a small
              number of states.  Finally, it is relevant to note that the data to be archived
              are unlikely to be maintained indefinitely in the absence of an effort such as
              that proposed; if not collected now, the data would be irretrievably lost.

