Title       : New Mexico Research Site for Educators in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a9974883

Award Number: 9974883
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stevens                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1703000            (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Dana Brabson gb6s@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1990      CHEMISTRY EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 1363,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Chemistry of the University of New Mexico is supported by the
              Chemistry Division and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
              Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences under the "Research Sites for
              Educators in Chemistry" program.  The grant is designed to increase
              participation in chemical research by undergraduates enrolled in two and
              four-year colleges in the New Mexico area.  Since a large fraction of New
              Mexico students start  post-secondary education at community colleges, the
              program will focus on two-year institutions.  Dr. G. Dana Brabson is the
              Principal Investigator, and there are five co-Principal Investigators.  The 
              program will facilitate cooperative interactions between undergraduate
              chemistry faculty in two and four-year colleges in the New Mexico region and 
              research groups in the University of New Mexico and at Los Alamos and  Sandia
              National Laboratories.  One-semester sabbatical visits and summer research
              opportunities for faculty of two and four-year colleges and limited numbers of
              undergraduate student internships will be supported.  Additional methods of
              increasing research activity at participating colleges will be developed and
              applied. 

Research Sites for Educators in Chemistry (RSEC) bring together
              the faculty of participating two-year colleges, baccalaureate colleges, and
              master's universities with faculty at research universities within a geographic
              region to enhance the research and educational opportunities at all
              participating institutions.  Academic and research institutions provide
              abundant opportunities where individuals may concurrently assume
              responsibilities as researchers, educators, and students, and where all can
              engage in joint efforts that infuse education with the excitement of discovery
              and enrich research through the diversity of learner perspectives.  RSECs such
              as this one at the University of New Mexico provide mechanisms for
              disseminating the knowledge, skills, practices and ethics of research to a
              broader community, including those from underrepresented groups; assist in
              developing viable, sustainable research programs at participating institutions;
              and involve faculty and students at the participating institutions with a
              broader cross-section of faculty and students.

