Title       : Design Algorithms for Mulifunction Reconfigurable Antenna Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a9974113

Award Number: 9974113
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Volakis volakis@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Panos Y. Papalambros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9974113
Volakis

The objective of this proposal is to develop and extend the
              application of the Homogenization Design Method (HDM) to conformal multilayered
              antenna array design with emphasis on adaptive/reconfigurable devices. We will
              achieve this by bringing together a team of researchers from electrical and
              mechanical engineering. The proposers from the mechanical engineering community
              have already played a key role in developing and transitioning design
              methodologies to the automotive industry where HDM was used to achieve optimal
              automobile designs subject to minimum weight and prespecified thermal and
              loading requirements. HDM is considered a breakthrough design methodology and
              its application has permeated all aspects of automobile manufacturing.
              Basically, HDM provided the capability to design materials with prespecified
              thermal and structural/mechanical properties, a long standing "dream" in
              applied mechanics. It was a breakthrough design methodology in mechanical
              design and had an immediate and significant impact on automobile design.
              Similarly, in electromagnetics and antenna design in particular, we do not
              expect that the proposed design technique will be an evolution to existing
              designs. Instead, the new designs may be of any possible shape and composition
              while still satisfying bandwidth, size, coupling, gain, pattern and other
              commonly used performance requirements. Reconfigurable aspects of the antenna
              can be readily considered as part of the design process.

The extension and
              impact of HDM to new application areas is expected to be equally effective. So
              far, this highly successful homogenization design method has not been
              considered for electromagnetic applications. Nevertheless, it certainly has the
              potential to generate designs for new high performance antennas by following a
              cell by cell and layer by layer design of the multilayered and multicell
              antenna structures. The introduction of HDM to electromagnetics (and antenna
              design in particular) is a timely endeavor for two reasons. First, antenna
              proliferation in all types of wireless systems and integration of antenna
              arrays into a single multifunction aperture present us with new challenges for
              antenna array design which maintain acceptable levels of performance in the
              presence of highly complex systems. The availability of fast and highly
              adaptable algorithms based on hybrid finite element method techniques is the
              second reason for pursuing practical design algorithms.

Although this
              proposal is primarily aimed at antenna design, its success will also impact
              designs for all other electromagnetic applications. It will also allow for the
              development of furore design algorithms which combines constraints from
              mechanical, electrical and other engineering specifications.

