Title       : Functional and Evolutionary Ecology of a Phenotypically Plastic Feeding
               Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a9974594

Award Number: 9974594
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dianna K. Padilla padilla@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The ability of organisms to change their form in response to short-term changes
              in the environment is called phenotypic plasticity.  This research will examine
              a group of closely related species (snails) which have been found to have the
              ability to change their form in response to short term changes in their diet. 
              The PI will be studying snails on both the Atlantic and Pacific shores of North
              America, and in Australia.  The goals of this research are to use computer
              modeling, field observations and experiments, controlled laboratory
              experiments, advanced microscopy techniques, and genetics experiments to
              determine whether the ability to change form is advantageous to individuals,
              and to determine how widespread this ability is among species.  By looking at a
              wide range of species the PI will be able to determine if there are
              associations between the ability to be phenotypically plastic and reproductive
              patterns, diet and habitat, risk of predation, or other ecological features of
              these species.    

This work will provide important information about what
              makes some species able to respond to short-term changes in the environment (be
              phenotypically plastic) and some species not (have fixed, genetically
              determined forms).  In addition, the results of this work should help the PIs
              begin to predict the environmental situations and species characteristics where
              the PIs would expect phenotypic plasticity to be present, and when the PIs
              would predict that it should not, where species should have fixed morphologies.
              

