Title       : Actin-Regulatory Complexes in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a9974649

Award Number: 9974649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian K. Haarer haarerb@mail.upstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY, Upstate Med Univ
	      750 E. Adams Street
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/464-5476

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
In this study, several basic cell biological questions are being addressed:
              (i) how does a
cell establish polarity; (ii) what signals convey this
              decision-making process to components of
the cell that are responsible for
              carrying out the necessary morphological changes; and (iii) once
this message
              is conveyed, how are morphological changes controlled in an orderly
              fashion?

In yeast cells, morphological changes in response to internal or
              external signals generally involve rearrangements of the cell's actin
              cytoskeleton.  The focus of this research project is on the link between the
              signaling transduction pathways and the downstream cytoskeletal reorganization.
               In particular, the emphasis of this project is on the role played by the small
              actin-binding protein, profilin.

Through genetic and physical interaction
              screens, multiple links between the actin-regulatory
protein profilin and
              small G-protein signaling pathways have been established. These
              results,
coupled with data from other laboratories, suggest that profilin
              binds to multiple protein
complexes in response to activation (by binding to
              GTP) of Ras, Cdc42, or Rho proteins. This
study focuses on one of these
              protein complexes to determine its effects on actin polymerization
and to
              better understand the general role of profilin in promoting cytoskeletal
              changes.
One particular protein complex in yeast is likely responding to the
              Ras-adenylate cyclase
signaling pathway to induce cytoskeletal changes. The
              interactions between yeast profilin,
adenylate cyclase, and adenylate
              cyclase-associated protein (CAP/Srv2p), and the relevance of
these
              interactions to Ras-induced cytoskeletal changes, will be examined through
              biochemical
and two-hybrid analyses. It will be determined how these proteins
              participate in a larger protein
complex, and the effects of such a complex on
              actin polymerization will be examined in vitro
and in vivo.  

Results from
              this study will advance our understanding of how actin cytoskeletal changes are
              brought about in response to specific cellular signals. Since profilin has been
              linked to multiple protein complexes, characterization of its biochemical
              activity in one of these actin-regulatory complexes, and determination of its
              role in nucleating or extending actin filaments, will be widely applicable to
              the analysis of related complexes. Upon understanding the core activity (i.e.
              the actin nucleating/elongating function) of these complexes, one can extend
              the studies to investigate the role of additional proteins in modulating the
              three-dimensional structure and function of actin networks promoted from a
              given regulatory complex. 

The studies described in this project will
              largely be carried out by the Principal Investigator and undergraduate students
              under his direction. The nature of the experiments is such that undergraduate
              students can learn a substantial number of techniques and can be of abundant
              assistance to the Principal Investigator. If past success is repeated, it is
              likely that the more senior and proficient undergraduate students will perform
              aspects of the described studies in a more independent fashion.

