Title       : Applied Robust Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2002     
File        : a0202922

Award Number: 0202922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43561              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Olive dolive@math.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research considers the development of resistant procedures for visualizing
              regression data and the development of rigorous statistical theory for
              practical robust estimators. Regression is the study of the conditional
              distribution of the response variable given a vector of the predictor
              variables. Many of the most used statistical procedures, including multiple
              linear regression and generalized linear models, are special cases of
              regression. Existing methods for regression often make rather strong
              assumptions on the predictor distribution. If this distribution is skewed or if
              outliers are present, then regression graphics methodology such as ordinary
              least squares, sliced inverse regression, and principal Hessian directions may
              fail to give useful results. Of primary interest in this research is the
              question of how to visualize regression when the predictor distribution
              assumptions are violated. Previous research has shown that robust estimators
              can be useful for visualizing regression. Since robust estimators for which
              there is rigorous theory are generally impractical to compute, another focus of
              this research is to develop practical consistent robust estimators.

This
              research will lead to a better understanding of the increasingly complex high
              dimensional data sets collected for scientific, social and strategic purposes.
              Many methods using regression have been developed, and applications include
              biomedical research, predicting future observations based on previous data, and
              the analysis of economic and social data. Robust statistics combined with
              regression graphics has the potential to make simpler but more accurate models
              and diagnostics. New robust estimators are needed since robust methods that
              perform well on text book sized problems frequently fail if applied to larger
              high dimensional data sets that actually occur in practice.  

