Title       : Conference: Modeling Complexity Across Levels: Social Insect Societies As
               Multilevel Integrated Systems to be held at the Santa Fe Institute, on May
               22-26, 2002.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0202646

Award Number: 0202646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra D. Mitchell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Page  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Fe Institute
	      1399 Hyde Park Road
	      Santa Fe, NM  875016188    505/984-8800

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              "Modeling complexity across levels: social insect societies as multilevel
              integrated systems."

Social insect colonies provide a "model system" for
              understanding biological complexity.  They are exemplars of multi-component,
              multi-level causal structures. All levels of organization are involved in the
              production, maintenance and modulation of behavior in a colony of ants, bees,
              wasps or termites from genetic effects on neurological process and behavior to
              selection effects at the group and individual levels   The recent explosion of
              research on complex systems in general has produced a variety of new
              theoretical, mathematical and computational tools with which to model spatial
              and temporal dynamical processes. Models of self-organization, evolutionary
              computation, functional genomics, data mining, multi-agent simulations, etc.
              can clearly aid in the understanding of complex social insect behavior. 
              

The PIs will bring together graduate students, postdocs and junior faculty
              members who study processes at different levels of organization of social
              insects with those developing some of the current array of modeling methods. 
              The purpose of this workshop is to educate the next generation of researchers
              about multilevel approaches to behavior science, and to tighten the connection
              between empirical studies and abstract modeling efforts.  The workshop will be
              held at the Santa Fe Institute, and is structured as a tutorial.  That is, it
              will be highly interactive with hands-on applications of the models to current
              research questions and data.  The PIs expect that new collaborations will arise
              from this workshop, that generalizations about integrating models will be
              discovered, and that these results will be relevant to a wider scientific
              community investigating complexity.  

