Title       : Theoretical and Applied Probability on Stochastic Calculus, Numerical Methods,
               and Mathematical Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0202958

Award Number: 0202958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip E. Protter protter@orie.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremy C. Staum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0202958
Protter
	The principal investigator and co-principal investigator will
              investigate several topics in probability within the subfields of stochastic
              calculus and Monte Carlo simulation. The problems selected are motivated
              primarily by applications in mathematical finance, but the results will be of
              more general theoretical significance. In stochastic calculus, new results
              about stopping times will lead to better models of credit risk and a deeper
              understanding of what makes possible successful hedging of financial risks. New
              progress in stochastic calculus will help extend theories of incomplete
              markets, i.e. markets containing risks that can not be perfectly hedged, as is
              true in practice. One Monte Carlo issue to be addressed is the optimal use of
              an algorithm that has recently become popular in option pricing. Another line
              of research will involve improving numerical techniques for solutions of
              stochastic differential equations in connection with simulation. A third Monte
              Carlo topic is the optimal application of some variance reduction techniques
              that are well suited to problems in nuclear physics, estimation of rare events
              probabilities, and some option pricing problems. The recent development of a
              new model for stock prices that incorporates sizes of trade will lead to new
              pricing technology for financial derivatives. 
	The application of probability
              to finance has revolutionized an industry. In the past 20 years the creation of
              multi-trillion dollar derivative security markets has facilitated the
              world-wide flow of capital and thereby enhanced international commerce and
              productivity. Without the mathematical models which provide reliable pricing of
              derivative securities (e.g., stock options) and guide the management of their
              associated risk, these markets could not exist. The underlying theme of the
              mathematical success has been to compute precisely the price of financial
              derivatives which enable companies to lay off risk by buying financial
              instruments that protect them from unlikely but possibly disastrous events.
              Equally if not more important has been the description of a recipe for the
              seller of the instrument to follow in order to protect himself from the risk he
              accepts through the sale. A complete market is one in which the theory explains
              how to do this in principle, and in such a market the theory often provides an
              explicit guide to implementation of this recipe. In other words, in complete
              markets a new type of insurance has been created, and this has been made
              possible by existing probability theory. This type of "risk insurance"
              generated the revolution mentioned above. A real problem, however, is that in
              reality markets are not complete, and thus new mathematical techniques are
              needed to extend the theory and to make it more truly applicable. This has
              already begun, but it is in its infancy, and this extension of the theory will
              be a large focus of the proposed project. In addition, recently new models have
              been proposed to better incorporate liquidity issues and market frictions (such
              as transaction costs when implementing stock trades), in part by the PI
              himself. These models will continue to be developed, calibrated, and
              statistically verified. 

