Title       : Geometry and Computation of Dynamics for Conservative Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0202032

Award Number: 0202032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244958             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Meiss jdm@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Proposal #0202032
PI: J.D. Meiss
Institution: University of Colorado
              Boulder
Title: Geometry and Computation of Dynamics for Conservative
              Systems

ABSTRACT

The principal investigator proposes to study the
              geometry of low-dimensional dynamical systems, especially symplectic and
              volume-preserving maps, using both computational and analytical techniques. 
              While much is known about the two-dimensional case, there are still many
              questions about the onset and development of chaos for three- and
              higher-dimensional systems.  While most oscillators are anharmonic (have
              twist), twistless bifurcations occur in one-parameter families of these
              systems.  In the proposal, the geometry of twistless bifurcations will be
              studied leading to an understanding of fold and cusp bifurcations in the twist.
               The resulting geometry of the reconnection of resonances and exotic twistless
              tori will be studied numerically.  These should play a role in limiting the
              stability domains for many dynamical systems.  From the other side, the
              destruction of chaos can be profitably studied using a limit of extreme chaos,
              the anti-integrable (AI) limit as a starting point.  In this proposal, the PI
              will use the AI limit to study coupled systems of maps and chaotic boundaries. 
              Near this limit, structures such as exotic versions of the Smale horseshoe, and
              other heteroclinic tangles should occur.  The onset of chaos in conservative
              systems is signaled by the destruction of tori.  These have been studied by a
              rescaling analysis called the renormalization transformation.  The structure of
              this transformation for four and higher dimensional systems is only beginning
              to be understood.  The PI proposes that recent approximate versions of this
              transformation will give effective numerical strategies for finding the
              destruction and analyzing the topology of the resulting objects.

Developing
              an understanding of the dynamics of conservative systems is important to
              applications including the design of particle accelerators, obtaining rates for
              simple chemical reactions, calculating confinement times for charged particles
              in plasma fusion devices, understanding the spectra of highly excited atomic
              systems, and designing efficient spacecraft trajectories in an era of lower
              budgets.  Dynamics is such systems is often chaotic, which implies 
that
              prediction of specific trajectories is difficult; however, chaos can be
              profitably utilized to improve efficiency, for example of spacecraft
              trajectories, by judiciously applying small course 
corrections.  Chaos can
              also dramatically affect the lifetimes of particles in confinement devices and
              the rates of chemical reactions.  The PI proposes to develop geometrical and
              computational techniques that can be used to address these questions.  In
              addition extending our understanding of chaos to higher dimensional cases will
              help populate the zoo of chaotic objects in multidimensional systems.

