Title       : Maryland Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2002   
File        : a0202169

Award Number: 0202169
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur Johnson ajohnson@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet C. Rutledge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1515      MINORITY GRADUATE EDUC ACTIVIT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Project Summary

The Maryland Alliance for Graduate Education and the
              Professoriate (MAGEP) is a coalition of three campuses of the University of
              Maryland dedicated to increasing the number of minorities who earn Ph.D.s in
              SEM fields. MAGEP has the further goal of preparing our students to be
              successful in their careers, with a focus on the professoritate. This alliance,
              led by the University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC), is made up of the
              three state supported research universities in Maryland: UMBC, the University
              of Maryland, College Park (UMCP), and the University of Maryland, Baltimore
              (UMB). MAGEP embraces the notion that we must educate the whole person. Our
              comprehensive approach will foster excellence in education and research while
              providing emotional support, peer advising, group study, role models and
              mentoring.

MAGEP builds on a number of initiatives at the undergraduate and
              graduate levels that have been quite successful on the individual campuses and
              within partnerships between some of the alliance institutions. The University
              System of Maryland (USM) Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
              (LSAMP), also led by UMBC in partnership with UMCP, the University of Maryland
              Eastern Shore (UMES) and the public community colleges, has more than doubled
              the number of bachelor's degrees awarded to minority science, mathematics,
              engineering and technology students from 201 to 502 during 1994-2000. Large
              numbers of these students continue on to graduate schools across the nation.
              The LSAMP provides partial support for the nationally recognized Meyerhoff
              Scholars program at UMBC. Both UMBC and UMCP have a large contingent of McNair
              Scholars who receive strong preparation for graduate school. UMCP has received
              recognition for its success in graduating minorities with Ph.D.s in SEM fields,
              including 3 African American women in mathematics in one year.

In 1996, a
              minority graduate training program was initiated at UMBC, supported by a NIH
              National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) grant. The Graduate
              Meyerhoff program is focused on biomedical science, and currently has four
              participating departments. Enrollment in the program has grown from 2 when the
              program started to 22 today. The Graduate Meyerhoff program has proven to be
              highly successful and has attracted excellent applicants. Our results
              demonstrate clearly that a comprehensive approach is successful at the graduate
              level. The programs and activities of MAGEP will be modeled after the Graduate
              Meyerhoff program and will incorporate best practices in diversifying graduate
              education from MAGEP and other universities.

To achieve its goals, MAGEP
              will focus on the following specific and measurable objectives: 1) cultivating
              new graduate students: including not only increasing the numbers of applicants
              but also recruiting students with higher qualifications (GPA, undergraduate
              research experience); 2) retention through degree: increasing the rate of
              successful completion of the Ph.D. degree; 3) excellence in academic
              performance: providing support mechanisms to ensure outstanding classroom
              performance; 4) excellence in research performance: providing appropriate
              infrastructure and research opportunities to enhance research productivity
              (including publications and presentations); and 5) pursuit of careers in the
              professoriate: increasing the number of students who enter and thrive in
              academic careers by providing preparation in the issues and responsibilities
              that shape professional life in the academy.

MAGEP will institute a
              comprehensive set of programs and activities that have proven to be effective
              in pilot efforts at MAGEP institutions and at others around the country. They
              are clustered into three areas: cultivating new students, building a supportive
              community, and professional development. Many of the programs span more than
              one of these areas. Each institution will participate in all of these programs
              and activities to some extent. However the emphasis on individual campuses will
              be tailored to the needs of the students and graduate programs.

