Title       : Harmonic Analysis and Geometric Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0202139

Award Number: 0202139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea R. Nahmod nahmod@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nahmod's research lies in the overlap of harmonic analysis, geometry and
              
partial differential equations. It aims at studying the behavior of
              
nonlinear waves arising in geometry, ferromagnetism and gauge field theories;
              
and that of functions along vector fields whose integral curves lack
              
sufficient curvature. In the first part the focus is in geometric partial
              
differential equations. Of special interest are Schroedinger maps, 
Wave
              maps and other gauge field theories such as the Yang Mills equations
in
              Minkowski space-time. All of these equations model `wave like phenomena'.
              
Their solutions arise as minimizers of the corresponding energy functionals.
              
To conform with natural physical situations, it is of interest to study their
              
existence, uniqueness under minimal regularity assumptions. These are
              
difficult issues because the nonlinearities of these equations involve not
              
just the solutions but also their derivatives. Nahmod will address these
              
questions and plans to show that in the scale invariant set up solutions to
              
the Cauchy initial value problem exist globally provided that the data is
              
sufficiently small when measured relative to the critical regularity norm.
              
She also plans stability issues; e.g. whether such a system remains close to
              
its initial state as time evolves when the data has small energy. From a
              
physical viewpoint the latter models whether such systems are close to
              
equilibrium. The techniques exploit geometric aspects of these equations to
              
extract crucial information -such as special structures in the nonlinearity- 
              
which is then used in the analysis. The method combines deep Fourier analysis
              
with gauge theoretic geometric tools. The goal of the second part is the
              
study of the Hilbert transform along vector fields and its associated
              
maximal operator in two dimensions. Their treatment departs from the
              classical 
study of singular integrals for in the present situation, the
              singularity 
lives on some variety that is changing at each point. Nahmod will
              
investigate how to develop time frequency techniques to study operators under
              
no curvature assumptions. This is the case, for example, in studying
              
differentiability properties of functions along vector fields. 

Partial
              differential equations are the mathematical models to the laws governing much
              of the phenomena in our physical world. The wave equation models the
              propagation of different kind of waves -such as light waves- in homogeneous
              media. Nonlinear models of conservative type arise in quantum mechanics while
              other variants appear for example in the study of vibrating 
systems and
              semiconductors. The nonlinear Schroedinger equation arises in various physical
              contexts in the description of nonlinear waves- such as propagation of a laser
              beam in a medium whose index of refraction is sensitive to the wave amplitude,
              water waves at the free surface of an ideal fluid as well as in plasma waves.
              Some of the interesting questions are those about local and global existence of
              solutions, uniqueness as well as long time behavior of global solutions. The
              role of mathematical analysis is to understand the behavior of the solutions to
              these equations, provide the tools to extract their quantitative and
              qualitative information and 
lay the foundations upon which methods to
              accurately approximate the solutions are developed. Fourier analysis and more
              generalized adapted frequency decompositions such as time-frequency analysis'
              consists in decomposing complex objects via `modulated waveforms' into basic
              building blocks which are localized and easy to understand, and then piecing
              them back together in a straightforward manner. It works very similarly to a
              musical score. The modulated waveforms have four attributes: amplitude
              (loudness), scale (duration), frequency (pitch) and position (instant it is
              played). The objects could be speech, radar signals, as well as oscillatory
              
expressions arising in optics, AC ousting scattering, wave propagation and
              other phenomena of nonlocal nature. 
