Title       : Technical Education Pathways
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0202263

Award Number: 0202263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bennett Yohe ben.yohe@rrcc.cccoes.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Breece  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Sperling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : RRCC
	      13300 W 6th Avenue
	      Lakewood, CO  802281255    303/914-6276

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Construction Technology Center of Red Rocks Community College has joined
              with secondary education representatives and industry leaders throughout
              Colorado to develop a model in the recruitment and preparation of prospective
              technicians. The Technical Education Pathways (TEP) produces skilled
              technicians with improved skill adaptability as a result of integrated
              classroom and internship experiences reinforcing real world application of
              science, and mathematics. 

Through adaptation of promising approaches in the
              marketing of technical career education developed by other National Science
              Foundation grantees, career awareness activities with high school students
              includes job shadowing and real opportunities to interact in the technical
              workplace. A college level course offered for high school students introduces
              the application of science and mathematics and effective communication in the
              workplace as students are prepared for matriculation as college freshmen with
              improved academic competencies. 

Faculty development joins secondary faculty
              of mathematics and the sciences with the postsecondary technical faculty in
              collegial exchanges improves the integration of the core academic subjects with
              the application that occurs in the technical work place. Faculty are engaged in
              developing an instructional approach that facilitates learning by encouraging
              active inquiry-based exploration that coaches learners in the multiple
              applications of the theoretical knowledge in the sciences and mathematics. The
              postsecondary classrooms and laboratories replicate the technology in the
              manipulation of the tools and the equipment found in the actual technical
              workplace as college freshmen are prepared in a series of paid internships and
              apprenticeships. Professional practicing technicians are prepared through
              training provided by the TEP as workplace mentors in the guidance of the
              prospective technician student in the integration of the new knowledge gained
              in the classroom with real work using the principles of contextual learning.
              Students are engaged in project-based learning in the workplace, using
              mathematic and scientific concepts to solve problems and honing reasoning
              skills useful in diagnosing and resolving problems yet to be encountered. At
              the completion of the applied associate of science program, the new technician
              has multiple career options as well as opportunities to continue his or her
              undergraduate studies with universities offering articulation for the
              graduating technician. 


