Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: 'Egg-box' Energy Absorption Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0202580

Award Number: 0202580
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcus P. Zupan mpz20@eng.cam.ac.uk  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : M, Zupan
	      University of Cambridge
	      Cambridge CB2 1PZ,       122/333-9883

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0207000   Transportation                          
Program Ref : 0000,5946,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0202580
Zupan

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.

This award will support an eighteen-month research
              fellowship by Dr. Marc Zupan to work with Dr. Norman A. Fleck at the University
              of Cambridge, in the United Kingdom.

This goal of this project is to
              demonstrate strategies for minimum weight energy absorption systems based on
              egg-box panels and to develop a group of design parameters that allow egg-box
              panels to be adapted for specific protection needs.  The realizations will be
              manifested in (1) characterizing the mechanical response of egg-box panels in
              both crash and blast situations; (2) analytical models will be developed so
              that minimum weight designs can be achieved for specific needs; (3) design maps
              will be produced and validated by the production and experimental analysis of
              new geometries to meet current industry demands.  Egg-box panels are a new
              category of energy absorption devices.  It is feasible that egg-box cores, when
              configured correctly, can be used in a broad range of protective situations for
              both crash and blast protection.  Energy absorbers based on egg-box panels
              promise to have a significant influence on vehicle protection providing a novel
              minimum weight, low cost energy absorber leading to the combined goal of
              reduced weight, and superior energy absorption across widespread
              applications.

The University of Cambridge's Micromechanics Centre will
              provide a diverse environment, providing direct partnerships not only with the
              host, but also with many others.  The interdisciplinary facility currently
              maintains close international links with both European and American research
              groups.

