Title       : Research Starter Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2002     
File        : a0202676

Award Number: 0202676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Creagh W. Breuner creagh@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Responding to stressful events in the environment is a fundamentally important
              activity for all organisms.  Within the stress response, there is a plasticity
              of glucocorticoid action, allowing for specificity in the response depending on
              life history strategy, reproductive stage, body condition, or even time of day.
               This proposal explores the mechanisms, environmental regulation, and
              functional consequences of this plasticity among three subspecies of the
              white-crowned sparrow  (Zonotrichia leucophrys gambelii, Z. l. oriantha, and Z.
              l. pugetensis).  The three subspecies have different distributions that are
              likely to affect the evolutionary pressures shaping the stress response.  In
              particular, these sparrows breed at different elevations and latitudes and thus
              have breeding seasons that differ markedly in length.  Gambelii is the
              northern-most subspecies, breeding in the arctic and sub-artic regions of North
              America.  The breeding season is short (allowing only 1 clutch per season). 
              Oriantha breed in sub-alpine meadows of the western United States.  They can
              raise one and sometimes two clutches per season.  Pugetensis breeds at low
              elevations in the Pacific Northwest and usually raises 2 or 3 clutches per
              season.  This proposal explores the possibility that the length of breeding
              season has a strong evolutionary influence on how birds respond to stress. 
              Specifically, in birds with time to raise only one or rarely two clutches, the
              fitness consequence of abandoning the nest may be substantially larger than in
              birds that can raise up to three clutches per season.  Thus, animals with short
              breeding seasons should be less responsive to stressors, and therefore less
              likely to abandon their young.  The stress response of each subspecies will be
              evaluated measuring basal and stress-induced corticosteroid responses to
              capture and handling, corticosteroid binding globulin levels (to estimate the
              bioavailability of glucocorticoids), and glucocorticoid receptor levels (to
              estimate the tissue-specific sensitivity to glucocorticoids).  
