Title       : Concave Finite Element Shape Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0202232

Award Number: 0202232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275104             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gautam Dasgupta gd18@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Geometrical concavity in   finite elements does not permit the
              displacement-based shape functions that are restricted to algebraic
              polynomials. Functions with singularity and rational polynomials (numerator
              polynomials divided by denominator polynomials), which alleviate the limitation
              of Taylor polynomials, will be constructed to yield shape functions to
              guarantee a preassigned degree of continuity within a concave finite element.
              The application of exact integration (not conventional numerical quadrature
              schemes) based on the divergence theorem will be employed  to integrate the
              energy density functions leading to element mass and stiffness matrices. In
              stress-based (hybrid) finite elements, concavity does not pose any additional
              problems. Theprocedures available for convex polygonal elements will be
              utilized with appropriate modifications to account for concavity. These novel
              finite elements are essential in high quality models that necessitate minimum
              number of tessellations. In addition to domain discretized procedures,
              three-dimensional boundary element models will utilize the proposed elements to
              cover boundaries where reentrant corners exist.  As an outgrowth of this
              research,  a limited number of curved boundaries, will be pursued to augment
              the element library. Conventional convex elements with limited forms of
              geometrical shapes, where isoparametric transformations are routinely employed,
              will be incorporated in the proposed numerical formulation as special
              cases.

Fundamental mathematical results  of  projective and perspective
              geometrical considerations will guide the  construction of  shape functions
              including the singular non-classical ones in closed analytical forms. Computer
              algebra code will symbolically manipulate singular functions as distributions
              (generalized functions). The weak definition of the square root to generate
              absolute values, the delta sequences and their formal derivatives to construct
              Dirac's delta and Heaviside step functions will be seamlessly accommodated
              within the element shape function and integration routines. All integrals will
              be interpreted in the distributional sense in a non-classical (weak)
              formulation. 

Object-oriented complied codes will result from the computer
              algebraic constructs based on closed-form manipulations of analytical
              representations of singularities.  This integrated computational environment,
              which consists of algebraic, numerical and graphics routines, will be employed
              to generate shape functions and system matrices on both convex and concave
              domains in order to solve large scale problems where high numerical accuracy
              cannot be compromised.

Application fields will include geotechnical modeling
              for blasts, soil-structure interactions and bioengineering growth analysis of
              soft and hard tissues.  Second order effects of randomness in constitutive
              descriptions and boundary geometry will be studied as benchmark examples. High
              precision  applications in the field of high technology, e.g., optical
              determination of constitutive properties in the micro and lower level material
              structures, will be explored.

