Title       : Transition to Teaching Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0202994

Award Number: 0202994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $919536             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn C. Markle markle@uc.beh  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl A. Huether  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles W. Groetsch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 7688      Science,Tech,Eng&Math Teacher
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7688,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Transition to Teaching Partnership (T3 ) is a collaborative effort among the
              Cincinnati Public Schools, the Mt Healthy Schools, University of Cincinnati
              College of Education, Procter and Gamble, the Cincinnati Business Committee,
              and multiple community agencies. Its purpose is to recruit, prepare, and retain
              effective mathematics and science teachers committed to teaching in urban
              schools. Using Ohio's Alternative Educator Licensure process, recent college
              graduates and adults changing careers are receiving the education, support, and
              mentoring required for a successful transition from other activities to
              teaching math or science in grades 7 through 12. T3 is based on the University
              of Cincinnati's "Cincinnati Initiative for Teacher Education," a nationally
              recognized, award winning teacher preparation program and Cincinnati Public
              School's award winning "Peer Evaluation and Assistance Program." T3 combines
              the best practices of both programs in providing 24 recruited pre-service
              teachers with content preparation, pedagogical knowledge and skills, and
              follow-on support and development as new teachers.
Recruitment for
              participation in the program is taking place in the local communities in which
              the schools exist and through partnerships with downsizing corporations.
              Grass-roots organizations have been included as partners to address the needs
              of community members. T3 is collaborating with these groups to identify and
              recruit qualified individuals. T3 also is working with the human resources
              departments of companies to make classroom teaching a viable option for their
              laid off chemists, mathematicians, biologists, and others. There is particular
              emphasis on attracting minority teacher candidates. Special features of the
              retention component of the project include financial planning, personal and
              family counseling, and contingency funding for unanticipated life events.
              Recruited candidates are enrolled in university courses required to meet the
              Ohio Alternative Educator License requirement and other refresher content
              courses. Candidates are required to become Cincinnati Youth Collaborative
              mentors and form one-on-one relationships with Cincinnati or Mt Healthy public
              school students. This feature of T3 is assisting teacher candidates in building
              rapport based on knowledge and trust with their students. It also serves as a
              "reality check" to ensure that candidates have an accurate understanding of
              urban youth and the difficulties they face. 
Teaching experiences begin in
              summer school sessions. Teacher candidates teach in those schools where they
              are scheduled to become full-time teachers in the fall (in accordance with
              Ohio's Alternative Educator License). Cincinnati and Mt. Healthy have a large
              cadre of experienced teachers who have been trained to mentor and support new
              teacher candidates. These teacher-mentors are leading teams of 3 to 4 teacher
              candidates with support from university faculty. Teacher candidates continue
              working with a mentor teacher until they earn a professional teaching license.
              Coursework completed in T3 also counts toward a master in education degree, a
              feature that enables continued university participation in the professional
              development of program participants. This program has the potential to become a
              model for the State of Ohio and the nation. The evaluation strategy has a dual
              purpose, one focused locally on the project and one focused on the
              effectiveness of this approach for wider dissemination. 

