Title       : Heat Kernel Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0202939

Award Number: 0202939
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162292             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce K. Driver driver@math.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This research is devoted to questions involving heat equations in both finite
              and infinite dimensional contexts. The following issues are to be addressed. 1.
              The existence of differential type inequalities related to hypoelliptic heat
              equations in finite dimensions, including the existence of logarithmic Sobolev
              and Poincare (or mass gap) type inequalities. 2. The existence of differential
              inequalities related to heat kernel measure and Wiener measures on path and
              loop spaces of Riemannian manifolds 3. The relationship between heat kernel
              measures and pinned Wiener measures on Loop spaces of compact Riemannian
              manifolds. 4. Extensions of Fock space like representations from finite
              dimensional groups to infinite dimensional loop groups. 5. The generalization
              of certain finite dimensional approximations to Wiener measures to include the
              "super symmetric quantum mechanics" setting used by physicists. 
	Most of the
              questions to be studied in this research are motivated by, or are outgrowths
              of, questions coming from studying a number of fields, namely the spread of
              heat in curved metal plates, quantum mechanics, quantum field theories, and
              certain aspects of probability theory. These seemingly disparate fields turn
              out to share a common mathematical description, namely "parabolic partial
              differential equations" or equivalently the probabilistic theory of "Brownian
              motion." In most interesting (physically relevant) cases it is seldom possible
              to find explicit solutions to the complicated partial differential equations to
              be studied by the P.I. Nevertheless, it is often possible to discover
              interesting and relevant properties of the solutions. A typical phenomenon of
              parabolic partial differential equations is the fact that their solutions tend
              towards steady state values after waiting a sufficiently long time. For
              example, if a metal plate is heated in a non-uniform way and then left alone,
              the heat in the plate will redistribute itself over time so that the
              temperature reaches a constant equilibrium value throughout the plate. A
              fundamental problem, related to "Poincare" and "logarithmic Sobolev"
              inequalities, is the questions of how quickly do the systems described by the
              parabolic partial differential equations to be studied in this research
              converge to their equilibrium value. This same rate of convergence question has
              another interpretation in the context of quantum field theories describing
              relativistic (i.e. moving near the speed of light) elementary particles. For
              these theories the existence of a Poincare inequality has the desirable
              interpretation that the mathematical theory does not predict an unreasonable
              plethora of elementary particles. The particle interpretation of parabolic and
              related quantum mechanical Shrodinger equations will be another point of study.
              The particle interpretation goes under the title of Fock space representations
              which were mentioned in the first paragraph. 

