Title       : 21st Century Urban Technical Education Project-Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  2002  
File        : a0202399

Award Number: 0202399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900001             (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Hodgkinson hodgkinb@matc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Len Sterry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth D. Welty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Munson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberly Farley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Milwaukee Area Tech Col
	      1015 North 6th Street
	      Milwaukee, WI  532031203    414/278-6600

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In Milwaukee and the State of Wisconsin too few high school graduates transition
              into technical careers. A gap exists between the existing supply of graduates
              and the high wage technical jobs available. The 21st Century Urban Technical
              Education Project, funded in 1999 by the National Science Foundation, has
              responded to this problem by creating a new approach to technology education.
              Focusing initially on the construction trades during Phase I, the current
              initiative focuses on the application of this technology education model/design
              to Energy and Power and Transportation. Phase II begins to diffuse this
              technology education model at three district high schools in the Milwaukee
              Public Schools in an effort to bring about systemic change in the future. The
              project continues to prepare technical high school students for technical
              career opportunities through an articulated 2+2+2 approach and the development
              of an integrated/connected education model.

This project refines and
              assesses the template for standards-based educational reform designed and
              developed in Phase I as part of the construction technology cluster. Phase II
              addresses the areas of curriculum reform, faculty development, diversity,
              marketing and recruitment, partnerships, and the integration of applied
              technology in education. The major partners in Phase II include the Milwaukee
              Public Schools, the Milwaukee Area Technical College, the University of
              Wisconsin-Stout, Wisconsin Energy Corporation, the U.S. Department of
              Transportation, the Association of General Contractors of Greater Milwaukee,
              and various business, industry, and labor organizations.

Phase II curriculum
              for grades 11-14 in Energy and Power and Transportation is being aligned to
              state and national standards. A coordinated secondary and post-secondary
              teacher training initiative, which is based on the successful NSF/WASDI
              (Wisconsin Academy for Staff Development Initiatives) project, is being
              established in collaboration with business and industry for ongoing faculty
              development. A committee of partners, using a shared decision-making model, is
              guiding and overseeing technical education initiatives and providing technical
              training opportunities for staff and students. A career development model and a
              marketing plan are also being developed and implemented. In addition, research
              and implementation strategies are breaking down barriers for women and
              minorities in non-traditional technical careers and supporting and increasing
              involvement by underrepresented populations.




