Title       : Variational and PDE Models, and their Computation for Image Inpainting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0202565

Award Number: 0202565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121322             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianhong Shen jhshen@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0202565
PI: 			Shen, Jianhong
Institution:
              		University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
Program: 		Applied Mathematics
Program
              Manager: 	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: Variational and Partial Differential
              Equation Models, and their Computation for Image Inpainting

This project is
              intended to discover and develop the most fundamental and crucial mathematical
              principles and frameworks for highly diversified applications of digital
              inpainting. These frameworks will allow us to further construct many
              universally applicable inpainting models, and design their efficient and robust
              computational algorithms. Our proposed approach is to employ several high level
              mathematical tools for the modeling and computation of inpainting, which
              include the Bayesian decision theory, nonlinear partial differential equations
              (e.g. mean curvature motions, nonlinear transport and diffusion), variational
              methods in the space of Bounded Variations and for free boundary problems, a
              variety of state-of-the-art tools from harmonics analysis such as wavelets and
              multiresolution analysis, and many efficient schemes in numerical analysis and
              computational partial differential equations. The project is also highlighted
              by the fact that we are proposing for the first time to integrate visually
              important curve, surface, and image geometry into the traditionally statistical
              models and dynamic processes. 

Digital inpainting is to develop an automatic
              process to intelligently recover and complete the missing, unavailable, or
              purposely disguised image information. Such loss of information occurs
              ubiquitously in a   variety of important fields including computer vision,
              network (especially wireless) communication, robust image coding and
              transmission (from the Hubble Space Telescope for example), three-dimensional
              volumetric organ reconstruction from two-dimensional medical images, disguise
              of enemy weapons and personnel in the battlefields, and the digital restoration
              of cracked   ancient paintings in digitized fine art museums. This project will
              develop a mathematical framework for image inpainting. Besides the broad impact
              on the numerous important fields mentioned above, the project will also
              strengthen the integration of high level pure mathematics into the contemporary
              digital, computer, and artificial intelligence technology, and in return,
              create numerous opportunities for mathematical modeling, analysis, and
              computation. It will also help the principal investigator develop new curricula
              and train new graduate students in this booming fresh field of applied
              mathematics.

Date: May 22, 2002

