Title       : Applications of Non-Commutative Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0202832

Award Number: 0202832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Baum baum@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Baum
Non-commutative geometry seeks to extend geometry and topology
              from the classical setting of Riemannian manifolds and topological spaces to a
              new setting of mathematical structures whose coordinate algebras are
              non-commutative.  In this context, approximately twenty years ago, P.Baum and
              A.Connes conjectured a formula for the K-theory of the (reduced) C* algebra of
              any locally compact topological group. At the present time no counter-example
              is known to the conjecture and-due to the work of many mathematicians-the
              conjecture has been proved for several very interesting classes of groups (e.g.
              real Lie groups, p-adic algebraic groups, adelic algebraic groups, discrete
              hyperbolic groups, amenable groups). Also established is that the conjecture,
              when valid, has many corollaries (e.g. Mackey analogy, Atiyah-Schmid
              construction of the discrete series, Novikov higher signature conjecture,
              stable Gromov-Lawson-Rosenberg conjecture, Kadison-Kaplansky conjecture). This
              project aims to discover and develop further corollaries of the conjecture in
              representation theory and in geometry-topology.

Analysis is the branch of
              mathematics based on calculus. The fundamental ideas of calculus
              (differentiation and integration) were introduced by Newton and Leibniz and
              played a central role in the scientific revolution of their era. Topology is
              the most basic form of geometry and was founded by such eminent nineteenth and
              twentieth century mathematicians as Riemann, Poincare and Lefschetz. A major
              theme in modern mathematics has been the interplay between analysis and
              topology. For example, Maxwell's equations for electricity-magnetism are
              formulated via analysis, but many of the implications are topological. This
              project continues the interaction of topology and analysis by using and
              applying a new synthesis of analysis and topology known as "non-commutative
              geometry".

 



