Title       : Aquarium Technology and Marine Interpretation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0202141

Award Number: 0202141
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750547             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Hodgkins jhodgkins@occc.cc.or.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lavern J. Weber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Boehlert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy Miller-Morgan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Coast Community Col
	      332 S.W. Coast Highway
	      Newport, OR  973654928    541/574-7124

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project isl developing and implementing an Associate of Applied Science
              (AAS) degree program in Aquarium Technology and Marine Interpretation. The
              program is educating individuals to work in the growing number of aquariums,
              ornamental fish enterprises, aquaculture facilities, and marine recreation and
              interpretative centers in the Pacific Northwest and throughout the country.
              

As an Advanced Technology Education (ATE) Adaptation and Implementation
              Project, Oregon Coast Community College is:
(a) Reviewing and adapting
              curricula on Fisheries Technology developed by Northwest Center for Sustainable
              Resources (DUE 981315) and aquarist curricula developed by Marine Advanced
              Technology Education Center (DUE 9752028);
(b) Developing additional
              curriculum specific to aquarium technology and marine interpretation using the
              DACUM ( Developing A CurriculUM ) process;
(c) Submiting and receiving
              approval for the AAS degree from the Oregon Department of Education, Division
              of Professional/Technical Education;
(d) Enrolling 25 students in the program
              in each of years two and three of the grant;
(e) Developing articulation
              agreements with Oregon State University and other four-year institutions to
              facilitate successful transition to related bachelor's degree programs;
              and
(f) Sponsoring annual marine education and career institutes for high
              school students. These institutes give 100 students per year the opportunity to
              explore careers in aquatic life support, aquatic animal husbandry and health,
              and marine interpretation.

The project is accomplishing these tasks with the
              assistance of local and national partners. The partners provide technical
              expertise, training facilities, and internship opportunities for students.
              Local partners include the Oregon Coast Aquarium, the Bureau of Land
              Management, the Port of Newport, private nature-based tourist enterprises, and
              the Oregon State University Hatfield Marine Science Center, which includes
              Oregon State University's Marine Science program, Extension Sea Grant and
              research facilities for the Environmental Protection Agency, the National
              Oceanographic and Atmospheric Association, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
              and the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. A National Science Foundation
              funded nation-wide survey indicated strong employer demand for a technical
              training program of this nature.
