Title       : Collaborative Research: Investigations of Non-Classic Lake-Effect Boundary Layer
               Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0202305

Award Number: 0202305
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431403             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Kristovich dkristo@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil F. Laird  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Advances in research and operational weather observation systems and numerical
              modeling techniques have led to progressive improvements in understanding of
              physical processes involved in the development and evolution of lake-effect
              snow storms.  In particular recent observations taken during the Lake-Induced
              Convection Experiment (Lake-ICE) and mesoscale numerical models have been
              utilized to better understand isolated "classic" lake-effect systems that
              develop primarily from lake surface heat and moisture fluxes in fall and winter
              months.  The enhanced scientific understanding of interactions between
              microscale and mesoscale processes in classic lake-effect systems can now be
              applied to more complex, and perhaps more common and intense, non-classic
              lake-effect storms.

This collaborative research project will build on past
              research results and use new observations and numerical models to develop a
              physically-consistent understanding of complex interactions of synoptic systems
              and mesoscale lake-effect systems and factors controlling the coherence of, and
              structure along, mesoscale lake-effect convective bands.  In particular the
              Principal Investigators will analyze data obtained from radars, aircraft,
              satellites and surface instrumentation and perform detailed mesoscale model
              simulations to study unresolved issues for non-classic lake-effect situations. 
              Four specific research objectives are to: 1) Determine differences in the cloud
              microphysical structure and thermodynamics of lake-effect boundary layers that
              occur with and without large-scale precipitation aloft; 2) Determine the
              effects of a warm lake on the mesoscale dynamics and structure of moving
              mesoscale precipitation systems (such as associated with synoptic fronts); 3)
              Determine the processes by which the convective boundary layer and mesoscale
              circulations from an upwind lake influence lake-effect development over a
              downwind lake; 4) Determine the dynamic mechanisms leading to the development
              of mesoscale structures along lake-effect snow bands and the influence of
              vertical wind shear on band structural coherence. 

Successful completion of
              this research could help improve the forecast of intense lake-effect
              snowstorms.
