Title       : Asymmetric Synthesis of alpha-Amino Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0202827

Award Number: 0202827
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Williams rmw@chem.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research will be the development of the synthetic methodology 
              necessary to achieve the asymmetric total synthesis of the following
              naturalproducts: (1) azomethine ylid dipolar cycloaddition reactions as applied
              to the asymmetric total synthesis of spirotryprostatin A; (2) intramolecular
              nitrone cycloadditions as applied to cylindrospermopsin; (3) Mannich-type
              reactions to construct alpha, beta-diamino acids and application to the
              asymmetric total synthesis of capreomycin 1B; (4) further development of
              peptide isostere methodologies and application to the asymmetric total
              synthesis of leuhistin; (5) lactone homologation methodology development as
              applied to the asymmetric total synthesis of N-acetylneuraminic acid; (6)
              development of stereoselective methods to construct peptide isosteres with
              three contiguous stereogenic centers; (7) development of methodology to prepare
              alpha-alkyl-isoserine derivatives; (8) development of novel intramolecular
              azomethine ylid dipolar cycloaddition reactions for application to the
              asymmetric total synthesis of palauamine; (9) diastereoselective aldol and
              lactone functionalization methods for application to a short, asymmetric total
              synthesis of quinine featuring a facially selective intramolecular SN2
              cyclization reaction.

With this renewal award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Robert M.
              Williams of the Department of Chemistry at Colorado State University. 
              Professor Williams will focus his work on the asymmetric synthesis of complex,
              optically pure, densely functionalized amino acids and amino acid derivatives. 
              The methodology will be extended to the preparation of natural products having
              interesting and important biological properties.  The research has broad
              impacts for the pharmaceutical industry and for the training of graduate and
              postdoctoral students.
