Title       : Biodiversity of the Russian Far East: Sakhalin Island
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0202175

Award Number: 0202175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195712             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore W. Pietsch twp@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5973,5978,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              "Biodiversity of the Russian Far East" is a long-term international effort
to
              document the diversity of plants and animals that occupy the landmasses
that
              surround and enclose the Sea of Okhotsk.  This region is one of the
most
              biologically diverse yet poorly known areas within the northern hemisphere.  At
              the same time, compared to most other high-latitude regions of
comparable size
              around the world, its biota is relatively undisturbed.
For political reasons,
              but also because of its remoteness and severe
climate, all but a few Russian
              biologists have ignored this region.
Information about the plants and animals
              of Okhotskia is largely unknown
outside of Russian and what little is
              available is published in Russian
and thus relatively inaccessible.  Each
              summer since 1994, three-dozen
scientists, along with their students, from the
              University of Washington,
the Far East Branch of the Russian Academy of
              Sciences, and the Sapporo
and Hakodate campuses of Hokkaido University, Japan,
              spend eight weeks
exploring remote islands and continental shorelines,
              utilizing land-based
field stations or ocean-going Russian research vessels. 
              While our primary
center of focus has been the island biotas of the Kuril
              Archipelago, our
destination over the next two years will be Sakhalin Island. 
              Our goals
are to record the detailed species-level diversity of life in
              aquatic and
terrestrial habitats of the Russian Far East as a prologue
              to
investigations of biological patterns and processes, and as a basis
              for
the development of conservation strategies for this part of the
              world.

Biological materials from lichens to liverworts, from spiders to
              frogs are
being collected, curated, and made available to specialists around
              the
world.  Dozens of species new to science are being named, described,
              and
classified, and numerous scientific and popular articles are
              being
published.  In the area of conservation, our work is providing
              an
important foundation of information that will promote
              long-term
environmental protection of these unique biotas.  Finally,
              our
biodiversity studies in the Russian Far East contribute significantly
              to
education and to the development of human resources in science at
              the
undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate levels.  Since 1994,
              the
project has provided financial support and direct involvement in field
              and
laboratory research for dozens of students.  With major responsibility
              for
collecting, identification, and curation, as well as data
              collection,
analysis, and interpretation, students share authorship on
              scientific
publications.  International collaborative interaction between
              students
and scientists of diverse interest and training provides
              unique
opportunities to address important new questions ranging from
              comparative
biology to conservation.


