Title       : CISE Research Infrastructure: Pervasive Pixels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0202063

Award Number: 0202063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1485098            (Estimated)
Investigator: Henning Schulzrinne hgs@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail E. Kaiser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Kender  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Feiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen R. McKeown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 02-02063
Schulzrinne, Henning
Feiner, Steven K., Kaiser, Gail E., Kender,
              John R., McKeown, Kathleen R.  
Boston University 

Title:  RI: Pervasive
              Pixels

Projected Proposed:

This project, developing a flexible
              department-wide collaborative work infrastructure, "Pervasive Pixels," that
              will serve as a testbed for research in collaborative systems, aims to use this
              collaborative framework to conduct research and teaching. Pervasive Pixels will
              capture and deliver multimedia information across heterogeneous networks and
              devices. The system will schedule meetings, manage and prefetch multimedia
              objects, laying out material on individual and shared displays. Meetings are
              facilitated by locating, tracking and identifying users as they desire and are
              recorded, annotated and summarized, with extensive research capabilities. While
              improvements in core computation and communication technologies encourage
              working and interacting remotely, engaging in interdisciplinary collaborations
              that span buildings, cities, and countries, routinely encounters severe
              limitations imposed by current collaboration support systems. Pervasive Pixels
              is created to address these problems and should make possible 
      
              Capturing and delivering multimedia information (including video), through
              heterogeneous  networks, clients, and devices;
       Scheduling meetings,
              managing and prefetching work documents and multimedia objects, and laying out
              materials of individual and shared displays, based on models of workflow needs
              and models of temporal, spatial, and semantic interrelationships;
      
              Facilitating meetings by locating, tracking, and identifying users, and
              understanding their gestures, in live and captured video and audio;
     
              Recording, annotating, summarizing, and searching meeting content, from
              multiple physical perspectives and via multiple types of database queries, thus
              maximizing the effects of temporal differences.
The infrastructure
              emphasizes
       Large, instrumented, multi-display workspaces in a variety
              of locations, to accommodate group interactions.
    Networked mobile devices
              of various capacities, used individually and in the context of  larger
              workspaces.
    Transparent and automatic adaptability to changes of place,
              platform, or group composition, allowing mobile users to interact as they move
              about, without having to account for these changes manually.
      Support a
              wide range of hardware and software, beginning with commercial off-the-shelf
              commodity components, whose capabilities are retained while the system evolves,
              ultimately leading to new standards for meeting environments.

