Title       : Planning Grant for Tampa Bay Regional Center for Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0202277

Award Number: 0202277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49896              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn Barger mbarger@hccfl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew M. Hoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley E. Jenkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Gilbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hillsborough Cmty College
	      P O BOX 22127
	      Tampa, FL  336222127    813/879-7222

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a proposal to prepare a planning grant for Tampa Bay regional center for
              manufacturing. This Center involves educational material development,
              adaptation and implementation from existing centers, and professional
              development for educators. A new manufacturing program at Hillsborough
              Community College (HCC), an emerging manufacturing technology program at St
              Petersburg College (SPC), and an active industry focused Engineering College at
              the University of South Florida (USF) form a strong academic foundation for the
              creation of this regional center. Furthermore, the manufacturing companies also
              recognize the urgent need to refocus manufacturing education in the region.
              Hence, the planning grant time and funds are going to be directed to conducting
              job and skill analysis, DACUMs, and fine tuning of results of the state-wide
              effort that are currently underway to assure maximum coupling among these
              schools and the manufacturing companies in the region.

Planning grant funds
              are also going to be used to shape the proposed center's activities. Besides
              providing the needed synergy for academic and industrial partners focused on
              manufacturing issues, the Center is also going to build a bridge between the
              Associate of Science Degree at HCC in Manufacturing Technology and the B.S.
              Engineering degree (manufacturing emphasis) offered at the Industrial
              Engineering Department within USF's College of Engineering. In addition, the
              ATE Center is going to serve as a greater Tampa Bay
regional umbrella for
              SPC's and HCC's Manufacturing Technology programs. The center is going to
              support all the regional high schools and community colleges that have courses
              or programs in manufacturing or related technology fields that should be
              revitalized.

