Title       : Spectral and Transport Properties of Random Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0202656

Award Number: 0202656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Hislop hislop@ms.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Spectral and Transport Properties of Random Media

PI: Peter D. Hislop,
              University of Kentucky
DMS-0202656

Abstract:

This proposal concerns
              continuing investigations of the principal
investigator into the spectral and
              transport properties of random media.
The basic question is: How do random
              perturbations of a background
medium, for example, a perfect crystal,
              influence the propagation
of quantum and classical waves in the medium?
The
              proposed work concentrates on properties of the integrated density of
states
              and models related to the quantum Hall effect.
Several other models and
              related technical problems are discussed.
The main aspects of the proposal
              include:
1) Continuity and Regularity of the Integrated Density of States;
2)
              Spectral and Transport Problems in the Quantum Hall Effect;
3) the
              Aizenman-Molchanov Method for Localization, Energy-Level Statistics,
and
              Random Magnetic Fields.
The overall goal of this work is to describe the
              effect of
disorder on the measurable properties of the system,
such as the
              density of states, the conductivity,
and the edge currents. The proposer also
              discusses
localization for some previously untreated systems
like random
              magnetic fields and nonlocal potentials.
The proposed methods will contribute
              to the
understanding of wave propagation in random media.

Our understanding
              of many basic electronic properties of solids is
based on the simple
              one-electron model of an electron propagating
in a periodic array of atoms.
              This simple idea explains many fundamental
phenomena such as metals,
              insulators, and semiconductors. One of the
limitations of this model is that
              it predicts infinite conductivity. In
1958, P. W. Anderson proposed disorder
              as a mechanism for limiting the
ballistic behavior of an electron in a
              periodic array of atoms. He argued
that the electron wave function should be
              localized in space
due to multiple and incoherent scattering from the randomly
              distributed
impurities, with probability one. Disorder-induced localization of
              states
for many models has now been proved. Some of the work in this
              proposal
involves applying these ideas to the study of systems with
              interesting
geometries, such as a strip or a torus, that exhibit the quantum
              Hall
effect. The principal investigator is interested in the nature of 
the
              quantum Hall edge-currents, and the nature of the 
electron states for regions
              with two-edges, such as a strip. One of the tools for studying these systems is
              the density of states that provides a measure of the number of
              electronic
states per unit volume. The continuity of the density of states
              measure
provides a measure of the effectiveness of the disorder in breaking
              degeneracy of the ordered system. Very little is known about this function. The
              principal investigator is also interested in exploring the effect on electron
              propagation of randomness in the magnetic field, and the influence of
              randomness on certain systems with nonlocal interactions.





