Title       : SpaceTEC National Center of Excellence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0202398

Award Number: 0202398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2984902            (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert M. Koller kollera@brevard.cc.fl.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marie Dalton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Swindell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffery K. Little  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Cunniff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Hosley  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Brevard Community College
	      1519 Clearlake Road
	      Cocoa, FL  329226503    305/632-1111

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
A nation's success in any economic sector is directly related to the strength
              of its educational system, and the aerospace industry is no exception. To
              address the need for skilled technicians and to spur student interest and
              motivation to study, Community Colleges for Innovative Technology Transfer
              (CCITT) is establishing SpaceTEC, a national Aerospace Science Technical
              Education Center of Excellence under the NSF's ATE Program. 

The vision of
              SpaceTEC is to be the focal point for technical education resources featuring
              aerospace, providing motivation for academic studies and professional
              development services for faculty, students, and aerospace employees. The
              mission of SpaceTEC is to create and implement an industry-driven,
              government-endorsed, technical education process for aerospace technicians that
              can be shared with other educational venues. The goals of SpaceTEC are to
              foster interest in science, mathematics, and technology education in the U.S.,
              and to provide education for the technical workforce using a national alliance
              of representatives from business and industry, government, and academic
              institutions. The strategy is to formalize aerospace technician education
              nationally, establish a skills-based standards program that has industry-wide
              support, and infuse aerospace themes into other areas of study. Methods include
              regional and national advisory committees, national articulation among K-12 and
              post-secondary institutions, a national professional development organization,
              a formal certification process, innovative faculty development, resources for
              national dissemination, and coordinated curriculum development. Instructional
              materials with aerospace themes are being shared with non-aerospace
              disciplines.

The nine CCITT member colleges participating in this initiative
              are affiliated with a NASA center or Department of Defense location. Together
              they enroll over 400,000 students annually. United Space Alliance is an
              industry partner providing a co-principal investigator. CCITT colleges are each
              leading one or more of the elements of the national program, and Brevard
              Community College is serving serve as the fiscal agent and Center manager.
              

Internal reviews  are being provided by a National Aerospace Technology
              Advisory Committee, with representatives from advisory committees affiliated
              with CCITT colleges. External review is by representatives from the Air Force
              Academy, the Air Force Institute of Technology, and a National Visiting
              Committee (NVC). The NVC includes members of industry, academia, and government
              groups.

There are several major benefits from a national Center. Program
              graduates receive nationally recognized competencies for employability.
              Participating academic institutions receive funding for their roles, access to
              relevant curriculum, program articulation, faculty development, and recognition
              for industry-endorsed programs for critical workforce needs. Business and
              industry are provided with a dependable source of well-educated entry-level
              technicians and a means of sustaining workforce development. Government is
              provided an improved educational capability and qualified technicians for a key
              economic sector. Educators have new space-related curricular themes to enrich
              their courses in many disciplines. SpaceTEC is serving as a national resource
              to strengthen our country's technical education base and motivate interest in
              academics.
