Title       : Topics in Stochastic Control, Portfolio Optimization and Credit Risk Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0202851

Award Number: 0202851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomasz R. Bielecki T-Bielecki@neiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern Illinois Univ
	      5500 N Saint Louis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606254625    773/442-4670

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0202851
Bielecki

The proposed research will be organized into two principal
              
research areas: 1) Development of mathematical theory for risk 
adjusted
              portfolio optimization and fixed income investment 
management, incorporating
              factor modeling of security returns, 
and 2) Development of mathematical
              theory for credit risk 
valuation and hedging. There are three fundamental
              aspects of the 
first research area: 1A) The concept of risk adjusted control
              
(optimization) criteria for investment problems with finite and 
infinite
              planning horizons. More specifically, we shall continue to 
develop theory and
              applications for mean-variance stochastic 
control. This kind of control
              problems is appealing to financial 
industry as it extends to more realistic
              dynamic framework the 
classical approach of Harry Markowitz  (1990 Nobel
              Prize in 
Economics).  1B) Development of control methodologies for the
              
fixed income investment problems with finite planning horizon 
coinciding
              with the maturity of the underlying bond. We shall 
attempt to overcome
              certain singularity problems arising in this 
context, which will lead to
              derivation of applicable fixed income 
investment strategies. 1C) Explicit
              consideration given to statistical 
estimation issues. Optimal control
              methodologies are rarely used in 
the financial industry, largely because of
              statistical difficulties 
associated with the estimation of constant drift
              coefficients in 
diffusion process models of individual securities.
              Practitioners 
typically channel their energies into forecasting security
              returns 
based upon exogenous factors such as interest rates and
              firm-
specific accounting measures. The proposed research will serve to
              
reduce the gap between theory and practice by developing 
optimization
              models, which explicitly incorporate exogenous 
factors. By explicitly
              modeling the dependence of the assets on 
factors, it will be possible to
              obtain more realistic models, to better 
understand the statistical estimation
              difficulties, and to be in a 
position to apply adaptive control methods. The
              fundamental 
aspects of the second research area are: 2A) Explicit
              consideration 
given to possibility of credit migrations of defaultable
              contingent 
claims. This will be done in the context of conditionally Markov
              
chains both with regard to a single defaultable claim as well as 
with
              regard to several such claims. The latter situation is very 
important for
              applications to basket credit derivatives. 2B) 
Development of mathematical
              theory for hedging of certain classes 
of credit derivatives that are vital
              for financial industry. This will 
be done in the context of martingale
              representations associated 
with conditionally Markov chains. 2C) Development
              of analytical 
tools for computation of certain class of functionals of
              conditional 
Markov processes. This will build upon the classical Feynman-Kac
              
characterizations, and will find applications for valuation and 
hedging of
              some fundamental (basket) credit derivatives such as 
default swaps.
              

Although the proposed research will require fundamental advances 
within
              the areas of applied mathematics, probability, and financial 
economics, it is
              anticipated that the proposed research will lead to 
new and practical tools
              that eventually become widely used in the 
financial industry, and possibly in
              the insurance industry as well. 
The main reason for this expectation is that
              the proposed research 
addresses the need of the two industries for
              quantitative 
methodologies that would enable financial and insurance decision
              
makers to properly manage certain categories of risks. The major
              
implication of incidence of risks in financial/insurance decision-
making is
              the possibility of financial losses. In general, neither the 
possibility of
              financial losses, nor their occasional severity, can be 
completely
              eliminated. However, workable tools, such as pricing 
and hedging strategies,
              are sought for controlling some of the risks 
underlying financial and
              insurance industries, so that both the 
possibility and severity of losses are
              kept to minimum. The 
proposed research will provide mathematical basis for
              
development of such tools.

