Title       : Problems in Probability Arising from Ecology and Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0202935

Award Number: 0202935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312168             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard T. Durrett rtd1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              


0202935
Durrett
	Durrett proposes to study a variety of problems in
              probability theory that arise from questions in ecology and genetics. In the
              area of stochastic spatial models, he will study the asymptotic behavior of
              multitype voter models where voters have several opinions and are more likely
              to imitate neighbors with similar opinions. With Ted Cox he will work to extend
              their conclusions for the stepping stone model to samples of size k > 2, and
              will study equilibrium properties of a hybrid zone which results when each of
              two alleles is favored in one half of the space. With Ed Perkins he will study
              measure valued limits of particle systems to produce limit processes with
              interactions between different types of particles. Not all of the systems
              Durrett studies will be spatial however: he will work with Jason Schweinsberg
              to develop approximations of genetic hitchhiking that involve the coalescent
              with multiple collisions, will study the phase transition in a quasi-species
              model which models properties of viruses with high mutation rates, and will
              continue his work with Vlada Limic on Kauffmann's NK model, which is a
              prototypical example of a fitness landscape with a large number of local
              maxima.
	Durrett's research is motivated by a variety of applications. Durrett
              will work with Ted Cox to extend their work on spatial genetics models to
              investigate explanations for the surprisingly large amount of linkage
              disequilibrium (genetic correlation) in the human genome. Understanding the
              possible sources of patterns in DNA sequences is important for using
              association mapping to locate genes and to identify footprints of positive
              selection. In relation to the latter question, Durrett will work with Jason
              Schweinsberg to develop an approximation to the genetic hitchhiking that occurs
              with the fixation of favorable mutation, which will allow for the derivation of
              analytical results for quantities that can currently be understood only by
              simulation. A major theme of Durrett's research is the influence of a spatial
              distribution of competitors on equilibrium properties of a system. With Simon
              Levin, he will study a collection of stochastic spatial models for the
              evolution of social norms. With Ted Cox, he will investigate hybrid zones where
              closely related but genetically differentiated populations coexist in close
              proximity. With Ed Perkins he will investigate scaling limits of stochastic
              spatial models, in order to construct new interesting examples of interacting
              measure-valued diffusions and to obtain approximations for particle systems
              with large range.

