Title       : SMECTEP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0202863

Award Number: 0202863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399883             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Andrews   (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl E. Longley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fresno Fdn
	      4910 N. Chestnut Ave
	      Fresno, CA  93726    559/278-0840

NSF Program : 7688      Science,Tech,Eng&Math Teacher
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7688,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The California State University, Fresno Science and Mathematics Education Center
              (SMEC) is implementing a collaborative teacher education partnership project
              within the service region of the university. SMEC, in collaboration with
              numerous school districts in its service region along with 2 community
              colleges, Reedley College and West Hills Community College at Lemoore
              (including their satellite campuses), is providing a range of program
              components designed to enhance science and mathematics teacher recruitment,
              induction, support, and preparation in the Central Valley of California.
              Activities are facilitated and coordinated through a new network of SMEC
              satellite partners known as Learning Communities centered at the regional
              community colleges in collaboration with neighboring school districts. Project
              activities include: 1) expansion of efforts to recruit and support future
              science and mathematics teachers (middle and high school) throughout the
              service region of California State University, Fresno with recruitment efforts
              focusing on under represented minority groups; 2) development of a network of
              Science and Mathematics Future Science and Mathematics Teachers Clubs based at
              the two new Learning Community Centers; 3) use of a highly developed and
              successful model for early field experiences for all SMECTEP participants in
              the project; and 4) creation of a user-friendly Alternative Pathways Program
              designed to assist potential science and mathematics teachers entering the
              profession from other professions that incorporates special programs and summer
              institutes designed to assist in the career transition process.

SMECTEP
              incorporates new recruitment and support strategies building upon the
              successful Fresno Collaborative for Excellence in the Preparation of Teachers
              (FCEPT) in an effort to greatly expand outreach to the service region of the
              university. STEM Site coordinators based at each of the Learning Community
              Centers (partner community colleges) serve as primary liaisons to SMECTEP and
              as key facilitators in the project. They serve as the primary recruitment
              facilitators at their site in collaboration with key district science and
              mathematics teachers. They are also establishing Future Science and Mathematics
              Teacher Clubs in collaboration with local SMECTEP school districts and
              identifying science and/or mathematics faculty on their campuses who may be
              interested in attending or leading professional development workshops. Academic
              Year and Summer Institutes focused on the modeling approach to learning are
              offered for preservice students. A partnership with the University High School
              is providing a campus-based demonstration site for the teaching strategies
              introduced at the Institutes.

SMECTEP is improving the preparation of future
              science and mathematics teachers through early field experiences and other
              support and mentoring programs. The project is increasing the pool of
              credentialed middle and high school mathematics and science teachers in the
              Central Valley with special consideration for attracting prospective teachers
              from under served ethnic communities. 

