Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Tiwanaku Residential Mobility and
               Archaeological Chemistry: Strontium and Lead Isotope Analyses in the South
               Central Andes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0202329

Award Number: 0202329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Under the direction of Dr. Douglas Price, Kelly Knudson will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation at the University of Wisconsin at Madison. She will
              use archaeological chemistry to investigate the Precolumbian Tiwanaku culture,
              which existed from AD 500-1000 in the South Central Andes. The large and
              impressive site of Tiwanaku, located in Bolivia, was a religious, economic and
              political center that exerted influence over what is now southern Peru,
              northern Chile and western Bolivia. However, the nature of that influence is
              unclear and very controversial. More specifically, the relationship between the
              capital city of Tiwanaku and smaller sites associated with Tiwanaku has been
              heavily debated. While some scholars argue that these sites in southern Peru
              and northern Chile are colonies established by the Tiwanaku empire to gain
              access to valuable agricultural goods, others insist that these sites were
              populated by local people with religious or economic ties, but not political,
              ties to the capital. 

While archaeologists have tried to address this debate
              through various means, only archaeological chemistry can definitively identify
              colonists from the capital city of Tiwanaku in the proposed Tiwanaku colonies.
              Through a new technique that utilizes the strontium and lead isotope ratios in
              archaeological human teeth and bone, Knudson will determine where people buried
              at the proposed Tiwanaku colonies lived for the first 5 years of their lives.
              By determining the patterns of residential mobility at the proposed Tiwanaku
              colonies and their biological relationship to the capital city of Tiwanaku,
              Knudson will test the various hypotheses concerning the nature of the Tiwanaku
              polity. 

This research is important on a variety of levels. Since this
              powerful methodology is still relatively new, this dissertation research will
              help refine the use of strontium and lead isotope analyses in archaeology, and
              will help convince the archaeological community of its utility. In addition,
              this research will elucidate the relationship between the capital city at
              Tiwanaku and possible Tiwanaku sites in the hinterlands, and will help
              Andeanists resolve the debate on the nature of the Tiwanaku polity. Finally,
              because most information on imperial strategies comes from regions and time
              periods for which written records exist, this research on Tiwanaku
              heartland-hinterland interactions and imperial strategies will expand current
              knowledge on the role of residential mobility in prehistoric state development
              and maintenance. The work will also assist in training a promising young
              scientist.
 

