Title       : Promoting Access To Technical Education for Non-traditional Computer
               Informations Systems Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0202319

Award Number: 0202319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $493336             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna Pagoria DPagoria@pierce.ctc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Link  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pierce College
	      9401 Farwest Drive S W
	      Lakewood, WA  984981999    253/964-6500

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY
A workforce crisis exists in the Information Technology (IT)
              industry. Many jobs go unfilled nationally, regionally and locally because the
              supply of trained graduates from institutions of higher education does not meet
              industry's demand for workers. This urgent need for IT professionals and
              technicians requires innovative instructional solutions that will expand and
              diversify the IT workforce.

The objective of this three-year project is to
              retain and graduate non-traditional community college (two-year) IT students
              who are being lost to the field because they are alienated, intimidated or
              excluded by traditional IT teaching methods and culture. Applying the results
              of recent research in science and engineering pedagogy, this project creates
              and evaluates instructional methods intended to work for non-traditional IT
              students, instead of against them. This project creates educational materials
              for students and professional development materials for faculty. 

The
              activities include:
- developing and implementing a new program to assess
              personality and learning styles of IT students and a program of advising based
              on that assessment;
- developing and delivering new curricula incorporating
              alternative learning strategies into key introductory IT courses;
- developing
              and instituting special workshops and study/support groups aimed at
              non-traditional IT students; and
- developing and delivering workshops to
              assist IT faculty to learn about and implement alternative teaching strategies
              for the target population.

Expected outcomes for nontraditional IT students
              are: 
- improved academic performance;
- increased retention in IT; 
-
              increased numbers of IT majors; and 
- improved graduation rates.

Expected
              outcomes for IT faculty are: 
- a more positive attitude toward a variety of
              learning styles,
- increased knowledge about alternative learning styles, and
              
- implementation of alternative teaching strategies.

The project will be
              tested at two additional community college sites in Year 3. 

Deliverables
              from this project include:
- the non-traditional curricula for two
              introductory IT courses; 
- the student assessment/advising program for
              non-traditional students; 
- the non-traditional student success workshops;
              and 
- the workshops to assist faculty in developing teaching strategies for
              non-traditional students.
