Title       : Center for the Advancement of Process Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0202400

Award Number: 0202400
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2999784            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanna L. Kile jkile@mail.mainland.cc.tx.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Hicks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Payne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steve Ames  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Raley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of the Mainland
	      8001 Palmer Highway
	      Texas City, TX  775912447    409/938-1211

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

The Center for the Advancement of Process Technology (CAPT), based at
              College of the Mainland in Texas, is using a systematic process that includes
              curriculum development, professional development, capacity building,
              dissemination and evaluation. Process industry sectors to be served include
              chemical and refining, exploration and production, pharmaceuticals, and power
              generation. Collaborations also exist with the pulp/paper, food processing, and
              ammonia refrigeration industries. CAPT envisions opportunities in which
              students from diverse backgrounds are encouraged to enter Associate in Applied
              Science (AAS) Process Technology degree programs. These students are succeeding
              in rigorous, consistent and quality programs of study available through CAPT's
              community college and secondary school partners. This national partnership is
              identifying the knowledge and skills needed to succeed as a process technician
              in all process-related industries and agreeing upon common courses of study and
              educational standards. Partners are developing and offering classroom and
              web-based technical courses that are being validated by the partnership and
              enabling students to learn anytime, anywhere. Testing and validation of
              students' knowledge and skill attainment are being standardized. The registered
              website of the partnership, www.captech.org, is home to a national
              clearinghouse of process technology information and resources.

Faculty at
              partner colleges and secondary schools are using the classroom and web-based
              technical courses and textbooks to guide and supplement instruction. Faculty
              are also attending workshops in preparation for delivering courses. Faculty and
              students complete internships with business and industry to assure workplace
              understanding and knowledge. Industry is hosting internships; providing subject
              matter experts to validate skill standards and work with course designers;
              providing local colleges with scholarship monies, laboratory equipment and
              software; and facilitating dissemination of program success. University
              partners assure articulation of programs and courses and aid in the definition
              of best practices. Governmental agencies and professional agencies, such as the
              American Chemical Society and American Petroleum Institute, aid in the
              development of skill standards, encourage networking and market career
              opportunities in process technology.

College partners of this effort include
              Alvin Community College, TX; Baton Rouge Community College, LA; Bismarck State
              College, ND; Brazosport College, TX; College of the Mainland, TX; County
              College of Morris, NJ; Del Mar College, TX; Delaware Technical and Community
              College, DE; Houston Community College, TX; Lamar Institute of Technology, TX;
              Lamar State Colleges, TX; Lansing Community College, MI; Lee College, TX; Los
              Angeles Trade and Technical College, CA; Louisiana Technical Colleges, LA;
              McNeese State University, LA; Middlesex County College, NJ; Mississippi Gulf
              Coast Community College, MS; Montana State University, MT; New Jersey Institute
              of Technology, NJ; Northern Oklahoma College, OK; San Jacinto College, TX; San
              Juan College, NM; Southwestern Illinois College, IL; Texas A&M University, TX;
              Texas State Technical College, TX; University of Alaska System, AK; Victoria
              College, TX; and Wharton County Junior College, TX. Selected industry partners
              include American Ref-Fuel, BASF, BP, Celanese, Chevron, Coastal Refining,
              Colonial Pipeline, Conoco, Dow Chemical, Dupont, Eastman Chemical, ExxonMobil,
              Formosa Plastics, Lyondell-Citgo Refining, Merck, Oklahoma Gas & Electric,
              Phillips Chemical, Roche Pharmaceuticals, Roche Vitamins, Shell Chemical, Tosco
              Refining and Uniqema. These institutions and industries are represented by six
              alliances: AK Process Industries Careers Consortium, CA Alliance, Greater New
              Jersey Process Technology Alliance, Gulf Coast Process Technology Alliance, OK
              Partners for Business/Industry and Higher Education, and the National Power
              Generation Alliance.
