Title       : North Texas Regional Technologies Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0202408

Award Number: 0202408
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann Beheler abeheler@ccccd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ezra Penermon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mitty C. Plummer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice Robeson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Hensley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Collin County Cmty Col
	      2200 West University
	      McKinney, TX  75071    972/881-5611

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The North Texas Regional Technology Consortium combines the strengths of
              regional educational institutions and business and industry partners to improve
              Information Technology (IT) Programs to increase the quantity and quality of IT
              resources available to the workforce. A partnership with the National Workforce
              Center for Emerging Technologies (NWCET) provides access to cutting edge
              information and access to successful existing curricula that can be adapted to
              so that multiple IT certification options can be integrated into associate
              degree bearing curricula. Articulation agreements are developed between high
              schools and two-year colleges and between two and four-year colleges in the
              area. The partnership with NWCET also provides access to affordable
              Educator-to-Educator professional development workshops for faculty in
              community colleges and high schools. A convergence laboratory at Collins County
              Community College provides students with experiences with interoperability of
              equipment and technologies. This laboratory is available to industry as a test
              bed. An industry council provides guidance to the project as well as
              opportunities for faculty and students to become acquainted with industrial
              practice and concerns. A dual recruitment process with industry helps increase
              the number of students from underserved populations. The project develops
              metrics for measuring increase in IT enrollments and in employer satisfaction
              with those employees who have participated in the program.
