Title       : The Case Files
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0202397

Award Number: 0202397
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $949988             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Johnson johnson_jr@nsti.tec.tn.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sydney U. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Kitchen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nashville St Tech Comm Col
	      120 White Bridge Rd
	      Nashville, TN  372094515    615/353-3236

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The vision of the Case Files project is to be a catalyst for reform of the
              learning experience for students in engineering and information technology
              program throughout the nation. This vision is being realized through the
              creation of a national community of educators who are skilled and experienced
              in the delivery of case-based learning. The secondary objective is to develop a
              systematic process that will capture case "ideas," develop a forum for sharing
              case concepts with other faculty, and to publish and distribute these
              materials. "The Case Files" follows up the work currently being concluded by
              the South East Advanced Technological Education Consortium (SEATEC) that has
              developed model case studies for technological education and evaluated their
              effectiveness. SEATEC's work has revealed evidence that using cases improves
              learning and creates a learning centered environment for students. Interest in
              using the case method has grown among technological educators in the past 3-5
              years. Currently, no resource exists for those educators who wish to use the
              case study method. Three major goals of the project are: improve knowledge and
              understanding of case studies among technological educators in Tennessee and
              across the nation; create an on-line clearinghouse for case "ideas" and cases
              developed by faculty; and disseminate case "ideas" and fully developed
              published cases to a national audience. Experienced faculty are mentoring those
              new to using cases. Partners in the project are Nashville State Technical
              Institute, the LITEE Center at Auburn University, and the Learning Technology
              Center at Vanderbilt University.
