Title       : The Central New York to Puerto Rico-Mayaguez (CNY-PR) Alliance for Graduate
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0202171

Award Number: 0202171
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard C. Johnson HJOHNSON@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stacey L. Tice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark N. Glauser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1515      MINORITY GRADUATE EDUC ACTIVIT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              2. Project Summary:

In this age of accelerated technological advances,
              increasing career specialization and extremely competitive job opportunities,
              society has a vested interest in promoting graduate and professional education
              as never before. The need for specialized knowledge and the acquisition of
              professional credentials place increasingly high demands on all college
              graduates, yet documented evidence shows that there exists a disparity in the
              opportunities for certain populations to gain access to programs conferring
              advanced degrees in science, mathematics and engineering (SME). Member
              institutions in the alliance spearheaded by Syracuse University with the
              collaboration of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Cornell University, and
              Puerto Rico-Mayaguez called the Central New York to Puerto Rico-Mayagilez
              (CNY-PR) are prepared to confront the challenge of making graduate study more
              available to reportedly underrepresented populations.

The CNY-PR alliance is
              based on mutual commitment to research experiences for undergraduate and
              graduate students, faculty development programs in an environment where
              recruitment, retention and mentoring are essential. The CNY-PR alliance brings
              valuable experience and resources for the enhancement of minority graduate
              education that will contribute to the diversification of the professoriate. The
              CNY-PR alliance goal is to use holistic approaches to substantially increase
              minority SME Ph.D. degree recipients entering academic positions. The CNY-PR
              alliance proposes the following objectives to achieve its goals:
0	Provide
              inter-institutional engaging research experiences for undergraduate and
              graduate students
0 Review and recommend innovative measures and guidelines
              for graduate admission criteria 0 Aggressively recruit and retain excellent
              minority students to ' the alliance institutions
Provide multi-year funding
              package for accepted minority graduate students
Expand professoriate and
              mentor training programs to alliance institutions
Develop and implement
              continuous assessment tools to evaluate the alliance's objectives

Each
              component of the program builds on the previous, creating a corridor the
              student moves through that motivates, guides, and supports from K-12 to Ph.D.
              to a successful career in academia or industry.

The alliance institutions
              are excited about this program, and have begun laying the groundwork. External
              funding from industry is already being sought to ensure the continuous 
.

