Title       : Pathways to Technology: The Community College Route
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0202223

Award Number: 0202223
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1189736            (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise Blumenthal Denise_Blumenthal@wgbh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project is showcasing a diverse range of ground-breaking Advanced
              Technology Education (ATE) programs currently operating in community colleges
              across the country, through production and dissemination of a series of
              media-based products. The project also features a robust outreach campaign to
              awaken students, parents, guidance and career counselors, policymakers, and
              community colleges themselves to the enormous potential of these
              programs.

Five 15-minute videotapes illustrate successful ATE programs in
              such fields as Agriculture, Biotechnology, Chemical or Process Technology,
              Information Technology, and Manufacturing. Each video profiles two students,
              highlighting the ethnic, geographic, and age diversity reflected in community
              college demographics. In addition, an introductory video, drawn from the
              library as a whole and also produced in CD-ROM format, provides an overview of
              exemplary ATE programs in community colleges across the country. A companion
              Web site is expanding on the topics addressed in the videos, providing
              additional information through text, interactive activities, streamed clips
              from the series, and links to related sites. A National Advisory Group is
              guiding all aspects of the project.

Dissemination activities feature
              widespread distribution of copies of the video series, the overview CD-ROM, and
              print guides to facilitate use. In addition, through partnerships with the
              American Association of Community Colleges (AACC), the American School
              Counselor Association (ASCA), and Jobs for the Future, Inc., there is use of
              common messaging to place listings and articles about the series in the online
              community college guides published by Peterson's, USA Today, and U.S. News and
              World Report.The project is also working to reach the 5 million members Phi
              Theta Kappa and marketing the series via general educational distributors.
              

All project materials are designed for use as tools by community colleges
              in recruiting students, educating policymakers, and encouraging expanded
              involvement of business and industry in ATE programs.The intention of the
              project is to bring community colleges to the forefront of consideration when
              students (e.g., high schoolers, older-adults, displaced workers) and those who
              support them (e.g., guidance counselors, workplace supervisors, and parents)
              are exploring educational and career options.


