Title       : A National Partnership to Develop a Strategic Plan for the Development of the
               National Center for Pulp and Paper Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0202423

Award Number: 0202423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. White jhwhite@ascc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steve R. Duke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda North  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harry T. Cullinan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alabama Southern Community
	      P O Box 2000
	      Monroeville, AL  36461    334/575-3156

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project formulates a strategic plan for the development of the national
              center for pulp and paper technology through the partnership of the four
              two-year colleges and with strong backing and support from industry. The center
              is going to establish and perpetuate a technology program and network providing
              students around the nation an effective education and training program. The
              center is also going to provide the pulp and paper sector of the U. S. forest
              products industry with a globally competitive, technologically advanced
              workforce. Alabama Southern Community College (ASCC) and Auburn University
              alliance continues in this project with the addition of four two-year colleges
              strategically located throughout the United States. These institutions include:
              (1) Kennebec Valley Technical College, a rural college in Fairfield, Maine, (2)
              Fox Valley Technical College in a more urban area in Appleton, Wisconsin, (3)
              Century Community Technical College in White Bear Lake, Minnesota, and (4)
              Lower Columbia College in a more urban area in Longview, Washington.

The
              project includes participation of several national pulp and paper industry
              organizations under an industry-academia-governmental initiative called Agenda
              2020. These national organizations consist of (1) The American Forest and Paper
              Association (AF&PA), (2) The Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper
              Industry (TAPPI), and (3) The Paper, Allied-Industrial, Chemical & Energy
              Workers International Union (PACE). This initiative enables focusing the
              industry's technology vision, sets the industry's technology agenda, and
              provides science and technology foundation for the industry. A major focus of
              Agenda 2020 is the development of a technologically advanced workforce (TAW) to
              operate and maintain the new technologies of today, and more importantly, in
              the coming years. The planning for this center is going to closely coordinate
              the workforce development needs of today and in the future as new and
              sophisticated technology is ushered in for purposes of efficiency and quality
              improvement so that our nation's pulp and paper industries can successfully
              compete internationally.

