Title       : SC ATE Center of Excellence Focal Point for Expanding Excellence in Engineering
               Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0202272

Award Number: 0202272
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine L. Craft elaine.craft@fdtc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bill Ware  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn G. Mack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joshua B. Phiri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kamil Zakhour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florence-Darlington Tec C
	      2715 W. Lucas St.
	      Florence, SC  295010548    843/668-000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Florence-Darlington Technical College and Piedmont Technical College are
              collaboratively serving as a national Resource Center for dissemination of
              educational materials, curricula, pedagogical practice, and recruitment
              strategies resulting from the highly successful South Carolina Advanced
              Technological Education Center of Excellence (SC ATE). As a national Resource
              Center for Excellence in engineering technology education, this partnership
              serves as a highly visible resource for ideas, materials, contacts, and
              mentoring focused on recruiting, nurturing, and teaching students at the
              beginning of the engineering technology educational pipeline where most
              attrition occurs. The institutions involved were an integral part of the SC ATE
              Center of Excellence work for the past six years, and the envisioned systemic
              reform has "taken root." They have the largest number of SC ATE-prepared,
              reform-ready faculty and the most experience in implementing the SC ATE
              curricula and fostering numerous other improvements in the teaching/learning
              environment. These two colleges are carrying this significant statewide work
              from a base of experience and success in South Carolina to the next level to
              benefit the greater two-year technical and community college engineering
              technology (ET) community. The vision of the project is to serve as a national
              model and clearinghouse to increase the quantity, quality and diversity of
              engineering technology graduates from two-year ET degree programs. 

The
              goals of the project are to:
 (a) Serve as a national focal point for
              improvement in ET education;
 (b) Refine and share successful SC ATE
              recruitment strategies (e.g., ATE Scholars) and share new recruitment
              strategies;
 (c) Refine and share the SC ATE Technology Gateway
              (pre-engineering technology) curriculum (three courses) and the SC ATE
              Engineering Technology Core curriculum, "ET Core";
 (d) Develop multiple
              course and curriculum scheduling options to increase use of the SC ATE
              curricula;
 (e) Introduce a pilot electronic version of Technology Gateway to
              facilitate greater access to ET programs for students for whom a full-time or
              an uninterrupted course of study is not possible;
 (f) Share insights into
              organizational change issues that can support or hinder lasting improvement in
              the teaching/learning environment for engineering technology students;
 (g)
              Deliver a pilot version of ATE Teaching Team Training via an interactive
              web-based workshop;
 (h) Leverage the experience of SC ATE's principal
              investigators, college administrators, and faculty by providing mentoring for
              others as they adapt and implement SC ATE models or otherwise address the
              special needs of beginning engineering technology students; and,
 (i)
              Demonstrate how the processes of project evaluation, program evaluation, and
              accreditation can be linked to implement total quality improvement in the
              preparation of students for successful careers in engineering technology and
              beyond.
