Title       : Saddlepoint and Bootstrap Methods in Systems Theory and Survival Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0202284

Award Number: 0202284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald W. Butler walrus@stat.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

PI: R. W. Butler
DMS-0202284

Title: Saddlepoint and Bootstrap
              Methods in System Theory and Survival Analysis

Stochastic systems underlie
              the models applied in most areas of modern science. These concepts have evolved
              over a long period of time but were heavily influenced more recently by the
              cybernetics movement spanning the late 40s until the late 70s. Those involved
              on the electrical engineering side of this movement used flow graphs to
              represent the systems. Interesting time-dependent system characteristics were
              naturally characterized in terms of the Laplace transforms that could be
              associated with the flow graph. Their efforts lead to a general theory of
              finite state semi-Markov systems that generalized the very restrictive Markov
              systems that are commonly applied even today. Unfortunately, the inversion of
              the transforms in this approach proved to be a challenge that ultimately
              limited the impact of the flow graphs. This proposal addresses these inversions
              along with other missing tools so that a general systems theory may be fully
              developed into a complete mathematical discipline. These inversion tools, using
              saddlepoint methods, allow for the determination of the transient behavior of
              complex systems. In addition, the bootstrap is introduced for nonparametric
              statistical inference about the true system based on system observation. The
              range of applications in the engineering and biomedical sciences include
              communication and computer networks, queueing theory, multi-state survival
              models, and right/left and interval censoring in the context of the competing
              risks associated with such models. More specifically, this proposal addresses
              the following issues: (1) New techniques are required for inverting the Laplace
              transforms that characterize the complex behavior of systems; the author
              proposes several new saddlepoint methods for achieving this by using the method
              of steepest descents. (2) Transforms describing system characteristics need to
              be specified in ways that make the saddlepoint methods easy to use. Often
              Mason's rule is used but, because of its form, it is much too complicated to
              apply to large systems. The author has proposed several alternative co-factor
              rules that greatly simplify computations for the saddlepoint inversions. (3)
              Nonparametric statistical inference is to be developed for such semi-Markov
              systems using the bootstrap and its relationship to empirical transforms. The
              single and double bootstrap lead to a practical means for computing confidence
              bands of survival and hazard functions related to the semi-Markov process. The
              proposed double bootstrap is implemented through saddlepoint
              inversions.

This proposal studies the statistical and probabilistic traits
              of dynamic stochastic systems with feedback. The models for such systems are
              commonly used to make extrapolations and predictions in most areas of modern
              science. In engineering, for example, a communication or computer system
              changes from state to state and the dynamics of these state transitions
              determine the evolution of the system. This proposal considers the computation
              and estimation of reliability or performance evaluation for such an evolving
              dynamic system. The proposed methods have important applications in reliability
              analysis, electrical engineering, biomedical sciences and manufacturing.   

