Title       : The Simulation and Fitting of the Rotational and Vibrational Structure of
               Electronic Transitions of Polyatomic Molecules for Singlet-singlet and
               Singlet-triplet Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0202681

Award Number: 0202681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125719             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Judge judge@icarus.uwp.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin-Parkside
	      900 Wood Road
	      Kenosha, WI  53141    /   -

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Judge will carry out research in the area of
              high-resolution electronic spectroscopy. Specifically, the singlet-triplet band
              system of selenoformaldehyde (CH2Se)will be investigated.  Thiophosgene (Cl2CS)
              and nitrosomethane (CH3NO) will also be analyzed. Improved computer codes will
              be written for the simulation of spectra, for the absorption and emission that
              originates from an initial single vibronic level, for the calculation of
              Franck-Condon factors, and other features. The codes will be shared with other
              investigators in the field. The work will be done in collaboration with groups
              at the University of Kentucky, the University of Akron, and the University
              Claude Bernard in Lyon, France. Undergraduate students will participate in this
              research.

This project deals with problems in the area of high-resolution
              molecular electronic spectroscopy. The research will be done in collaboration
              with groups at the University of Kentucky, the University of Akron, and the
              University Claude Bernard in Lyon, France. The experimental work will be
              accompanied by the development of computer codes specifically designed to deal
              with the complexity of the spectral band systems. This research will be
              conducted with the aid of undergraduate students. They will participate in the
              work done at their home institution as well as with on-site activities at the
              University of Kentucky. The students will gain valuable experience in modern
              research techniques and acquire both experimental and theoretical skills. These
              will be of advantage in their advanced studies, or work in industry, government
              laboratories or academia.

