Title       : Big Sky Conference on Discrete Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0202104

Award Number: 0202104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer McNulty mcnulty@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Mark Kayll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,7428,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will help support the Big Sky Conference on Discrete 
Mathematics
              which is  held in Missoula, Montana. There are two 
main objectives of the
              conference. First, the conference is 
designed to bring together researchers
              and educators from the 
geographical area with interests in discrete
              mathematics in order 
for them to share ideas, present their work, and
              collaborate. 
Topics for the conference cover areas of discrete
              mathematics
including combinatorics, graph theory, discrete geometry, design
              
theory and theoretical computer science. The conference attracts
              
mathematicians and computer scientists from western US and Canada 
and in
              doing so has strengthened the discrete mathematics 
community in the region.
              The conference also includes  two 
research-level invited addresses. One is
              given by a senior-level 
experienced  mathematician and the other by a younger
              researcher 
who has made significant contributions to the field. The presence
              
of these internationally-known researchers  greatly enhances the
              
conference. Secondly, the conference seeks to provide an 
opportunity for
              students, teachers, and others in the region to 
learn more about contemporary
              mathematics. This award provides 
support for undergraduate and graduate
              students to attend the 
conference and present their work. In addition, a
              public lecture 
(given by one of the invited speakers) is an integral part of
              the 
Big Sky Conference. The audience, comprised of people of all ages 
and
              many different walks of life, is treated to a dynamic lecture 
on the beauty
              and relevance of mathematics. The conference will 
be hosted by The University
              of Montana.


The Big Sky Conference on Discrete Math is held in the early
              fall 
at The University of Montana. The primary focus of the conference 
is
              stimulation and dissemination of research and creative ideas in 
discrete
              mathematics. This includes promoting collaboration among 
regional colleagues,
              supporting student research, and 
demonstrating to the general populace that
              mathematics is a 
dynamic evolving field with applications in modern society.
              The 
events of the conference include contributed talks by faculty and
              
students and three invited addresses. One of the principle 
speakers is an
              internationally acclaimed specialist and 
outstanding expositor. This speaker
              gives a research level 
seminar and a public lecture. With attendance at the
              public 
lecture between 300 and 500 people, public awareness of 
mathematics
              has flourished during the years of the Big Sky 
Conference. The other speaker
              is a younger researcher who has made 
a significant contribution to an area of
              discrete mathematics. 
This person typically gives a specialized talk about a
              recent 
advancement in the field. The conference attracts
              researchers,
educators, and students from the US and Canada, especially those
              
in the northwest region.

