Title       : Planning Grant: Appalachia: A History of Mountains and People
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0202878

Award Number: 0202878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49720              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross Spears   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Agee Film Project
	      6707 Wells Parkway
	      University Park, MD  27802    277/-38-80

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The James Agee Film Project is conducting planning to facilitate the integration
              of insights from a wide range of scientific disciplines into a filmscript for a
              four-part television series on the environmental and social history of the
              Appalachian region.  "Appalachia:  A Story of Mountains and People" will be the
              first film to weave the findings of the natural and social sciences into a
              story that examines the impact of landscape on culture and of human culture
              upon landscape.  The planning phase will include the following
              activities:

The film producers/writers will work with a science content
              director to develop an outline of the themes and general organization of the
              film.

The project staff will meet with scientists in small groups to
              brainstorm ways to integrate ideas and content into the script.

The science
              content director and the producer/writers will draft a script using input from
              the small groups.

A large group meeting of the science advisors will review
              the script focusing on the overarching themes and to refine ideas.

The
              script will be revised based on the recommendations from the meeting.

The
              project director will review the scripts with rural school districts and get
              reactions and suggestions to guide the development of outreach projects and
              materials to support use of the film in formal educational settings.

Review
              of the script and outreach plans will be conducted with two general audience
              focus groups, one in Appalachia and one outside the region.

The principals
              for the project bring a background of filmmaking and science.  Ross Spears, the
              producer/director/writer, has produced a number of award-winning films.  The
              co-producer/writer is Jamie Ross.  She is a free-lance writer and consultant
              with expertise in ecology, history, literature and culture of Appalachia and
              the American South.  George Constantz, the content director, is a biologist,
              naturalist, ecologist, educator, watershed administrator and science
              writer/editor.  The 15-person advisory committee includes members whose
              expertise includes:  archaeology, anthropology, economics, geology, geography,
              sociology, ecology and evolutionary biology.  A professional science writer
              also is a member of the committee.


