Title       : The Teaching Factory: A Multifaceted Project for Advanced Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0202444

Award Number: 0202444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599077             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lakshmi V. Munukutla   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edgar Peters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger Harlow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              john underwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Lesiecki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is creating a model for integrated regional workforce development
              for students majoring in semiconductor technology at the A.A.S. and B.S. degree
              levels. The multifaceted project comprises curriculum and materials
              development, faculty development, and technical experiences for students. The
              goal is to educate more and better-prepared technologists to answer the
              persistent workforce needs of the region's semiconductor industry. The strategy
              the project is using is to consolidate in a single world-class facility known
              as the Teaching Factory the hands-on laboratory instruction for all
              semiconductor students from multiple campuses throughout the region. Located on
              the campus of Arizona State University East (ASUE), the Teaching Factory is a
              15,000-square-foot teaching model of a semiconductor cleanroom. Intel,
              Motorola, Microchip, and Amkor Technology have donated a full complement of the
              major semiconductor process tools, and today the Teaching Factory is capable of
              producing fully functioning integrated microchips. Partners in the project
              include three community colleges (Central Arizona College, Chandler-Gilbert,
              and Mesa Community College); the NSF's Center of Excellence in Semiconductor
              Manufacturing, the Maricopa Advanced Technology Education Center; and Intel,
              Motorola, Inc., Microchip, and Atomika Instruments. In this regional model,
              A.A.S. and B.S. degree seeking students are continuing to learn semiconductor
              principles on their home campuses via distance and classroom delivery, but all
              students in the region travel to the Teaching Factory for practical lab
              instruction and practice.

