Title       : Access to Teacher Preparation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0202311

Award Number: 0202311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katherine J. Denniston                  
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gloria A. Lopez   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee Sloan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              JoAnn Canales  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine Price Blount  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Del Mar College, a South Texas Hispanic-serving community college, in
              partnership with Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi, a four year Hispanic
              Serving Institution, is creating the Access to Teacher Preparation at Del Mar
              College (ACCESS-TP). The project is increasing the number of students majoring
              and transferring across to four-year institutions as middle and high school
              Career and Technology, mathematics, and science preservice teachers. A special
              emphasis of the project is on those programs which mirror the modern workplace,
              such as computer science/CISCO academies; GIS; electronics; engineering
              technology; health sciences; biotechnology; or aviation technology.
              

ACCESS-TP goals and objectives include: 
(1) Recruit and retain Del Mar
              College students into technology, mathematics, and science teaching fields;
              
(2) Give ACCESS-TP preservice teachers an understanding of teaching and
              modern workplace applications of Career and Technology, mathematics, and
              science; and
(3) Position participants in the program to transfer to a
              four-year preservice teacher degree program.

The ACCESS-TP project is
              recruiting students majoring in technology, mathematics, and science into
              preservice teacher degree paths. Retention of participants in teaching fields
              and student support for academic success include mentoring and tutoring by
              peers and mentoring by in-service teachers. The Teaching and Learning Center
              provides additional support for ACCESS-TP preservice teachers. The inservice
              teachers who provide mentoring are former participants in the Applied
              Connections program, through which they created instructional materials that
              infuse modern workplace applications into instruction. The ACCESS-TP student
              participants see first-hand how these materials are used in the classroom. This
              project leverages other projects that focus on teacher preparation and the
              underserved population of South Texas.
