Title       : Scientific and Technological Education in Photonics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0202424

Award Number: 0202424
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $857028             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel M. Hull hull@cord.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred P. Seeber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Darrell M. Hull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur H. Guenther  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chandra Roychoudhuri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CORD
	      601 Lake Air Drive
	      Waco, TX  767105878    254/772-8756

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The critical shortage of photonics technicians in U.S. industry can be remedied,
              in part, through effective associate degree programs. The knowledge and skills
              needed to succeed as a photonics technician are obtainable via associate
              degrees, and companies often prefer graduates of two-year colleges. But, to
              meet the challenge of producing qualified photonics technicians, community and
              technical colleges need more up-to-date educational materials and well-trained
              faculty. They also need a larger pool of high school graduates who have good
              academic skills and who, through exposure to photonics via articulation, are
              inclined and prepared to enter two-year programs in photonics. 

The
              Scientific and Technological Education in Photonics (STEP II) project is
              enhancing the ability of community and technical colleges to produce larger
              numbers of qualified photonics technicians. The project is addressing that goal
              through (1) development of up-to-date photonics curriculum materials (including
              both new materials and an updated version of the materials produced through the
              NSF-funded STEP I project, Fundamentals of Photonics; (2) promotion,
              dissemination, and facilitation of the use of project materials at community
              and technical colleges; and (3) demonstration of how articulated technical
              curricula, beginning in the ninth grade and continuing through the
              baccalaureate degree, enhance the value of associate degrees in photonics by
              making the transition from high school to two-year colleges seamless and by
              providing options for education beyond the associate degree level. 

In
              addition to curriculum materials, the project is producing a number of
              supporting items, including an updated and reconfigured version of the National
              Photonics Skills Standard for Technicians (1995), which serves as a guide for
              future curriculum and assessment development; new or updated clustered
              curriculum frameworks; online supplements; a math remediation guide for
              two-year post-secondary photonics students; and a curriculum planning guide
              describing the logistical steps necessary to implement a
              two-year
post-secondary photonics program or to infuse photonics courses into
              existing technical programs. The project is disseminating and facilitating the
              use of project materials at two-year colleges and technical schools and
              providing professional development (some delivered via the web) for new faculty
              members. It is anticipated that, as a result of the project's dissemination
              efforts, 20 to 30 community and technical colleges will be using STEP materials
              as of the 2003/2004 school year.
