Title       : SGER: Effective Models of Science Research Partnerships in the Classroom:
               Resolving Key Pedagogical Issues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a0202181

Award Number: 0202181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jewel C. Prendeville                    
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18090              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Ross rmr16@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul G. Harnik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carlton E. Brett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren D. Allmon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Paleontological Res Inst
	      1259 Trumansburg Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    /   -

NSF Program : 1733      GEOSCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

SGER: Effective Models of Science Research Partnerships in the
              Classroom: Resolving Key Pedagogical Issues

PRI (the Paleontological
              Research Institute) is requesting funding to develop and evaluate
              "student-scientist partnership" (SSP) resources for fourth through ninth grade
              student participants in the Devonian Seas Project.  Through the proposed
              activities PRI will contribute a fully evaluated model laying out protocols for
              effective linkage between Earth science research and pre-college classroom
              teaching.  Age-appropriate materials and an associated project database will be
              catalogued with the Digital Library for Earth System Education (DLESE).   This
              will greatly increase access to real world data sets while providing DLESE with
              content usable in tests of new Digital Library protocols.  The timing of this
              award is critical and urgent since PRI has recently acquired corporate support
              for its "Devonian Seas" classroom outreach SSP. This award will allow PRI to
              leverage corporate funds to develop and evaluate new SSP materials in the
              formative stages, one of the major challenges facing SSP development and
              implementation.  Funding will help to establish the Devonian Seas Project as a
              model that may catalyze change in the way students experience science
              education.


