Title       : SMAR2T: Science and Mathematics Academy for the Recruitment and Retention of
               Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0202847

Award Number: 0202847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $872690             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra K. Abell abells@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Weaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John K. Lannin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fran Arbaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. Volkmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Meera Chandrasekhar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7688      Science,Tech,Eng&Math Teacher
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7688,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In order to address the increasing science and mathematics teacher shortage in
              rural Missouri, the Science and Mathematics Academy for the Recruitment and
              Retention of Teachers (SMAR2T) project is developing and testing models of
              Alternative Pathways to Teaching that will recruit and prepare individuals who
              possess STEM baccalaureate degrees to teach at the middle and secondary levels.
              The University of Missouri-Columbia (MU), with five rural school district
              partners, is designing and implementing two models of post baccalaureate
              certification: 1) an accelerated post baccalaureate program (APB) which
              certifies individuals within a 15-month intensive program that takes place both
              at the university and in residence in a partner school; and 2) a 2-year
              alternative certification program (ALT) in which individuals with provisional
              teaching licenses, who are employed full time by a school district, are
              supported over three summers and two academic years. A defining feature of the
              program design is the partnership among science and mathematics educators,
              scientists and mathematicians, and Missouri school districts in the preparation
              and induction of these teachers into the profession. Another defining feature
              is the role of technology in delivering innovative Internet-based distance
              learning opportunities for interns, their mentors, and university faculty
              through the Shadow netWorkspace software developed at MU. Project evaluation
              includes formative assessments to inform and continuously improve the project,
              and summative measures that allow the dissemination of project outcomes to a
              wider audience across the state and nationwide. The 4-year project is resulting
              in the certification of 80 new science and mathematics teachers for Missouri
              schools, as well as effective models of recruitment, preparation, and induction
              for post-baccalaureate students that can be adopted on a broader scale.


