Title       : U.S.-Canadian Workshop on Cross-Border and Multi-Center Wildlife Studies,
               November 15 -16, 2001, Vancouver, British Columbia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a0202297

Award Number: 0202297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11579              (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. VandeBerg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Fdn for Biomed
	      P.O.Box 760549
	      San Antonio, TX  78245    210/258-9544

NSF Program : 1106      LIVING STOCK COLLECTIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports participation by the principal investigator and three other
              US scientists in two consecutive day-long workshops concerned with regulations
              affecting research on wild animals.  The workshops will be held at the
              University of British Columbia (UBC) in Vancouver, Canada.  All four scientists
              will speak during one or both of the workshops.  The first of the two is an
              Animal Care Regional Workshop convened by the Canadian Council on Animal Care
              (CCAC), the Canadian group responsible for establishing Animal Care Committees,
              the Canadian equivalent of Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees
              (IACUCs) at US institutions.  The second is a Workshop on Cross-Border and
              Multi-Center Wildlife Studies.  Previous US workshops have underscored the need
              for additional and ongoing discussion of how the animal welfare act, the
              endangered species act, and other relevant regulations affect the conduct of
              field research with vertebrates.  The Vancouver workshops will address, among
              other issues, transportation of wildlife, projects involving migration and
              endangered species, multi-center project approval, and wildlife management
              relative to basic research.  The impact of newly revised Canadian wildlife
              guidelines will also be discussed.  Approximately 150 attendees are
              anticipated.  Because the NSF, like the NIH, delegates most responsibility for
              enforcement of all pertinent animal care and use regulations to grantee
              institutions, there is a significant need for ongoing discussion and education
              efforts in this area; participation of these four speakers will enhance the
              value of the workshops. Additional support will be provided by the CCAC, by the
              Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare of the NIH, and by the host institution
              where the workshops will be held. 
