Title       : South Carolina Middle School Science and Mathematics Teacher Recruitment,
               Certification and Retention Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0202957

Award Number: 0202957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $616072             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip M. Astwood   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dana M. Hutto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin M. Dickey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine Ebert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lorraine Conrad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 7688      Science,Tech,Eng&Math Teacher
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,7688,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              South Carolina is facing a critical shortage of properly prepared teachers of
              science and mathematics at the middle school level. The state must recruit more
              teachers into the profession, these teachers must be properly prepared for the
              duties they will assume, and well-trained and experienced teachers must be
              encouraged to remain in the classroom. To be successful in the middle school,
              science and mathematics teachers must have a strong background in content as
              well as pedagogy, and they must be familiar with the way students learn in the
              middle years. In response to these needs, the University of South Carolina
              College of Science and Mathematics and College of Education in collaboration
              with selected middle schools in the Columbia, South Carolina Metropolitan area
              are developing and evaluating a Science and Mathematics Middle School Teacher
              Training program to provide pre-service middle school teachers of science and
              mathematics with the content and pedagogy they require to successfully enter
              and succeed in the teaching profession. The content portion of the program
              consists of six new courses in science and three new courses in mathematics for
              pre-service teachers. These courses are taught by content area faculty in
              association with master middle school teachers and faculty from the College of
              Education. The objective in each course is to provide the appropriate content
              while modeling proper pedagogy and assessment strategies. In addition, the
              project is designing a new professional education course in which the
              pre-service teachers study and develop ways to describe what goes on in a
              classroom and how it can influence the interests, learning, and social
              development of the students. The future teachers observe middle school students
              and record what the students are doing and how they set about learning the
              concepts presented to them. The pre-service teachers also have the opportunity
              to take part in a "rounds" program that allows them to observe and discuss
              exemplary teaching in the middle school. Finally, the future teachers spend at
              least six hours each week working with a middle school teacher. These
              experiences allow the new teachers to enter their classrooms with a broad
              knowledge of how schools work, how students react to learning, and how best to
              help students learn while they cope with all of the changes occurring within
              them and around them. An important part of the project is recruitment of
              additional candidates for the middle school certification program in university
              science and mathematics classes and in college transfer programs in Technical
              Colleges. 

