Title       : Topics in Mathematical Fluid Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0202767

Award Number: 0202767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113631             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Friedlander susan@math.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0202767
PI: 			Friedlander, Susan
Institution:
              		University of Illinois, Chicago
Program: 		Applied Mathematics
Program
              Manager: 	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: Topics in Mathematical Fluid
              Dynamics

This project uses a variety of techniques in nonlinear partial
              differential equations to study several different open questions connected with
              the equations that describe the motion of a fluid, namely the Euler and the
              Navier-Stokes equations. Stability of a fluid flow is one of the most basic
              problems in fluid dynamics: stable flows are robust under the inevitable
              disturbances in the environment, while unstable flows may break up, sometimes
              rapidly. The investigator will continue to  explore the relations between
              different types of instability with the goal of defining  scales or degrees of
              instability. Sufficient conditions are sought to demonstrate nonlinear
              instability for classes of inviscid fluids. Another topic studied in the
              project is the equation for a viscous fluid when there is a nonlinear relation
              between the stress and strain tensors (a so-called non-Newtonian fluid ). A
              fundamental mathematical question asked for any of the fluid equations is the
              possibility of the development of singularities in finite time. Motivated by
              results from a dyadic model for the non-Newtonian equations, the investigator
              and collaborators use techniques of wavelets and Littlewood -Paley theory to
              give an upper bound on the dimension of the singular set in the case of the
              Navier Stokes equations with nonlinear viscosity.   

The greater portion of
              our world is composed of fluids: e.g., the atmosphere, the oceans, even our own
              bodies. However fluids behave in very complex ways that are presently
              understood only to a very minor degree. This project uses rigorous mathematics
              to examine several questions that are fundamantal to the nature of fluid
              motion. These include the stability or instability of a fluid configuration. In
              the view of many scientists, waves and instabilities lie at the heart of long
              term weather prediction  with all its practical implications for global change
              and the world economy. Another topic under investigation concerns fluids with a
              nonlinear viscous force relation. This happens, for example, in models for
              turbulent eddies and also in fluids with a special molecular structure such a
              blood or some polymers. The investigator seeks to bound the development of
              singularities (e.g. infinite energy spikes) in the motion of such fluids.
              


Date: April 26, 2002

