Title       : Graduate Alliance for Education in Louisiana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0202178

Award Number: 0202178
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lester A. Lefton lefton@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry L. Bart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Isiah M. Warner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Su-Seng Pang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Calvin Mackie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1515      MINORITY GRADUATE EDUC ACTIVIT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Graduate Alliance for Education in Louisiana

PROJECT SUMMARY

We propose
              to establish an alliance for increasing diversity in graduate education and the
              professoriate in Louisiana. Alliance partners will include Tulane and Louisiana
              State University (the two Carnegie Research I universities in the state and the
              institutions responsible for 94% of the minority doctoral degree production in
              the state between 1994-2001), Xavier University of Louisiana, Dillard
              University, and Southern University Baton Rouge and New Orleans. The Graduate
              Alliance for Education in Louisiana (GAELA) will build upon existing minority
              SME research training programs at these institutions, and develop new programs
              to encourage more minority students to pursue SME graduate education and
              academic careers. One of the goals of the GAELA project will be the early
              identification and nurturing of promising students during their undergraduate
              years. A concerted effort will be made to recruit doctoral fellows from
              participants in LS-LAMP, the College Fund - Xavier AMP, and other pre-graduate
              training programs in the state. We expect that the nurturing students receive
              in these programs, and the familiarity they gain working with faculty at Tulane
              and LSU will increase their chances of successfully completing their doctoral
              training.

The second major goal of the GAELA Program will be to affect
              significant change in the culture of graduate education at the State of
              Louisiana's top research universities in order to significantly increase
              minority SME doctoral degree production. We have set a numerical goal of 45
              Ph.D. per year by 2006, more than triple the 2001 annual output on minority
              doctoral degrees. The project has a strong component of recruitment and early
              exposure of students to academic career opportunities focused on participating
              HBCU's, and a variety of retention activities focused on the two graduate
              research institutions.

The recruitment component consists of exposing
              students at HBCU's to study and academic career opportunities at LSU and Tulane
              through recruiting visits by LSU and Tulane faculty, annual recruitment fairs
              on Tulane and LSU campuses, and involving HBCU students in Tulane/LSU
              faculty-mentored research. We will establish GAELA campus programs at Xavier,
              Dillard, SUBR and SUNO to coordinate these activities. The retention component
              will consist of mentoring workshops for Tulane and LSU faculty, awarding
              research funds and professional travel grants to doctoral students that are
              making satisfactory progress toward completing their degrees, SME academic
              career training sessions, and #I survival sessions" for helping minority
              students cope with the majority graduate educational environment.

