Title       : Instructional Multimedia: Curriculum, Professional, and Educational Materials
               Development for Science, Mathematics, and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0202260

Award Number: 0202260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434978             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvia Sorkin ssorkin@ccbc.cc.md.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna H. Tupper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Todd M. Abramovitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Beiderman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen M. Harmeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Comm Coll of Baltimore Cnt
	      7201 Roseville Boulevard
	      Essex, MD  212373855    410/682-6000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is enabling secondary school teachers and college faculty in
              Baltimore County and the surrounding region to effectively integrate computer
              technology into their classrooms. Activities include:

(1) expanding the
              current NSF-funded Information and Multimedia Technology (IMMT) program (NSF
              Award No. 9950056) to include a new Instructional Multimedia curriculum with a
              certificate option for educators interested in becoming proficient in using
              multimedia technology to create effective interactive learning materials for
              their classrooms;

(2) providing two-week intensive experiences in classroom
              multimedia technology applications to develop the technological currency of
              in-service secondary school teachers and college faculty in science,
              mathematics, and technology fields, and to prepare in-service technology
              teachers to teach articulated multimedia technology courses at secondary
              schools; and

(3) creating a new digital audio/video computer production
              laboratory at CCBC Essex to support the new Instructional Multimedia
              certificate option and to enable project participants to develop Multimedia
              Learning Activities (MLAs) (small computer- or Web-based animations and
              interactive applications) for their classrooms. The developed materials
              incorporate national science, mathematics, technology, and industry standards
              in education.

Science, mathematics, and technology faculty from CCBC Essex
              are developing instructional design and technology courses in collaboration
              with teachers and administrators from the Baltimore County Public Schools,
              professionals from businesses that use multimedia in the workplace (including
              Apropos Media, BreakAway Games, and System Source), and faculty from the
              College of Notre Dame of Maryland. At least four new credit courses are being
              developed for both traditional and online delivery: Ethical Responsibilities in
              the Computer Age, Managing Learning with Technology, Educational Technology
              Process, and Online Course Management.

