Title       : Groups with One Defining Relation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0202382

Award Number: 0202382
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156405             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gilbert Baumslag gilbert@groups.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator proposes here to study groups defined  by a single
              relation.
Such groups arise as fundamental groups in algebraic topology, as
              discrete
groups of transformations in analysis and geometry and in abstract
              group
theory. The importance of such a study is in its many connections to
              other
branches of mathematics, as well as to computer science and logic.
              Progress  will shed
light on a number of other subjects. These include  the
              theories of hyperbolic 
and automatic groups, computability, genetic and other
              algorithms and 
may lead to a deeper understanding of finitely presented
              groups as a
whole. This proposal represents a first step in an overall study
              of one-relator
groups, using the number  of steps in a so-called Magnus
              breakdown, as the
basis for induction. The principal investigator, together
              with his many colleagues,
will initiate this study by focussing attention on
              one-relator groups of planarity one.
These are the very special HNN extensions
              of a free group that arise in the first step of the
Magnus breakdown referred
              to above.  
 
Groups are mathematical structures which are designed, in part,
              to capture the
intrinsic nature of symmetry. Consequently groups play an
              extremely important role
in geometry, in chrystallography, in particle
              physics, in chemistry and in cryptography
as well as in much of mathematics.
              Their uses in cryptography are yet to be exploited; 
RSA encryption may be
              viewed as a first step in this direction. Many of the problems of 
the
              physical world  can be translated into problems in group theory. On the other
              hand, many 
processes, such as evolution, can be used to unravel the nature of
              particular groups. Thus
group theory provides a testing ground for a better
              understanding of these processes.
The principal investigator, in the work to
              be undertaken, will, in particular, use group theory 
to attempt to improve on
              one of the most exciting new aspects of computer
science, so-called genetic
              algorithms. Such algorithms appear to be a means for designing ever 
more
              intelligent computers. 

