Title       : Capturing the Next Step in 3D: From 3D Modeling to 3D Parametrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0202256

Award Number: 0202256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346146             (Estimated)
Investigator: J.C. Malitzke malitzke@moraine.cc.il.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rick Lapidus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Bales  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria Vlamakis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark O'Halloran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Moraine Valley Cmty Col
	      10900 South 88th Avenue
	      Palos Hills, IL  604652175    708/974-4300

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Moraine Valley Community College is updating the existing exemplary Mechanical
              and DesignDrafting/CAD A.A.S. degree and three corresponding certificates by
              incorporating 3D Parametric Modeling skills into the curriculum. Employers have
              identified that 3D Parametric Modeling must be incorporated into curriculum to
              ensure graduates have mastered the advanced CAD skills used currently in
              business and industry.

Parametric modeling combines the power of
              three-dimensional modeling as an intuitive engineering design tool with the
              ability to manipulate and control the corresponding engineering drawings in an
              adaptive environment. This simplifies the design process, reduces the
              engineer's design cycle time, achieves better design visualization, more
              closely associates 2D and 3D drawings, and makes the design process easier to
              manage. Rapid prototyping is also being incorporated into curriculum in order
              to provide faculty and students the opportunity to produce a prototype, or
              model, of their designs. 

A collaborative partnership with three other
              community colleges and four high schools is forming to fully develop, pilot
              test, evaluate and revise curriculum for three existing and two new courses in
              the Mechanical Design and Drafting/CAD A.A.S. degree. Each member of this
              partnership, the Content Development Team, is participating in summer
              curriculum development workshops and year-round curriculum pilot testing,
              evaluation, and revision activities. The PI and three Co-PIs from Moraine
              Valley are serving on the Content Development Team and ensuring that the
              following project goals and corresponding objectives are implemented. 

Goal
              1: Revising/updating current Mechanical Design and Drafting A.A.S. 
degree and
              three Certificates to include 3D Parametric Modeling.
Goal 2: Building on
              existing partnerships with high schools and other community colleges to
              develop, pilot test and evaluate 3D Parametric Modeling courses.
Goal 3:
              Utilizing E-Learning tools to incorporate Web-assisted instructional course
              resources.
Goal 4: Disseminating the Mechanical Design and Drafting A.A.S.
              degree and three Certificates to other educational institutions.
Goal 5:
              Developing and implementing recruitment strategies to promote the revised
              programs to high school students - focusing on students currently
              underrepresented in Mechanical Design and Drafting/CAD courses.

To respond
              to student learning styles, alternative instructional techniques, such as group
              project work, and Web-assisted eLearning tools are incorporated into
              instructional delivery. 3D CAD instruction occurs using a variety of delivery
              methods, including traditional instructor-led classes and Web-assisted learning
              resources, such as online assignments, skills assessments, lab exercises,
              teacher guides, tests, quizzes, and course evaluations. 

Dissemination of
              the updated Mechanical Design and Drafting/CAD degree includes providing summer
              teacher training workshops for 20 high school and college faculty in year two
              and three of the project. In addition, the college is implementing a variety of
              career awareness activities to increase high students' knowledge about CAD
              careers. In each of these activities, students currently underrepresented in
              CAD careers (minorities and women) are targeted for participation. A total of
              51 high school and college faculty and several hundred of their students are
              gaining expertise and/or awareness of 3D parametric modeling and CAD careers.

