Title       : Hyperbolic Conservation Laws in Continuum Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0202888

Award Number: 0202888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175706             (Estimated)
Investigator: Constantine M. Dafermos Constantine_Dafermos@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0202888
PI:  Constantine M. Dafermos
Institution: Brown
              University
Title: Hyperbolic Conservation Laws in Continuum
              Physics

ABSTRACT

The proposed research program lies on the interface
              between continuum physics and the theory of hyperbolic systems of conservation
              laws.  It involves the following projects, which are motivated by the recent
              breakthrough of Bianchini and Bressan on the vanishing-viscosity method:  (a)
              The study of balance laws with dissipative source terms through the
              vanishing-viscosity method;  (b) An attempt to extend the layering method from
              scalar conservation laws to systems thereof; and  (c)  The study of the
              classical Riemann problem with the help of the new estimates of Bianchini and
              Bressan.
Hyperbolic conservation laws belong to a class of nonlinear partial
              differential equations that govern the dynamics of materials with nonlinear
              elastic response, including solids like rubber and gases like air.  The special
              feature of these equations is that the nonlinearity induces the development of
              discontinuities, akin to the familiar phenomenon of the breaking of waves on
              the beach.  The discontinuities then propagate as shock waves.  The proposed
              research program is to investigate a number of methods for constructing
              solutions with shocks.  The objective is to settle questions of a theoretical
              nature, such as the issue of existence of solutions, by an approach that brings
              out the intimate connection between mathematics and physics, while suggesting,
              at the same time, algorithms for the actual computation of such solutions.

