Title       : CISE Research Infrastructure: SENSORIUM: Research Infrastructure for Managing
               Spatio-Temporal Objects in Video Sensor Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0202067

Award Number: 0202067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1247395            (Estimated)
Investigator: Azer Bestavros best@cs.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ibrahim Matta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margrit Betke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Crovella  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stan Sclaroff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 02-02067
Bestavros, Azer
Betke, Margrit; Crovella, Mark E.; Matta,
              Ibrahim; Sclaroff, Stan
Boston University 
         
RI: SENSORIUM: Research
              Infrastructure for Managing Spatio-Temporal Objects in Video Sensor
              Networks

This project, developing an open sensor network research
              infrastructure (SENSORIUM), aims to catalyze fundamental advances in image and
              video computing, network protocols, and resource management to deal with unique
              spatio-temporal constraints of sensor networks. SENSORIUM is composed of a
              sensor network of video cameras spanning several rooms, networked processing
              units, and a terabyte database, managed together to satisfy queries using those
              generated by mobile users within this environment. The infrastructure enables
              the following research projects:
a.   Modeling, interpretation, and prediction
              of human motion in video streams at multiple 
scales in space/time and at
              multiple layers of detail; 
b.   Development of efficient location management,
              routing, transport, and content 
distribution protocols for
              multi-resolution/scale streaming sensory data networks; 
c. Characterization
              of traffic and access patterns in mobile sensory networks; 
d. Instrumentation
              of embedded real-time operating systems to enable coordinated resource
              management and the development of middleware services for the management of
              active sensor networks; 
e. Indexing and mining of large spatio-temporal
              non-textual sensory datasets, with a particular emphasis on mining of human
              motions and activities; 
f. Enhancing code safety for embedded systems through
              the use of type systems and run-time support, with emphasis on flow-oriented
              programming; 
g. Development of algorithms and protocols for supporting
              security and trust, and for protecting the confidentiality and integrity of
              data in video sensor networks and repositories.

These collaborative projects
              target two vertical applications. The first aims to merge the physical and
              cyber worlds in an integrated, well defined, privacy-protecting manner. It
              involves the development of a system capable of gathering, interpreting,
              routing, and storing data from distributed video sensors, and answering queries
              about the physical world on the Web. The second aims to develop assistive
              environments for people with severe disabilities, to help them gain access to
              computers, and thereby obtain a tool to communicate with their environments. 
              These applications will unify the various research projects leveraged by the
              SENSORIUM by acting as catalysts for the development of generic technologies
              that could be used (and reused) in other vertical applications. 

