Title       : A Model for Combustion in Strongly Stratified Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0202485

Award Number: 0202485
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274426             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alvin Bayliss a-bayliss@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald E. Taam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0202485
PI: 			Bayliss, Alvin
Institution:
              		Northwestern University 
Program: 		Applied Mathematics
Program Manager:
              	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: A Model for Combustion in Strongly Stratified
              Environments

We develop and solve numerically a low Mach number model for
              deflagrations in stellar envelopes. For many stellar environments the Mach
              number, the ratio of flame or convection speed to the sound speed, is very
              small (order .01 or less) so that for explicit computations based on full
              hydrodynamics timesteps are limited by the acoustic speeds, thus requiring
              excessive computation time to simulate the relatively long timescales
              associated with the deflagrations and associated convection flows.  Our model
              filters out the sound waves while accounting for strong vertical pressure
              stratification (of the order of ten orders of magnitude).  The model is based
              on initially pre-computing a strongly stratified hydrostatic solution by
              solving a boundary value problem in the vertical coordinate. The hydrodynamic
              equations are then expanded about this solution. The resulting system for the
              velocities and the non-hydrostatic pressure is then expanded in Mach number,
              effectively filtering out sound waves and yielding a system where timesteps are
              restricted by fluid and flame speeds rather than the sound speed.  The new
              model will be applied to the study of convection in the envelope of an
              accreting white dwarf during a nova outburst.  The model will allow simulation
              over convective timescales and thus allow a theoretical description of the
              multi-dimensional nuclear burning development of novae.

We propose to
              simulate the hydrodynamics of nuclear fluids in a stellar envelope in which
              sound waves are filtered out.  It is typical of such environments that energy
              is released via nuclear reactions in a manner similar to terrestrial combustion
              (nuclear combustion). In many such configurations the flame speed and
              associated fluid speeds are much smaller than the sound speed. This limits the
              length of time for which these models can be solved and effectively precludes a
              simulation of phenomena associated with the burning and convection.  For
              example, a simulation of burning in a neutron star envelope required
              approximately 30,000 hours net processor time, i.e., the time for all
              processors on a parallel Silicon Graphics computer, for  approximately 200
              milliseconds of simulated time.  For this problem, the burning and convection
              timescales were of the order of minutes, e.g., about 5 minutes.  Thus, a
              simulation and computer analysis of such phenomena would be prohibitive using
              current models. We anticipate that such analyses would be feasible with the
              proposed new model, because acoustic effects would be eliminated.  The model
              will be used to study the nature of white dwarf novae, and in particular to
              resolve competing theories regarding the role of mixing of different species in
              promoting nova outbursts.  The numerical solution of the model will employ
              parallel algorithms and computers and thus the project will entail the use of
              high performance computing to explain observed astrophysical
              phenomena.

Date: June 21, 2002

