Title       : AGEP: Iowa Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0202174

Award Number: 0202174
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2474965            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon Whitmore jon-whitmore@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip Kutzko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rollin C. Richmond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron Podolefsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1515      MINORITY GRADUATE EDUC ACTIVIT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Iowa Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate

Project
              Summary

The Iowa Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate, a
              group consisting of faculty in Science, Mathematics and Engineering and
              Technology (SMET) fields and administrators from all three Iowa State Regents
              Universities, requests five years of NSF funding under the Alliances for
              Graduate Education and the Professoriate program in partial support of a
              coordinated series of activities designed to recruit, retain and graduate a
              substantial number of underrepresented US minority graduate students in SME
              fields, as well as to change the culture at all three universities in order to
              guarantee real and permanent access to, through and from Alliance universities
              and programs.
Support is requested for five major program areas:

o
              Buildingpartnerships with minority-serving institutions
o An Alliance Summer
              Research Experience Program for Minority Undergraduates
o An Alliance Graduate
              Teaching Fellowship Program
o An Alliance Graduate Student Summer Workshop
o
              An Alliance Campus Awareness Program

Partnerships with minority-serving
              institutions will be built and maintained by a series of yearly conferences in
              each of three regions in which Alliance universities have been active in
              recruiting. Undergraduate students from minority-serving institutions will be
              introduced to the programs and culture of the Alliance universities through
              anAlliance Summer Research program.
Iowa State University and the University
              of Iowa will each provide support for five.41liance,Teaching Fellows during
              each year of the program. These five-year Teaching Fellowships will be made
              permanent at the end of the grant period. The University of Northern Iowa will
              provide support for two one-year Alliance Teaching Fellows through its teaching
              assistantship program. NSF will be asked to supplement these positions with an
              initial one-year traineeship. UNI Teaching Fellows will be encouraged to
              transfer to one of the other Alliance universities to complete work on the
              doctorate. A key role in all of this will be played by the Alliance Student
              Development Coordinator who, together with supporting student development staff
              at each of the three Alliance universities, will have primary responsibility
              for faculty and staff training; the development of programs and activities in
              and out of the classroom to enhance retention and the quest for excellence
              among students; and the development and administration of a system to assess
              the progress of the student development aspects of the program. The Director,
              together with faculty mentors and staff, will design and implement an
              introductory two-week Summer Workshop for incoming Teaching Fellows as well as
              academic-year programs designed to promote campus awareness, build community
              and ensure access. Career counseling and placement assistance will be provided
              for Fellows as they near the completion of the doctorate.
Through these
              programs and in cooperation with other Alliance University programs and other
              AGEP Alliance and AMP programs, a substantial number of minority students will
              complete the doctorate in SME fields at Alliance universities beginning at the
              end of year five of this project and continuing in subsequent years.

