Title       : High School Technology Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0202373

Award Number: 0202373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Haney                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450036             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew M. Hoff hoff@eng.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marilyn Barger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Gilbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goals of the High School Technology Initiative (HSTI) are to attract and
              retain more high school students in science and technology career paths.
              Today's high school students, while familiar with high technology as users,
              frequently fail to connect underlying scientific principles to the technologies
              that enable their lives in so many ways. The objective of this project is to
              create curriculum content modules that engender an interest in pursuing
              technology, engineering, or science related careers by providing students with
              connections between technology and its underlying science as part of state
              mandated science instruction.

The HSTI team consists of high school science
              teachers from schools in the greater Tampa Bay region, the University of South
              Florida (USF) Engineering College, Hillsborough Community College (HCC)
              faculty, engineering graduate students, and professional multimedia and video
              personnel. 

Each HSTI educational module contributes to the project goals
              and objectives by: 
1. Providing instructional materials to teachers on topics
              they currently teach, but packaged in the context of high technology examples
              that are relevant to their students' everyday lives. 
2. Providing the
              curriculum material in a high-tech, computer based presentation format so the
              lessons grab the student's interest and hold their attention. 
3. Making the
              materials easy to use by including detailed instructions and suggestions on how
              to use the curriculum materials as well as background materials about the
              engineering and technology involved. 
4. Making the instructional materials
              integrate throughout all levels of high school physical sciences (chemistry,
              physics, and physical science) and some mathematics courses so students work
              with the same concepts several times during their high school studies but from
              different perspectives and to different depths and details.

HSTI was created
              as a follow up and extension to a traditional set of high school pipeline
              activities for science teachers. USF and HCC presented these pipeline
              activities as participants in an NSF Advanced Technology Education grant
              (DUE-9950106) aimed at developing a high technology workforce for semiconductor
              manufacturing industries within the State of Florida. During these
              workshop-type activities to increase technology awareness, teachers requested
              materials for classroom use, but also stipulated a number of constraints for
              any materials produced. Continued interaction with a group of teachers resulted
              in the HSTI curriculum concept and initial material development.

This
              project is serving to refine materials currently under development and create,
              evaluate, and distribute two additional modules. Additionally, HSTI is
              providing an array of science and mathematics teachers' professional
              development opportunities to teach the teachers about the technologies
              integrated into the modules and also to provide them with hands-on training
              experience for using the multimedia materials (CD navigation, downloads,
              altering and adapting, etc). Finally, an efficient and cost-effective
              nationwide distribution system for the materials is being developed with the
              help of MATEC (Maricopa Advanced Technology Education Center).
