Title       : Analyzing Evidence: Indentification and Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0202431

Award Number: 0202431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond Harris harrisrl@pg.cc.md.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott A. Sinex  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Prince George's Cmty Col
	      301 Largo Road
	      Largo, MD  207742199    301/336-6000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Analyzing Evidence is focusing on the Forensic Science Program at Prince
              George's Community College (PGCC). Individuals who are competently trained in
              forensic science are essential to the quality of justice administered in the
              court system as these personnel are responsible for evidence gathering,
              analysis, and court testimony relevant to that evidence. The overriding purpose
              of this award is to increase the number of forensic science personnel with the
              scientific knowledge and instrumentation skills needed for the rapidly changing
              forensic field. To achieve this purpose, the College is 1) creating
              inquiry-based mock crime scene modules that incorporate laboratory experiments
              using state-of-the-art instrumentation to infuse into a variety of forensic
              science courses, 2) creating an inquiry-based Analytical Forensic Chemistry
              Identification and Instrumentation course, 3) improving the instrumentation at
              the College by the purchase of equipment and accessories to perform the
              laboratory experiments in the crime scene modules and new forensic chemistry
              course, 4) training faculty to use the instrumentation, and 5) improving career
              opportunities for students by enhancing internships with local crime
              laboratories and creating pathways from high school through the baccalaureate
              degree in the field of forensic science. Modules with laboratory experiments
              and other teaching materials are being published online and linked from the
              Payton Scientific website for dissemination to other forensic programs. The
              Forensic Science Program was created at PGCC in response to a documented need
              in the metropolitan Washington, D.C. area for well-trained forensic
              technicians. The award has the support and cooperation of state and local
              police departments and crime laboratories, the University of Baltimore to which
              the PGCC A.S. program articulates, and the local school system.

