Title       : (SGER): Experiments on the Effects of the Magnesium-Calcium Ratio of Seawater on
               Carbonate Skeletal Secretion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0202849

Award Number: 0202849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21031              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Stanley stanley@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence A. Hardie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There is now powerful evidence that changes in the Mg/Ca ratio of seawater have
              produced the oscillations during Phanerozoic time between intervals when
              nonskeletal carbonates precipitating from seawater have consisted of low-Mg
              calcite and intervals when these chemical precipitates have consisted of
              high-Mg calcite and aragonite.  In previous work that focused on patterns in
              the geologic record, we showed that throughout Phanerozoic time biologically
              simple carbonate-secreting organisms, especially those that hypercalcify
              (produce massive skeletons or generate sediment rampantly) have adhered to the
              'calcite sea'/'aragonite sea' pattern.  This correspondence implies that simple
              organisms hypercalcify only when the Mg/Ca ratio of ambient seawater favors
              their mineralogy.  Thus far, PI's research has been based on patterns in the
              geologic record. They are now embarking on an entirely new approach: they plan
              to conduct laboratory experiments to test the effects of the Mg/Ca ratio on the
              calcification of living organisms.  Specifically, they plan three kinds of
              controlled aquarium experiments that they anticipate will be particularly
              tractable.  They will determine whether, when grown in water having low and
              very low ('Permian' and 'Cretaceous') Mg/Ca ratios, (1) specimens of coralline
              algae, which secrete high-Mg calcite in modern seawater, incorporate less Mg
              into their skeletons than when they are grown in modern seawater; (2) specimens
              of aragonitic algae grow at lower rates than when grown in modern seawater; and
              (3) calcareous nannoplankton, which secrete calcite, experience more rapid
              population growth than comparable populations cultured under identical
              conditions but with an ambient Mg/Ca ratio equal to that of modern seawater.
              (in other words, when extant species of nannoplankton are grown in 'Cretaceous'
              seawater, in which the Mg/Ca ratio is close to unity and there is a large total
              concentration of dissolved Ca, will they bloom as their ancestors did in the
              'chalk seas' of the Cretaceous?).
