Title       : Online Degree Program: Electrical Transmission Systems Technology (ETST)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0202366

Award Number: 0202366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899911             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Wahlman wahlman@gwmail.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Pettingill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bismarck St Coll
	      1500 Edwards Avenue
	      Bismarck, ND  585011276    701/224-5400

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Electrical generation system operators are essential to the reliable and safe
              distribution of electric power. Recent federal regulations, certification
              requirements, and projected need for a trained workforce have created an urgent
              need for this program. Bismarck State College (BSC), expanding upon existing
              energy programs and distance education expertise, joins industry and technology
              partners, in the development and delivery of an anytime, anywhere accredited
              Associate Degree in Electrical Transmission Systems Technology. This project
              encompasses several national funding priorities including: response to a
              national workforce education need; collaboration and effectiveness of multiple
              partners; balance between cost efficiencies and flexibility; development of
              high quality, interactive courses, and; accountability of student learning and
              program success.

An industry advisory committee works with the project team
              to develop curriculum for a competency-based program with measurable
              performance outcomes. This team is designing and developing 18 technical
              courses for flexible, online delivery to a targeted workforce audience in a
              7-state region that is challenged by time and place constraints. Through
              internal and external assessment, BSC continually evaluates this model in terms
              of student learning, retention, performance, success and overall program
              effectiveness.
 
The major outcomes and innovations of this project are:
1)
              To design a comprehensive, accredited associate degree program for electrical
              transmission system operators.
2) To demonstrate and record the outcomes of
              leveraging partnership resources.
3) To deliver the system operator program to
              a targeted region and workforce audience.
4) To demonstrate student success in
              an interactive learning environment, that ensures program effectiveness through
              continuous modification and improvement.
5) To disseminate student learning
              and program results, and market for distribution in other locales.
