Title       : A Manufacturing Technology Program for North Central Alabama
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0202248

Award Number: 0202248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andy Hatley ahatley@jscc.cc.al.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry M. Marbut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Billie Sue Hulsey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jefferson St Cmty College
	      2601 Carson Road
	      Birmingham, AL  352153007    205/853-1200

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is responding to a growing demand for technically trained employees
              for automotive manufacturing industries in north central Alabama. The faculty
              at Jefferson State Community College (JSCC) formed partnerships with regional
              manufacturers, area secondary schools, universities, and the Alabama Technology
              Network to develop a Manufacturing Technology Training Center. Over $2 million
              has been spent to renovate and equip the facility, which serves college and
              high school students as well as economically disadvantaged adults referred from
              the "One-Stop" career center established through the Workforce Investment Act.
              The Center offers degrees, certificates and short-term training in five
              manufacturing-related tracks. This project focuses on two tracks: industrial
              maintenance and automated manufacturing. The project goal is to meet the
              workforce needs of area manufacturing industries by fully developing curricula
              for industrial maintenance and automated manufacturing that integrates
              technical experiences into the classroom and laboratory, and is complemented
              with workforce experience. The four major goals are to: (1) Develop faculty
              trained to teach in these two programs, (2) Establish specific program
              requirements including entry and exit requirements for certificate, degree, and
              short term training that correlate with specific assessments and standards, (3)
              Fully develop and teach each course in these two programs, and (4) Develop
              additional partnerships with industries, secondary schools and colleges to
              establish comprehensive 2+2+2 programs in industrial maintenance and automated
              manufacturing. The curriculum development team composed of JSCC faculty,
              industry representatives and educators from local high schools and universities
              has developed the curriculum. DACUM and/or Work Keys processes were used to
              establish specific academic and technical skills required for employment in
              each area. This information has been organized into courses within the Alabama
              Common Course and Curriculum Guide for Colleges and Universities. 

