Title       : Nonpositive Curvature and Geometric Rigidity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0202536

Award Number: 0202536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $412002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher B. Croke ccroke@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT DMS - 0202536.

This project concerns two major themes.  The first
              is the study of
rigidity theorems (i.e. metric uniqueness) on compact
              manifolds.  Here
for example we consider isospectral problems: to what extent
              must spaces
with the same spectra (e.g. eigenvalues of the Laplace
              Beltrami
operator, or Lengths of closed geodesics) be isometric.  This
              also
includes questions about metric rigidity induced by conjugacy
              of
geodesic flows, as well as inverse scattering problems.  The other
              theme
considers infinite groups G acting cocompactly on nonpositively
              curved
spaces H (in the sense of Alexandrov).  The project is to study
              the
relationship between the geometry of H and the induced action of G on
the
              ideal boundary of H.  This can be considered an aspect of geometric
group
              theory and is partially motivated by some questions of Gromov.  
As well as
              these two major themes the proposal concerns the authors
continuing work on
              various isoperimetric inequalities.  These groups show up as 
symmetries of
              Hadamard spaces H (which include spaces of nonpositive curvature.)   


The
              first theme of the project concerns the question of whether a space
can be
              determined by a certain set of data.  One part of this relates to
questions of
              remote sensing.  For example: can you determine the density
of an object (say
              a persons body or the moon) from measurements taken
"from the outside"?  The
              CAT scan is a practical example where one
determines the mass density (or more
              accurately the absorption
coefficient) of an object from measurements of the
              total mass along
straight lines.  An alternative set of measurements is the
              set of times
it takes for sound to travel between any two points on the
              boundary
(this is a special case of the boundary rigidity question dealt with
              in
the proposal).  The thrust of the proposed study is to determine
              under
which circumstances certain sets of data (e.g. eigenvalues, lengths
              of
closed geodesics, distances between boundary points) are sufficient
              to
completely determine the geometry of the spaces in question. Groups show up
              
naturally as symmetries of various spaces.  The second theme of this project
              
concerns the study a certain class of infinite groups. 

