Title       : New Strategies towards Inorganic-Organic Materials with Extended pi-Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0202040

Award Number: 0202040
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Protasiewicz jdp5@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              John Protasiewicz, Department of Chemistry, Case Western Reserve University, is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              to investigate new compounds containing multiple bonds to phosphorus. The
              project has three main goals: 1) to develop new and better methodologies for
              the synthesis of phosphaalkenes, diphosphenes and other P=X bonds; 2) 
              synthesize and study new ligands containing several low coordinate main group
              elements; and 3) characterize extended systems having interesting optical and
              electronic properties. The fundamental chemistry of phosphinidenes will be
              examined following their thermal or photochemical generation from phosphinidene
              precursors. In addition, phosphinidene precursors will be used to construct
              discrete oligomers and ultimately polymers with desireable properties.
              Phosphorus-containing analogs to poly(phenylenevinylenes), PPV, and
              poly(phenyleneethylenes), PPE, are two of the polymers to be prepared and
              studied.

Conjugated oligomers and polymers are technologically important as
              organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), molecular wires and molecular switches.
              Incorporating phosphorus or related main group elements into the backbone of
              these polymers can change the properties in many ways.  Students and
              researchers trained to work in this project will gain a broad knowledge in
              inorganic and organometallic synthetic methods as well as interdisciplinary
              areas such as polymer chemistry and molecular electronics. 

