Title       : Fix-a-Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0202327

Award Number: 0202327
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $815435             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie Natale vnatale@attbi.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip Jardim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : City Coll of San Francisco
	      33 Gough Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941031214    415/239-3000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

This project consists of two components: (1) developing a curriculum and
              instructional materials that provide community college students with actual
              research experience as a core part of their instruction and (2) designing a
              recruitment strategy to attract a variety of students to programs and retain
              them. The research focuses on developing a treatment for a genetic disorder
              called xeroderma pigmentosum (XP). XP is a serious disorder that causes
              patients to suffer severe skin damage (including serious burns and DNA damage)
              when exposed to minimal sunlight. The disorder is caused by mutations in genes
              responsible for repairing DNA damaged by UV light. When DNA cannot be repaired,
              mutations accumulate and cancer develops. In fact, approximately half of all XP
              patients are diagnosed with skin cancer by age 10. City College of San
              Francisco (CCSF), Bio-Link, and the University of California San Francisco
              (UCSF), are collaborating on this project.

The motivation to undertake this
              project rests on three factors. First, students learn best when they see the
              real-world, human connections of the content they are learning. By teaching
              courses in this manner, students gain an immediate practical understanding of
              two important concepts: (1) the importance of biotechnology in the search for
              treatments for diseases and (2) the essence of life as a research assistant.
              The second reason for undertaking this project is to increase the diversity and
              number of students pursuing careers in science generally and biotechnology
              specifically. Third, the motivation rests on the fact that this project exposes
              students to world-class researchers from UCSF, and the research in which they
              are involved is leading to advancing knowledge about genetic disorders
              generally and XP specifically. 

The tangible deliverables of this project
              include: (1) a model for curriculum design that blends education and technical
              research experiences; (2) a set of instructional materials in cell culture and
              research that promote real-world applications, hands-on experiences, and
              problem-solving skills; (3) a model recruitment strategy based on research and
              tested through actual experience; and (4) research findings with respect to XP
              (and other related diseases) to which students have contributed.

Bio-Link is
              disseminating the Fix-a-Gene products by making them available through the
              online instructional materials clearinghouse; featuring the project and
              materials at the annual Bio-Link Summer Fellows program that brings together
              community college and high school biotechnology educators from across the
              nation; and showcasing the project in the national Bio-Link newsletter. An
              advisory panel composed of individuals with expertise in XP research, cell
              culture, and community college biotechnology education is guiding the project.
              In addition, an external evaluator provides formative assistance in developing
              the curriculum and instructional materials and recruitment strategy in addition
              to conducting a summative analysis.
