Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Paleoclimatology and Geochronology of a Late
               Quaternary Eolian System, Columbia Plateau, U.S.A.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a0202096

Award Number: 0202096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Busacca busacca@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Gaylord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The paired eolian system of the Columbia Plateau is composed of the extensive
              Palouse loess of variable thickness and upwind dune fields that are derived
              from reworking of sand- and silt-rich slackwater deposits from multiple
              episodes of Wisconsin giant outburst flooding from Glacial Lake Missoula. Few
              models exist that explain changes in the thickness and distribution of loess
              accumulations. We will investigate three models that describe the interaction
              of migrating sands with loess and influences of topography, bioclimate, and
              source sediment character that control the thickness and distribution of loess.
              Field mapping will include sample collection on a regional scale to determine
              the temporal and spatial distribution of saltation- versus suspension-dominated
              eolian units. Timing of stability (represented by paleosols) and eolian
              activity (represented by eolian sand an loess units) will be determined by
              luminescence dating that measures the last time sediments were exposed to
              sunlight. We will determine 1) when and where loess deposition began following
              latest-Wisconsin outburst floods, 2) if eolian saltation in upwind dunes was
              active concurrently with suspension fallout downwind, 3) if periods of saltator
              release inferred from sand-rich intervals in the loess were associated with
              periods of heightened aridity, and 4) the mass accumulation rates of loess.
              

Dust emissions on the Columbia Plateau today resulting from dryland farming
              are hazardous through the presence of particulate matter less than 10 microns
              in size in the air and reduced visibility. This regional study will show how
              the Columbia Plateau system has responded to climate change through time,
              allowing future dust emissions to be predicted. While paired eolian systems do
              exist elsewhere in the world (China, Europe, Alaska, North American Great
              Plains), the Columbia Plateau offers the opportunity to study multiple models
              of loess generation on a workable geographic scale, to add to the knowledge of
              the dynamics of paired eolian systems, and to enhance the record of
              late-Pleistocene to Holocene climate change for the Columbia Plateau. As a
              Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will also provide
              support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
              research career.

