Title       : Interactions between Algebra, Algebraic Geometry and Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0202295

Award Number: 0202295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83552              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajesh Kulkarni   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this proposal, the investigator and collaborators study problems in
algebra,
              algebraic geometry and topology. Three of these projects
study families of
              noncommutative algebras arising naturally in various
branches of algebra. The
              first project is to study finite dimensional
irreducible representations of
              Clifford algebras of forms of higher
degree. The approach in studying these
              algebras is to work on a
reformulation of the questions in terms of moduli
              spaces of certain
reflexive sheaves on hypersurfaces. Another goal is to
              investigate
arithmetic applications of these results. The second project
              (joint
with D. Chan) is continuation of previous work on sheaves of
              maximal
orders on complex, projective, algebraic surfaces. The main goal is
              to
classify various classes of such sheaves of maximal orders. This
              work
follows recently developed ideas in noncommutative algebraic
geometry.
              The third project (joint with A. Ram) is to investigate
whether the Springer
              correspondence can be set up for rational
Cherednik algebras along the lines
              of single graded Hecke
algebras. Another goal is to investigate whether these
              algebras can be
related to N. Wallach's approach to the Springer
              correspondence. The
last project (joint with M. Banagl) is to investigate
              whether there
exist self-dual sheaves compatible with the intersection chain
              sheaves
on reductive Borel-Serre compactifications of locally symmetric
              spaces
associated to semisimple algebraic groups defined over
              rational
numbers. 

In the last few decades, the interaction between various
              branches of
mathematics and theoretical physics has proved to be
              especially
enriching for all the fields. One important thread in
              these
connections has been algebraic geometry, a very old subject that
              dates
back at least to ancient Greece.  Algebraic geometry is the area of
              
mathematics that studies solutions to multi-variable polynomial 
equations
              as geometric objects.  It has found applications not only in
mathematics, but
              also in computer science, coding theory, robotics and
string theory in physics
              to name a few areas impacted by it. The first
two projects of this proposal
              use tools from this subject to study
"algebras" that are of interest to a wide
              range of mathematicians and
physicists. It is useful to describe the whole
              family of such classes
of algebras as a geometric object, and a goal of this
              project is to
obtain such descriptions.  The third aspect of this research is
              part
of a subject called representation theory. The main objects of
              study
here are "representations", processes which encode information
              about
symmetry in nature. The last part of this proposal stands at
              the
intersection of three subjects: number theory (where number systems
are
              studied), representation theory, and topology. In topology spaces
are studied
              to determine which properties do not change under elastic
deformations such as
              twisting and stretching.  The spaces to be
studied in this research encode
              number theoretic information. The goal
is to investigate whether there are
              invariants of these spaces which
themselves satisfy some symmetry.   
