Title       : New Policies for a New Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0202802

Award Number: 0202802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214564             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristin Conklin kconklin@nga.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dane L. Linn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : National Governors' Assn
	      444 North Capitol Street, N.W.
	      Washington, DC  200011512    202/624-5300

NSF Program : 7431      CCLI - ASA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7431,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In the late 1990s, the National Governors Association Center for Best Practices
              (NGA) recognized that the driving force behind the 21st century economy is
              knowledge, and that developing intellectual capital is the best way to ensure
              prosperity. In a series of publications NGA began to describe the ways that
              state governments, including their public colleges and universities, need to
              change to help their citizens develop this intellectual capital. Necessary
              changes include becoming flexible and adaptable, consumer friendly, reinvented
              with technology, accountable and performance-driven. 
Meanwhile, the market
              for postsecondary education has continued to grow in size and importance and
              on-line learning has begun to proliferate. The quantity and nature of the new
              economy's educational demands place extraordinary pressure on this new, more
              diverse postsecondary education market. Our nation not only needs more of its
              adults to have education and training beyond high school; it also needs more of
              its adults to possess scientific, mathematical, and technological competencies.
              Tightening state budgets intersect with these trends to heighten traditional
              gubernatorial concerns with access, cost, and accountability. Together, these
              trends lead Governors to ask for better measures of higher education quality.
              Specifically, they seek measures that are more performance than input-driven,
              focused on the customer, and adaptive to such technological changes as
              e-learning. NGA is engaged in a set of activities whose combined objective is
              the development of state policies that reward postsecondary efficiency and
              effectiveness.
(1) A policy academy for eight states designed to develop new
              quality assurance practices for postsecondary education. State teams are
              participating in two annual meetings of the academy, where governors, state
              higher education executive officers, legislators and other key higher education
              stakeholders are working with national experts to identify new models for i)
              providing customer-driven, course-level quality assurance, and ii) assessing
              undergraduate student learning at the discipline and institutional levels.
              
(2) A national forum for fifty states designed to help Governors define
              expectations and refine their postsecondary education accountability systems.
              Key themes of the meeting include: supporting K-12 reform with linked
              accountability systems; integrating learning outcomes and other measures of
              quality into accountability systems; and linking economic and social indicators
              to postsecondary education accountability. In addition to presentations of
              research findings and lessons from states, the forum includes workshops for
              board members, college presidents, and policymakers. 
(3) An Issue Brief
              designed to share existing research and practice in the emerging and important
              policy area of undergraduate student assessment. 
The desired outcomes of this
              proposed set of activities are: 
- Databases measuring course-level quality
              that are online and usable. 
- Comments and actions of Governors that reflect
              greater knowledge of the basic methodological and policy issues related to
              undergraduate student assessment.
- Commissions, pilot studies, and/or large
              scale assessment investments that reflect stakeholder consensus for the need to
              comparably measure undergraduate competencies, including science, mathematics
              and technology literacy. 
- State higher education accountability systems that
              incorporate student learning data and link more closely to accountability
              systems for K-12. 

