Title       : Boundary-Value Problems for New Classes of Nonlinearly Elastic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2002  
File        : a0202834

Award Number: 0202834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cornelius O. Horgan coh8p@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-0202834
PI: Cornelius O. Horgan
Institution: University of
              Virginia
Title: Boundary-value problems for new classes of nonlinearly elastic
              materials 

ABSTRACT

The investigator will study mathematical
              boundary-value problems in continuum mechanics for new classes of nonlinear
              elastic constitutive models describing the mechanical behavior of rubber-like
              materials undergoing large strains.  The material models exhibit strain
              hardening at large strains, in contrast to the classic models used in the
              literature.  In the molecular theory of elasticity, the models to be
              investigated are called non-Gaussian, because they involve a distribution
              function for the end-to-end distance of the polymer chain composing the
              material that is non-Gaussian.  From the phenomenological point of view, the
              models can be divided into two classes: models with limiting chain
              extensibility and power-law models.  The former have the feature that a stress
              singularity occurs at the limiting strain and thus offer new mathematical
              challenges.  It is proposed to use theories of nonlinear continuum mechanics to
              analyze some fundamental mechanical problems for these materials.  These
              challenging problems will be formulated as boundary-value problems for
              nonlinear ordinary and partial differential equations, the latter involving
              second-order quasilinear elliptic partial differential equations and coupled
              systems of such equations.  Since the stress response of nonlinearly elastic
              material models with limiting chain extensibility is significantly different
              from that of classical models currently used in science and engineering
              practice, the proposed research should have important practical
              implications.

The work proposed here is relevant to the mechanical behavior
              of rubber and rubber-like materials (of critical importance to the automotive,
              aerospace and defense industries) as well as to the behavior of biological soft
              tissues including both natural and tissue derived engineered biomaterials.  In
              industrial practice, finite-element based large-scale commercial computer codes
              are based primarily on classical material models and their predictions for
              rubber-like materials at large strains warrant reassessment.  In particular,
              fracture of rubber leading to automobile and aircraft tire degradation is an
              important current technological problem to which the proposed work will
              contribute.  Applications to biological materials include the study of arterial
              wall mechanics with emphasis on the role of strain hardening in the development
              of cardiovascular disease.  The work is interdisciplinary involving modern
              methods of engineering mechanics, applied mathematics and physics.  Fundamental
              mathematical studies of the type proposed here are necessary to ensure the safe
              reliable utilization of rubber-like materials in modern
              technology.











