Title       : Denver Metro Teacher Preparation Partnership
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0202318

Award Number: 0202318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colleen Jorgensen colleen.jorgensen@rrcc.cccoes.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda N. Damon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Lanning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carole Basile  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheryl Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : RRCC
	      13300 W 6th Avenue
	      Lakewood, CO  802281255    303/914-6276

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Colorado Commission on Higher Education and the Colorado Community College
              System has encouraged the development of an articulated model of teacher
              preparation to be replicated statewide. Red Rocks Community College, the
              Jefferson County School District and the University of Colorado at Denver have
              created an alliance known as the Denver Metro Teacher Preparation Partnership
              (DMTPP) for the purpose of increasing the number of certified teachers with
              degree credentials in mathematics, and the sciences, and demonstrable
              competencies in the integration of technological tools in classroom
              instruction. The project includes recruitment of prospective teachers, teacher
              educator development, and pre-teaching experiences. An integrated advising
              network comprised of advisors from each partner institution supports the degree
              planning and efficient transfer from high school Teacher Cadet programs to the
              community college and on to the university. High school and community college
              students interested in teaching are participating in an intensive summer camp
              program hosted by the University of Colorado at Denver to introduce the
              teaching profession and life as an undergraduate teacher candidate. The project
              includes strategies for recruiting paraprofessionals into the preservice
              program. As instructors of prospective teachers, science and mathematics
              secondary and postsecondary faculty receive professional support from faculty
              trainers from the Rocky Mountain Teacher Collaborative in the integration of
              inquiry-driven learning. A Technology of Teaching Certificate is facilitating
              cohort teams comprised of prospective teachers and classroom teachers in the
              development of interactive standards based curriculum using technological
              adaptations to increase student achievement. Mediated internships in secondary
              classrooms mentored by master classroom teachers from Professional Development
              Schools (PDS), tutoring of secondary students and co-leading special science
              and technology projects sponsored by professional societies and museums with
              secondary students from high risk populations are strategies of the DMTPP that
              support the pre service preparation of prospective secondary teachers.
