Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: A View from Afar: Elite Residences, Teotihuacan
               Interaction, and the Early Classic Period in the Lower Rio Verde Valley, Oaxaca
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0202624

Award Number: 0202624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11964              (Estimated)
Investigator: Payson Sheets sheetsp@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will explore how ancient elites in the lower Rio Verde valley,
              Oaxaca, Mexico, interacted with the Central Mexican state of Teotihuacan during
              the Early Classic Period (AD 250 to 500) .  Archaeological research by Dr.
              Arthur Joyce has shown that, by the Terminal Formative Period (100 BC to AD
              250), a state polity had developed in the lower Rio Verde valley (LRVV).  The
              polity's center lay at the 200 hectare (500 acre) city of Rio Viejo.  The Rio
              Viejo city-state suddenly declined in the Early Classic Period, as evidenced by
              disuse of public spaces such as temples, a decrease in the population and size
              of the city, and the development of communities in defensible locations. 
              Concomitant with these events, lower Rio Verde valley residents began using
              imported volcanic glass (obsidian) from mines at Pachuca, located over 400
              miles away, just beyond the massive ancient city of Teotihuacan.  Other objects
              with clear stylistic or manufacture connections to Teotihuacan, such as ceramic
              funerary vessels, also appear in the lower Rio Verde valley's Early Classic
              archaeological record.   These changes in Early Classic Period lower Rio Verde
              valley material remains clearly indicate new political and economic ties
              between the Oaxaca coast and the bourgeoning Teotihuacan polity.  The character
              of these ties, however, remains difficult to ascertain given currently
              available data.  It is the objective of this research project to fill the
              existing data gap on this time period in the Rio Verde valley and allow for a
              more complete understanding of the relationship between the two
              regions.
Exploration of the relationship between the LRVV and Teotihuacan will
              be done through archaeological excavation of elite residences, an often
              overlooked source of information on ancient political and economic exchange
              practices.  I will then compare the archaeological data against four models
              that predict how material culture might have changed at elite residences with
              the establishment of interaction between the LRVV and Teotihuacan. Using a
              suite of seven material culture categories-such as ceramic serving vessels and
              burial style-I have attempted to determine how different types of relationship
              with Teotihuacan would have impacted elite residences.  After excavation, I
              will compare patterns in excavated materials with patterns predicted in the
              models.    The closest "fit" between excavated materials and one of the four
              models should serve to identify what type of relationship existed between
              Teotihuacan and the lower Rio Verde valley.  This project will offer key data
              on ancient political and economic relations, especially in relation to the
              Teotihuacan, as well as developing a methodological approach distinct from that
              used in most research on this topic. It will also assist in training a
              promising young scientist.


