Title       : Advancing Technology Education for Pulp, Paper, and Chemical Process Technicians
               and Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0202428

Award Number: 0202428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $488290             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve Browning sbrowning@ascc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steve R. Duke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda North  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alabama Southern Community
	      P O Box 2000
	      Monroeville, AL  36461    334/575-3156

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Alabama Southern Community College, with its partners from the Alabama
              Technology Network Center for Forestry, Paper and Chemical Technology, the
              Auburn University Chemical Engineering Department, and the Pulp and Paper
              Research Education Center at Auburn University, regional industry and
              participating regional K-12 school systems, are working on the development,
              evaluation and refinement of 12 curriculum modules. These industry driven and
              national skill based curricula are being utilized in training process operators
              and technicians for pulp, paper, chemical industries. This strategy of
              providing tools for a technician and operator education initiative is seen as
              the best possible solution to successfully develop qualified workers required
              to maintain and improve the competitiveness and sustainability of the pulp,
              paper and chemical manufacturing industry in the United States. Once fully
              developed, the program utilizes all 12-curriculum modules (8 already developed
              and being used under previous NSF ATE funding and 4 to be developed under this
              project) to extend hands-on technical education experiences for three technical
              degree programs at Alabama Southern as well as with regional industry to
              upgrade employee skills. These curricula include classroom, multimedia as well
              as instructor-led and teaming laboratory experiences that emphasize safety and
              environmental issues of the process operations being modeled. The project is
              producing publication-ready curriculum modules with aligned industry driven
              laboratory ready for regional and national dissemination. it is also developing
              two workshops; one for community college faculty preparing students for
              employment in pulp, paper and allied industries throughout the southeast region
              of the US. The second is for high school faculty and interested high school
              students to provide opportunities for experiencing an industry simulated
              environment to strengthen math, chemistry, teaming and workplace leadership
              skills. In addition, the project focuses on increasing scholarship and
              internship opportunities of students particularly for minorities and other
              groups that have been traditionally underrepresented in these industries.
              Dissemination is through a project web page, presentations at national
              conferences and publication of articles in refereed journals.

