Title       : Consortium for Education in Renewable Energy Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0202352

Award Number: 0202352
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420280             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joy A. McMillan jmcmillan@matcmadison.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Gibson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Madison Area Tech College
	      211 N Carroll Street
	      Madison, WI  537032285    608/266-5050

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               
The overall goal of this project is to establish a Consortium for Education
              in Renewable Energy Technologies (CERET) to facilitate implementation of a
              broad-based interdisciplinary approach to technical education in renewable
              energy technologies. This goal supports the vision of the consortium to embrace
              and mainstream renewable energy technologies through:
(1) development of a
              technically-competent renewable energy industry workforce.
(2) fostering of
              the production of more energy from Wisconsin grown agriculture products and
              by-products.
(3) encouragement of the use of distributed sources of energy
              generation.
(4) promotion of the understanding and knowledge of renewable
              energy applications.

CERET focuses on:
(1) establishing a technology
              demonstration site where business, industry, farmers, agribusinesses,
              consumers, legislative and governmental leaders, trades people, students, and
              educators can learn about renewable energy technologies and distributed sources
              of energy generation from the around the U.S. and the world.
(2) working with
              business and industry partners to provide hands-on training and new curriculums
              for skilled workers in the distributed energy generation, new and emerging
              energy technologies, and renewable energy field. 
(3) encouraging the use of
              ethanol, bio-diesel, and other Wisconsin-based renewable fuels from
              agricultural sources.
(4) making the promise of renewable and distributed
              energy technologies a reality for Wisconsin.

CERET includes as partners and
              collaborators: Madison Area Technical College, Nicolet Area Technical College,
              the University of Wisconsin Madison Biological Sciences Engineering, the
              Wisconsin Technical College System Board and Foundation, Milwaukee School of
              Engineering, Wisconsin state agencies including the Department of Agriculture,
              Trade and Consumer Protection, Department of Commerce, and Department of
              Administration Divisions of Energy and Alternative Fuels, Alliant Energy
              Corporation, Wisconsin Public Service, and energy consultants, equipment
              producers and skilled trades associations.

CERET offers technical training
              and education to incumbent workers as well as students seeking careers in
              renewable energy technologies. To insure that faculty of college students and
              teachers of high school students are well prepared in these technologies, the
              project is conducting workshops and courses for teachers. The project also
              facilitates discussion and implementation of a public voice for renewable
              energy technologies through a partnership with the Wisconsin Educational
              Communications Board. CERET provides training for the workforce needed to
              implement technologies for energy generation and distribution to sustain the
              economic strength and competitiveness of Wisconsin and the United States.
