Title       : Louisville Area Science and Mathematics Alliance for Recruitment in Teacher
               Education Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0202942

Award Number: 0202942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $849968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert N. Ronau bob@louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen K. Lind  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Burks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph M. Steffen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wiley Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 7688      Science,Tech,Eng&Math Teacher
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7688,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Louisville Area Science and Mathematics Alliance for Recruitment and Teacher
              Education Reform (LA-SMARTER) brings together the University of Louisville (U
              of L), Jefferson County Public Schools (JCPS) and 10 school districts of the
              Ohio Valley Educational Cooperative (OVEC). Its goal is to ensure that the
              Louisville area has an adequate number of qualified and certified middle and
              high school teachers of mathematics and science over the next decade. To meet
              this general goal, LA-SMARTER is building a model teacher education program in
              mathematics and science education with an accessible alternative certification
              option; Preparing at least 50 certified middle and high school mathematics and
              science teachers in the greater Louisville area in the next three years; and
              Building a support system in four schools for prospective and new teachers that
              extends beyond preparation and induction experiences. In support of these
              objectives, LA-SMARTER is (a) enriching mathematics and science courses in the
              teacher education program; (b) establishing an accessible alternative
              certification program for non-traditional students; (c) implementing an
              aggressive recruitment plan; and (d) creating a support system for new teachers
              that ensures retention in teaching beyond five years. 
The Alliance is using
              teams of mathematicians, scientists, mathematics and science educators, and
              exemplary middle and high school teachers to develop four mathematics and
              science courses that help prospective teachers develop a deep understanding of
              the content that they will teach. It has established and is supporting
              professional development teams (PDTs) in two middle schools and two high
              schools. These teams are comprised of a mathematics or science educator, all
              teachers in the mathematics or science departments, and a group of three or
              more student teachers in mathematics and science. Mathematicians and scientists
              will work with PDTs as needed. The Alliance employs a full-time faculty member
              in the College of Arts and Sciences to recruit and advise students and
              coordinate courses. This faculty member is recruiting into both traditional and
              alternative certification programs, focusing on students majoring in biology,
              chemistry, geology, mathematics, and physics and students who have withdrawn
              from the College of Engineering. Also LA-SMARTER has established a team of
              staff members from partner schools and the University to develop and distribute
              print materials explaining the certification programs in mathematics and
              science, and to actively recruit persons in mathematics and science teaching.
              This project is also recruiting and creating a pool of emergency-certified
              teachers that subsequently complete a one- or two-year alternative
              certification program in middle or high school mathematics or science. 

