Title       : Advancing Careers in Information Science and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0202276

Award Number: 0202276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297576             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennie Templeton dtemplet@radford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Ellerman  (Principal Investigator former)
              Joseph Chase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Radford University
	      Radford Univ Post Office
	      Radford, VA  24142    703/731-5000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In the Appalachian region of southwest Virginia, geographic barriers often
              prohibit travel to educational centers, thus limiting the region's ability to
              assist in meeting the growing need for information technology workers. Further
              complicating the ability to train qualified IT workers has been the traditional
              difficulty of transferring AAS credits from a community college to institutions
              granting baccalaureate degrees.

This project joins 11 community colleges
              from the Appalachian region of southwest Virginia with Radford University to
              form a Regional Technology Education Consortium (RTEC). RTEC is designed to (1)
              provide a clear path for AAS students to attain a Baccalaureate degree in
              computer science or information systems; (2) develop curriculum to meet the
              technology competency requirements of the information technology industry; (3)
              insure that articulated programs meet industry certification standards and
              recommended guidelines from professional associations and ; and (4)
              institutionalize procedures and organizational structures to guarantee
              continued congruence between the community college and 4-year university
              curricula in information technology.

To further enhance success, RTEC is
              expanding business and industry partnerships to improve the congruence between
              needs of employers and the institutions preparing future IT workers. Radford
              University's Business and Industry Council has a committee assigned to advise
              the College of Information Science and Technology. Business and Industry
              Council members, including representatives from SunTrust Bank, First Union
              National Bank, EDS Corporation, Science Applications International Corporation
              (SAIC), First Virtual Corporation, Polycom Network Systems, Verizon
              Communications, and SAP provide significant input from an employer's
              perspective. The dynamic partnership of RTEC combined with the collaborative
              efforts of the information technology industry is energizing and broadening the
              technology-based learning experiences available to AAS graduates in the
              Appalachian communities throughout southwestern Virginia. The demand for the
              next generation of information technology professionals is being met by
              incorporating industry needs with academic preparation.
