Title       : Interdisciplinary Mathematics and Science Initiative for Developmental Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0202359

Award Number: 0202359
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $488247             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Dave tdave@clpccd.cc.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose Alegre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chabot-Las Positas Comm C
	      7011 Koll Center Parkway, #200
	      Pleasanton, CA  94566    925/485-5208

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project establishes an interdisciplinary mathematics and science program
              that engages students and faculty in real world technology projects. The goal
              is to improve core mathematics and science education in an effort to better
              prepare remedial two-year college students for higher-level coursework and
              careers in technical fields. Instructional innovations integrate basic
              mathematics, elementary algebra, introductory physics, and basic reading,
              writing, and study skills. Activities include curriculum adaptation and
              implementation, industry field experiences for community college faculty and
              students, and professional development opportunities for regional community
              college instructors and K-12 teachers.

At its heart, this project remedies
              basic skill deficits and fosters motivation for the pursuit of technical
              careers among a regional student population increasingly under-prepared for
              college-level work in mathematics and science. To accomplish this mission, this
              three year effort: 1) establishes a year-long interdisciplinary mathematics and
              science learning community for developmental two-year college students that
              emphasizes problem solving and collaborative learning strategies; 2) integrates
              faculty internships and hands-on class projects into the curriculum to ensure
              workplace relevancy and enhance student motivation; and 3) facilitates regional
              training and dialogue activities for K-12 teachers and community college
              faculty, with an emphasis on interdisciplinary teaching methods, technology
              applications, and success strategies for underrepresented students.

Chabot
              College has established critical partnerships with the University of
              California, Davis, Edward Teller Education Center (ETEC), Lawrence Livermore
              National Laboratory (LLNL), Sandia National Laboratories (SNL), and the Hayward
              Unified School District to support this initiative. ETEC and the national
              laboratories actively participate in curriculum modifications, faculty
              internships, and hands-on student class projects in robotics, optics, and laser
              technologies. Additionally, ETEC and the Hayward Unified School District
              collaborate on the project's faculty enhancement activities. 
The project's
              underlying mission is to increase students' educational and career options
              through challenging, applications-oriented curriculum. Working collaboratively,
              this project revitalizes core mathematics and science education at Chabot
              College and serves as a model for developmental reform efforts.

