Title       : Expansion of the Woodworking Technicians Distance Education Partnership
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0202345

Award Number: 0202345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Hanson k_hanson@mwcc.mass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph K. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Wachusett Cmty Col
	      444 Green Street
	      Gardner, MA  014401337    617/632-6600

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              As a result of a 1998 critical needs analysis, the faculty of Mount Wachusett
              Community College (MWCC), Gardner, Massachusetts, applied for and received a
              grant from the National Science Foundation (ATE Award No. 9850317). Under this
              project faculty developed an educational program for woodworking technicians,
              employing a unique combination of educational videos, classroom and in-plant
              instruction utilizing a "Corps of Craftsman." The latest efforts build on this
              work to further develop and implement a national model offering
              distance-learning courses to industry professionals or students in existing
              woodworking training programs. Through this program, students earn a wood
              technician certificate which is applied towards an associate degree in wood
              products technology. MWCC is completing the development of and is offering the
              full associate degree program for woodworking technicians on a
              distance-learning basis in conjunction with an ongoing Winrock International
              apprenticeship program in Arkansas. Once their full program is underway in
              Arkansas, it will be expanded to at least one other state during the project
              period. The intent is to eventually use the Arkansas program as a national
              model. Courses are being offered through a unique combination of
              distance-learning and classroom instruction. 

The "Corps of Craftsmen,"
              consisting of both retired and non-retired personnel, was established as part
              of the initial NSF project. These craftpersons also assist in some of the
              hands-on educational instruction of the program. The course materials developed
              for the education of apprentices in Arkansas are also being used for a project
              currently underway in Washington, D.C. MWCC faculty are working in Washington,
              D.C. to train a diverse group of inner-city youths in woodworking, with partial
              support from their previous NSF grant. Ongoing participation of these youths in
              the project enhances their opportunities for learning. Another unique component
              of their program involves the inclusion of an industry trade magazine.
              Non-credit and for-credit course modules (portions of full courses) are being
              administered in cooperation with Wood Digest magazine on a national level. A
              major strength of their project is the involvement of several public and
              private organizations. 

