Title       : Local Cohomology and Related Questions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a0202176

Award Number: 0202176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $413281             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gennady Lyubeznik gennady@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
A large part of Professor Lyubeznik's research on local cohomology
over the
              last decade has been devoted to the study of a number of striking
connections
              with several quite diverse areas of mathematics, such as etale
cohomology,
              topology of algebraic varieties, D-modules and others including
the theory of
              tight closure and cohomology of groups. Professor 
Lyubeznik is going to
              continue to study these (and some other) 
questions by using methods that have
              been successful in the past as 
well as developing some new methods.

It is
              always fascinating when a connection is discovered between two 
very different
              fields of mathematics because it can result in 
unexpected and significant
              discoveries inaccessible by the methods of 
only one of those two fields. 
              This project is in the areas of mathematics known as Abstract Algebra and
              Algebraic Geometry, with connections to Topology.  Abstract Algebra is a vast
              generalization of high school or college algebra, think of it as the algebra of
              many simultaneous polynomial equations in many variables.  Algebraic Geometry
              gives a way of studying the solutions to such a system of equations as a
              geometric object.  Topology is the study of those properties of geometric
              objects that don't change when the object is stretched or twisted, as if it
              were made of rubber.  Over the last decade "local cohomology," an algebraic
              tool used in all three areas, 
has been shown to have some striking
              connections with a number of 
very different areas, including differential
              equations and 
others. These connections are mutually beneficial. For example,
              
"D-modules," an algebraic version of differential equations, has helped
              
establish some important algebraic properties of local cohomology, while
              
local cohomology has helped prove some striking topological results. Even
              though
considerable progress on this circle of ideas has been made,
              much
remains to be done. 
