Title       : Computational Studies of the Rotational Structure of Atomic and Molecular
               Clusters with Weak Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0202185

Award Number: 0202185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Farrelly david@habanero.chem.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              David Farrelly of Utah State University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to use diffusion Monte Carlo (DCM) methods to
              study the rotational structure of atomic and molecular clusters with weak
              interactions.  The major project goal is to develop new computational
              approaches for examining large amplitude rotational dynamics of impurity
              molecules and cluster impurities in liquid helium nanodroplets, as in helium
              nanodroplet isolation spectroscopy.  The new techniques will be generally
              applicable to rotational structure of assemblages of rigid top molecules in
              helium droplets or in the gas phase.  Also, investigations will continue into
              ultrahigh molecular Rydberg states, with applications to zero electron-kinetic
              energy (ZEKE) spectroscopy. 

An important task in theoretical chemistry is
              the computation of properties of matter in unusual or extreme situations.  It
              is often under such conditions that new and interesting properties come to
              light.  Nanodroplets of superfluid liquid helium provide such an environment to
              explore molecules or small, weakly bound clusters of molecules inserted into
              them.  Such droplets have been called the ultimate spectroscopic matrix,
              because of their very low temperatures and the weak influence they exert on the
              dopant molecules under study.  These nanodroplets present significant
              opportunities to understand new properties of matter and fundamental solvent
              effects.
