Title       : Collaborative Industry/Community College System ATE Professional Development
               Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0202330

Award Number: 0202330
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $638262             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lauren W. Kaufman kaufmanl@cbia.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis Saloom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen Wosczyna-Birch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CBIA Educ Foundation
	      350 Church Street
	      Hartford, CT  061031126    860/244-1938

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Connecticut Business and Industry Association (CBIA) Education Foundation,
              the Connecticut Community College System, Central Connecticut State University,
              the State Departments of Education and Higher Education, more than 15
              technology companies, and other partners are collaborating in a statewide NSF
              Advanced Technological Education (ATE) project. This project supports
              comprehensive professional development for community college faculty, high
              school mathematics, science and technology teachers and limited numbers of
              pre-service teachers. This project complements two existing NSF grants to the
              Connecticut Community College System (CCCS), including a new NSF grant for ATE
              curriculum development and a new CSEMS award for students entering state,
              two-year postsecondary ATE programs. 

Project goals are to: 
(1) strengthen
              relationships among business and industry, the CCCS, state comprehensive and
              vocational high schools, and other ATE institutions; 
(2) build a stronger
              feeder system for the state's two-year ATE programs in three areas:
              manufacturing, engineering technologies and computer science/information
              technology; and 
(3) increase the supply of technically trained AS graduates.
              

As the state's largest business association, with over 10,000 companies,
              CBIA is extremely well positioned to work with the state's secondary and
              post-secondary institutions to develop a more effective feeder system and
              expand the supply of technically trained workers. The members of this ATE
              collaborative are co-developing and co-sponsoring an array of professional
              development technology activities. Two cohorts of 12 ATE faculty and 10 high
              school "ATE Leaders" are participating in intensive professional development,
              including instructional leadership, industry-based hands-on applications of
              technology, collaborative research, and ongoing technical experiences. An
              additional 256 community college faculty and secondary teachers are involved in
              larger group professional development activities. This ATE project builds on
              CBIA and CCCS industry collaborative education and training initiatives and
              involves at least three other national ATE Centers (NWCET, NCTT and the South
              Carolina Center of Excellence) for ongoing technical assistance and guidance.
