Title       : The Development of Three New Five-Year BA/MA Programs in Secondary Science
               Teaching Emphasizing Inquiry Learning and Integration of Pedagogy and Science
               Content
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0202848

Award Number: 0202848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $794346             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela Mills pmills@shiva.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen DeMeo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Laurenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William V. Sweeney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4020

NSF Program : 7688      Science,Tech,Eng&Math Teacher
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7688,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Hunter College is addressing the need for effective secondary teachers of
              science with the creation of three new five-year BA/MA teacher-training
              programs in biology, chemistry, and physics. The new BA/MA programs include six
              central courses designed to substantially integrate discipline and pedagogy
              content. The development of these courses draws on the considerable experience
              of the science and education faculty with integration and inquiry gained during
              the construction of the 23-credit, integrated chemistry/physics/mathematics
              course for entering freshmen. The six central courses of the BA/MA programs are
              being designed by collaborative teams of faculty from the School of Education,
              faculty from the science departments, and high school teachers. A central theme
              in the new programs is training the future teachers to think and act like
              scientists through the use of inquiry. The preservice students experience
              inquiry in their early science courses, continue to gain practice with inquiry
              in many of their teacher training courses, and are required to use inquiry in
              their student teaching experiences. Recruitment is a significant component of
              the program. Early opportunities for students to participate in teaching
              experiences are provided and mechanisms are established to alter the climate in
              the science departments, broadening the focus to include careers in education.
              Support for newly graduated teachers in their classroom environment include a
              mentoring program and an outreach to Assistant Principals to build a community
              that can function as local support for the use of inquiry in the classroom.
              Approximately fifty new teachers are expected to graduate from this program in
              the fourth year of the funding period. These science teachers will be fully
              prepared to use inquiry pedagogy in their class-rooms, and will be supported
              locally at their high school and by Hunter College faculty mentors so that they
              can successfully translate their learning into classroom practice.
