Title       : Moduli Spaces that are Upper Half Plane Quotients and the Inverse Galois Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a0202259

Award Number: 0202259
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110688             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Fried mfried@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              MODULAR TOWERS AND THE IGP OVER THE RATIONALS: Often researchers use
algebraic
              relations in two variables x and y over a field to describe
significant data.
              Some examples are sets of values x having an (x,y)
with entries in the field
              that satisfy the relation. One of these is the
Davenport's problem of
              determining equivalence classes of polynomials
according to their value sets
              over finite fields. Describing complex
multiplication fields, generated by
              those x with (x,y) a special
elliptic curve torsion point, is a variant. A
              relation with a data
variable x produces a permutation group G: The Galois
              group. The
investigator treats these as cases of the Inverse Galois
Problem
              (IGP). One goal is to decide, from certain lists
of relations, if some have
              the rational numbers as definition field.
Serious group theory helped solve
              Davenport's 1965 problem and Schur's
exceptional polynomial problem (1919; see
              below). Further, modular
curves reveal complex multiplication to be a version
              of Schur's
problem. Having command of all finite simple groups has
              many
applications. One is to list those groups attached to
              exceptional
polynomials. Knowing many characters of Chevalley groups showed
              Thompson
and Voelklein where to find series of solutions to the IGP. Yet, it
              will
require more than massive group theory to solve the whole IGP.
              The
investigator uses Modular Towers, a modular curve generalization,
              to
finesse unknowable group classifications. He and his students let a
known
              group G, and a prime p dividing the order of G, seed the base level
of a
              Modular Tower. Higher tower levels code relations with mysterious
groups
              covering G related to p. Coherent maps between the tower levels
replace
              details on these intricate covering groups. Work of Y. Ihara and
J.P. Serre
              inspire showing that Modular Towers has many properties of
their special,
              modular curve, case. For example, high tower levels for a
G with no Z/p
              quotient should have no rational points. For certain groups G, 
and the prime
              p=2, this extends Serre's program on spin structures. The 
investigator
              applies new spin-like structures to all cases when p is 2 and 
to all primes
              p. 

PRACTICAL CRYPTOGRAPHY AND IGP OVER FINITE FIELDS: Modern
              cryptosystems
aim to secure electronic transfers of data. Exceptional
              functions act as
permutations on infinitely many finite fields. A special case
              of the
Inverse Galois Problem over finite fields asks how to
              construct
exceptional functions. These scrambling functions look simple. Users
              can
easily apply them (up to 1993, all came from the 19th century).
              Still,
finding them has been difficult. Fried (UCI), Guralnick (USC) and
              Saxl
(Cambridge) nearly classify them. This solves old problems (Dickson
              1896
and Carlitz 1965). They also produce unexpected new examples. Their
              best
discovery is that exceptional polyomial Galois groups (excluding
              now
well-understood cases) have the affine geometric property. This is
useful
              for it gives the degrees of exceptional polynomials. Yet, it is
also a
              difficult challenge: There can be no final description of all
affine groups.
              The investigator with A. Mezard approaches affine groups
by generalizing to
              all algebraic relations over finite fields
Grothendieck's famous results for
              tame relations. Applications for
exceptional functions alone include ways to
              manipulate data for
encryption and to assure integrity. This will mean faster,
              more
efficient and accurate file back-ups; more stable software; and
              more
secure data transfers.


