Title       : International Research Fellowship Program: Archaeological Research and
               Development at the Ancient Maya City of Pusilha, Belize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0202581

Award Number: 0202581
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88915              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey E. Braswell braswell@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : G,Braswell
	      380 MFAC, Ellicott Complex
	      Buffalo, NY  14261    716/645-2414

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0115000   Historical Sites                        
Program Ref : 0000,5926,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0202581
Braswell

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-one month research
              fellowship by Dr. Geoffrey E. Braswell to work with Dr. Jaime Awe at the
              Department of Archaeology at the Ministry of Tourism in Belmopan,
              Belize.

This project will involve the gathering of data to test two
              contrasting hypotheses about weakly and strongly integrated Classic Mayan
              states.  The Pis will work on a program of archaeological investigation,
              preservation, and consolidation at the ancient Maya city of Pusilha, Belize in
              Central America.  Pusilha is a mid-size population and political center located
              in the extreme southwest of Belize.  The site is known for its many carved
              monuments dating to AD 573-751 and for a unique engineering feature: an ancient
              triple-span bridge over the Pusilha (Machaca) River and two artificial
              diversion canals.  Dr. Awe is the Archaeological Coordinator of the Ministry of
              Tourism's Development Project.  As a fellow under Dr. Awe, Dr. Braswell will
              learn the archaeological and engineering techniques used to consolidate ancient
              monuments.  They will test specific centralist and decentralist hypotheses
              regarding the horizontal and hierarchical integration of ancient Maya economy
              against a historical-political framework derived from monumental texts of
              Pusilha.  Their research will contribute new and refine existing models of
              organization, stability, and change in Maya society, and - by extension - will
              be of relevance to the study of archaic states throughout the world.  

