Title       : Math Applications Shaping Tomorrow (MAST)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0202133

Award Number: 0202133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249724             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine Pirri cpirri@necc.mass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maureen Kelley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Essex Cmty Col
	      100 Elliott Street
	      Haverhill, MA  018302399    978/556-3000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is adapting "Revitalizing Classroom Teaching and Learning: A
              Beginning for Two-Year College Mathematics" from Greenville Technical College
              in South Carolina. It partners with local industry to incorporate
              problem-solving and real industry-based application into mathematics curriculum
              at three levels of education: high school, two-year college, and four- year
              college/university.

Using the pedagogical approach developed in the
              Greenville project, this project is accomplishing four objectives:
1.
              Revitalizing the mathematics curriculum with work-based experiences,
              incorporating technology as both a teaching and a learning tool, and fostering
              an interactive learning environment.
2. Building a strong connection among
              high school, community college, four-year college/university and industry by
              integrating mathematics content and industry-based applications by spiraling
              through the three levels of education; understanding the similarities and
              differences in mathematics vocabulary from the academic to the work setting;
              and improving communication and articulation among the three academic levels
              and industry.
3. Providing faculty professional development opportunities to
              support collaborative learning methodology, student engagement in learning and
              use of appropriate technology. 
4. Developing "The Process Guidelines" to
              revitalize curriculum, using from faculty journals. 

The project
              accomplishes these objectives by:
1. Developing a replicable and
              self-sustaining infrastructure that builds collaboration between education and
              industry; highlighted by interaction through shadowing, site visits, classroom
              visits, and externships;
2. Offering professional development activities to
              increase teamwork use of technology in the classroom, and knowledge of
              alternative teaching techniques that target different student learning
              styles;
3. Class piloting, refining and implementing of new teaching methods,
              work-based problems, and student interaction within the classroom; and
4.
              Synthesizing and generalizing faculty journals into a clear manual, "The
              Process Guidelines".

