Title       : Enlist, Equip, and Empower (E3): An Integrated Program for Middle School Science
               Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0202923

Award Number: 0202923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899294             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Rudge david.rudge@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Poel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Cobern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Pearson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julie Henderleiter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 7688      Science,Tech,Eng&Math Teacher
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,7688,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Michigan, like the rest of the nation, faces a critical shortage of qualified
              middle school science teachers. This shortage reflects a complex set of
              interrelated problems associated with recruiting new individuals into the
              profession, preparing them to meet the needs of young adolescents, and
              providing them with sufficient professional support during the crucial first
              few years of their careers. This project models excellence in middle school
              science teacher preparation as well as addressing local needs by developing
              programs that comprise an integrated solution to these problems. Faculty and
              staff at Western Michigan University, Lake Michigan College and Kalamazoo
              Valley Community College and Kalamazoo, Portage and Vicksburg school districts
              are working together in the pursuit of several distinct strategies aimed at:1)
              enlisting motivated and qualified prospective middle school science teachers by
              promoting teacher education programs at Western Michigan University, Lake
              Michigan College, and Kalamazoo Valley Community College and disseminating this
              information to K-12 counselors in participating school districts, 2) equipping
              prospective middle school teachers by deepening and extending the program of
              science content courses offered at these colleges that model effective teaching
              strategies and meet their unique needs. This project is also creating a middle
              school science minor, composed of specific inquiry-based science courses for
              elementary teachers and science discipline courses for majors and minors, and
              3) empowering middle school science teachers by providing professional
              mentoring and developing appropriate programs for novice teachers that address
              their needs for additional content background and inquiry-based learning
              strategies. Professional development meetings and workshops in the cooperating
              districts to support novice teachers and their mentors are a part of the
              project. Workshops for graduate credit through existing organizations are
              offered as well. In the short term, implementation of this program is resulting
              in the creation of a new middle science minor, enhanced science content
              courses, and professional development meetings and workshops. Curricular
              materials from undergraduate and graduate courses, as well as professional
              development meetings, are available nationwide via written materials, seminars,
              and the world wide web. In the long term, current research suggests that this
              comprehensive approach leads to improved scores on teacher certification exams,
              increased participation of teachers at regional and national meetings, lower
              teacher attrition rates, and improved student scores on local, state, and
              national standardized exams.
