Title       : California Regional Consortium for Engineering Advances in Technological
               Education (CREATE) Center for Information & Manufacturing Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0202396

Award Number: 0202396
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1992915            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen A. Alfano   (Principal Investigator current)
              Floyd A. Moos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheila Tan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell C. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Akelian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of the Canyons
	      26455 Rockwell Canyon Road
	      Rancho Santa Clarita, CA  91355    805/259-7800

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The CREATE Center is a joint effort between seven community colleges, five
              universities, and over fifty employers in a regional approach to educate the
              workforce in new technological advances in a wide range of high demand
              information and manufacturing technologies. The consortium members serve a
              large portion of coastal and central California of over 9,000 square miles,
              representing a population of over one million. Two previous NSF-ATE projects
              have educated over 4,000 students, developed and implemented 30 new degree
              programs and 105 new courses, and facilitated more than a million dollars in
              additional funding through innovative industry and college partnerships.

The
              goals of the Center are:
1. Increase pools of trained teachers for both
              Information Technology and Manufacturing Technology. An award winning training
              program (Hesburgh Certificate of Excellence) at College of the Canyons has been
              adapted to a three-year model to train part-time teachers from industry to be
              pedagogically strong and adept classroom teachers.
2. Increase feeder programs
              at the high school level. Summer hands-on workshops for high school faculty and
              academic year mentoring give high school faculty easy to use electronics
              kits/modules to incorporate back at their schools.
3. Increase Bachelor's
              level transfer programs that both articulate and are accessible with the new
              technology Associate degree programs. Five universities are working with CREATE
              to not only develop strong articulation between all the programs, but to also
              begin to offer BS programs on-site at the community college campus, a
              University Center concept already successfully pilot tested at College of the
              Canyons and now at Allan Hancock College.
4. Create an organized system for
              developing, documenting (through student portfolio), and implementing work site
              internship experiences for both Information Technology and Manufacturing
              Technology.
5. Develop, adapt, and implement regionally programs in network
              security, wireless and telecommunications technologies and more problem-based,
              modularized manufacturing technology curricula and standardization
6. Evaluate
              and contrast the learning, workplace competencies, and pass rate in industry
              certification programs of students who complete technical certifications in
              on-line (learner-centered vs. traditional) vs. in-class formats.
7. Implement
              a model evaluation that is going to follow both past and future students as
              they enter and participate in the workplace and/or transfer to measure
              longitudinally the success of the educational experience for all stakeholders,
              including colleges, students, and employers.

The CREATE Center colleges and
              their partners act as demonstration sites for curricula implementation,
              regional meetings, teacher training, and continue to foster the consortium
              partnerships to deliver the best set of skilled technicians for the region. All
              curricula and material developed both in technical and teacher training is
              available to any college who would like to adapt them to their needs.
              Dissemination includes conference presentations, publications, and center web
              site.

