Title       : The Advanced Manufacturing Technology Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0202296

Award Number: 0202296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299533             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk R. Barkdoll krbarkdoll@eiccd.cc.ia.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern IA CC District
	      306 West River Drive
	      Davenport, IA  528011221    563/336-3300

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Technology educators generally agree that the workplace of today is very
              different places than the workplace of yesterday. There is also a general sense
              that if a community is to maintain a position of economic strength there must
              be fundamental changes in the workplace as well as in the educational programs
              which support them. These emerging high performance work environments
              increasingly demand technician level employees with sophisticated technical
              skills, team skills, and critical thinking skills. It is in response to this
              need that our team in the Eastern Iowa Community College District, in
              collaboration with 14 public and private sector partners, has created the
              Advanced Manufacturing Technology Education Center (AMTEC). To address these
              workplace changes our team's efforts involve a number of key areas to support
              regional workforce needs. We are collaborating with existing ATE manufacturing
              programs to develop and deliver an advanced manufacturing technology curriculum
              that is responsive to the needs of our regional industries. Our AMTEC has been
              developed to have the flexibility to meet the diverse scheduling and learning
              style needs of students. We are also establishing a seamless educational
              pathway for advanced manufacturing technology education. We are offering three
              Associate of Applied Science programs in Industrial Control Systems, Industrial
              Mechanical Maintenance, and First Line Supervisor Training. 

Through
              professional development opportunities for community college and secondary
              school educators we are maintaining and strengthening the region's
              manufacturing technician programs. Our state-of-the-art training facility has
              been developed to support 340 students in a variety of advanced manufacturing
              areas. Our dissemination plans involves an annual Manufacturing Academy for
              high school students; a Technicians Speakers Bureau; job shadowing experiences;
              Manufacturing Careers program; Manufacturing Seminar for high school vocational
              instructors; and a Manufacturing Internship program.


