Title       : Bronx Community College Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Technology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0202386

Award Number: 0202386
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $694513             (Estimated)
Investigator: Panayiotis Meleties panayiotis.meleties@bcc.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Brennan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Bronx Cmty College
	      W 181 St & University Ave
	      Bronx, NY  10458    212/220-6450

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary
The Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Technology (PMT) program is
              establishing an A.A.S. degree in PMT at Bronx Community College, the first of
              its kind in the City University of New York. The PMT program is a chemical
              technology program specifically designed to prepare technicians to meet the
              growing needs of the New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut tri-state
              pharmaceutical, cosmetics, and related industries. To accomplish the primary
              goals of the PMT program, objectives and activities addressing the following
              categories are being implemented: a) Curriculum and course development; b)
              Instructional materials adaptation and development; c) College faculty and high
              school teacher training and professional development; and d) Student enrichment
              and internship activities. The PMT curriculum is incorporating the Voluntary
              Industry Standards (VIS) of the American Chemical Society. Long established
              ties between the Department and local chemical and pharmaceutical industries
              are an integral component in the design of this program.

The Pharmaceutical
              Manufacturing Technology A.A.S. degree curriculum is related to a series of
              secondary school programs such as the Tech Prep, School-To-Work, STEP and
              C-STEP programs in the Bronx and supported by the Bronx Educational Alliance
              and the Greater New Jersey Process Technology Alliance. Articulation agreements
              leading to the B.S. and B.A. science degree programs in CUNY and other colleges
              are in place. Thus, the program is providing new career pathways for minority
              students and other individuals by establishing strong viable links from high
              school to college level science and technology education to job placement.
              Graduates of the program will be in a competitive position to fill rewarding
              entry-level technician positions in the regional industries. Other long-term
              results, beyond the duration of the project, will be to increase the retention
              and the enrollment of minority and female Bronx students in science and
              technology programs.
