Title       : Establishing an Articulated Computer Science Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0202310

Award Number: 0202310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309632             (Estimated)
Investigator: Priscilla Grocer pgrocer@bristol.mass.edu;  (Principal Investigator current)
              Boleslaw Mikolajczak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bristol Community College
	      777 Elsbree Street
	      Fall River, MA  027207307    617/678-2811

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Bristol Community College's (BCC) Department of Computer Information Systems in
              a partnership with the Department of Computer and Information Science at
              University of Massachusetts Dartmouth (UMD) is developing a fully articulated
              computer science transfer program. Course alignment and professional
              development activities for two-year college faculty, as well as recruitment of
              high school students and adult graduates, are major activities. Special
              outreach efforts to women and minorities are also being implemented. Retention
              activities for community college students in the first two years and for
              students transferring are planned. A formal articulation agreement and a
              seamless pathway from high school to community college to university is being
              established.

Six computer science courses at the community college level are
              being aligned so that students may transfer, without loss of time or added
              expense because of non-transferable courses, into UMD's computer science
              program. Three new courses are being developed: Introduction to Computing
              Systems, Computer Organization and Design, and Software Specification and
              Design. BCC faculty, as well as other invited faculty are participating in
              professional and curriculum development activities for adopting these courses.
              Three other courses have being adopted and are being shared with other invited
              community college faculty. An intensive plan for professional development is
              being developed, including inter-institutional workshops, consultations, and
              professional meetings. 

In order to insure a true 2 + 2 + 2 seamless pathway
              from high schools to community college to university, strategies for outreach,
              recruitment, and retention are planned. The Bristol Tech Prep liaison is going
              to assist in outreach and implementation of early start activities for
              teachers, students, and parents. These activities are designed to motivate and
              prepare students for placement in the computer science program. Strategies for
              retention at the college and university levels include tutoring and
              mentoring.

The program design includes plans for developing tangible
              products to be shared with participating faculty at BCC, UMD, and other
              community colleges. These products include videotaping of the six courses,
              three intensive faculty-to-faculty courses and three courses in the classroom,
              in order to provide community colleges with a two-year professional and
              curriculum development strategy for instituting an articulated transfer program
              from the A.S. degree in computer science to the B.S. degree in computer
              science. 

