Title       : ALGORITHMS: New Concept and Parallel Algorithms for Robust Preconditioning in
               Large Scale Parallel Matrix Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2002     
File        : a0202934

Award Number: 0202934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172361             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun Zhang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Large sparse unstructured matrices arising from various computer simulation and
              modeling are commonly solved by preconditioned iterative methods. This research
              project will study and design robust high performance preconditioners for
              parallel solution of large sparse linear systems, based on a class of multistep
              successive sparse approximate inverse preconditioning techniques.

We will
              develop new concept and parallel algorithms of multistep successive
              preconditioning for enhancing the robustness of standard sparse approximate
              inverse preconditioning techniques, and generalize this concept to the context
              of other preconditioning techniques. Study will be conducted to show the
              advantages of such approach to enhance both preconditioning accuracy and
              factorization stability. We will build portable software packages to implement
              new preconditioning strategies for solving unstructured general sparse linear
              systems on high performance parallel computers.

The general purpose high
              performance preconditioned iterative solvers from this research project are
              expected to make significant impact in the field of applied scientific
              computing. Our experience and existing strength will ensure that the
project
              be carried out fully as proposed. As U.S. industry is more and more relying on
              computer aided design and manufacturing, large scale computer simulation and
              modeling will be a vital component in new products research and development.
              The outcome of this research will benefit U.S. industry as well as scientific
              research community by providing more efficient kernel software for
large scale
              computer simulations.





