Title       : Virginia Advanced Technology Demonstration Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0202383

Award Number: 0202383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $699002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diann Holt dholt@tcc.vccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lyle J. Bagley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick M. Konopnicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Occupational/Technical Edu
	      District Office - Norfolk
	      Norfolk, VA  235101907    757/822-1063

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Advanced Technology Education Demonstration Project (ATEDP) is structured to
              take full advantage of the new Advanced Technology Center (ATC) in Norfolk, Va.
              The ATC is located on Tidewater Community College's (TCC) Virginia Beach
              Campus. This center is described as the most advanced joint
              workforce/technology project in the Commonwealth of Virginia. The ATEDP brings
              together an initial consortium of Tidewater Community College, the Virginia
              Beach City Public Schools, the regional workforce investment board, three
              manufacturing business partners, and the City of Virginia Beach to create
              shared curricula and materials for science and engineering technology students
              in both high school and college. 

The ATEDP improves the learning
              environment, course content and learning experiences each year for 850 to 1,000
              Virginia Beach high school students enrolled at the ATC in CADD, industrial
              engineering technology, and information systems technologies. New curricula and
              materials in the area of Metrology, as well as the above technology areas, are
              also being used for about 800 Tidewater Community College students. The ATEDP
              provides intensive shared professional development and technical experiences
              for high school and college faculty in collaboration with the industrial
              employers. The new curriculum and educational materials are being developed for
              articulated placement of students, dual enrollment and distance education
              courses. High school students in these curricula are able to earn a minimum of
              12 credits toward an associate degree while attending the ATC. TCC faculty are
              involved in completing laboratory-intensive course content, including a
              distance education component, for a recently approved metrology curriculum. The
              employer partners are providing mentored, on-site internships for students,
              while the workforce investment board continues to develop new employer
              partners, particularly in manufacturing. 

Outcomes/deliverables include:
1)
              curricula for articulated and/or dual enrollment courses, targeted to the
              industry
standard, which enables high school students to earn a minimum of 12
              college
credits toward A.A.S. degrees in Industrial/Manufacturing Engineering
              Technology,
Information Systems Technology, Computer Aided Drafting and Design
              or related
options of the A.A.S. degree in Technical Studies, while they are
              completing their
high school diplomas.
2) content for a laboratory-intensive
              metrology curriculum and at least six new or
upgraded modules for other
              courses in the identified curricula not scheduled for
implementation as dual
              enrollment and/or articulated courses.
3) relevant, mentored, 80-hour or
              longer work site experiences for both high school
and other TCC students.
4)
              an 80 percent pass rate for those students who attempt regional and
              national
certifications after completing the relevant courses and taking the
              certification
exams.
5) detailed plans for implementing the reforms in the
              other three school systems in the
college service area and for disseminating
              them nationally.
