Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: A Comparative Study of Catarrhine Bone
               Microstructure and Life History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a0202823

Award Number: 0202823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9507               (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy G. Bromage tbromage@shiva.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4020

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Life history refers to the reproductive patterns characteristic of species, and
              the schedule and processes by which their members grow, mature, and die.  The
              evolution and diversification of life history strategies among Old World
              monkeys and apes, and the origin of the unique life history pattern
              characteristic of humans, is a major interest of anthropologists.  To extend
              investigations to extinct primates, including hominids, a focus has been the
              identification of anatomical "signatures" of life history that can be
              recognized in fossilized bones and teeth.  The majority of studies to date have
              focused on aspects of dental development (e.g., microscopic near-weekly
              increments in enamel) that reflect the growth patterns of individuals. 
              However, numerous studies of other vertebrates have demonstrated that
              microscopic structures in bone tissue constitute another important source of
              information about life history, thus expanding the foundation for studies of
              fossils.  The current study is designed to examine the influence of life
              history on the developing micro-structural organization of the midshaft femur
              and humerus, focusing on a restricted comparative sample comprised of growth
              series of vervet monkeys, white-handed gibbons, and common chimpanzees.   Using
              novel microscopy techniques, the specific aims of this study are:  1) to
              describe and quantify variability in several microscopic features of bone known
              to reflect individual growth patterns; 2) to assess the correspondence of
              micro-structural variables with more traditional measures of postnatal growth
              (e.g., known body weight, bone length, and dental eruption); 3) to determine
              whether species differences in bone micro-structural variables reflect life
              history variation; and 4) to consider the influence of changes in bone related
              to skeletal function on interpretations of life history.  If the potential of
              bone micro-structure for discriminating aspects of life history is established
              in modern animals, this approach may contribute to our understanding of the
              evolution and diversification of life history strategies among primates,
              including the growth patterns of early hominids and their paleoenvironments.
