Title       : Universal Scaling Laws in Biology: Origins, Applications, and Ramifications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0202180

Award Number: 0202180
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Brown                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431103             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey B. West gbw@pion.lanl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Fe Institute
	      1399 Hyde Park Road
	      Santa Fe, NM  875016188    505/984-8800

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Life is the most complex physical phenomenon in the universe, manifesting an
              extraordinary diversity of form and function over an enormous scale ranging
              from the largest animals and plants to the smallest microbes and sub-cellular
              units. Yet, many of its most fundamental and complex phenomena scale with size
              in a surprisingly simple fashion. For example, metabolic rate (the power needed
              to sustain life) scales as the 3/4-power of mass over 27 orders of magnitude
              ranging from molecular and intra-cellular levels up through the smallest
              unicellular bacteria to the largest multicellular organisms. Similarly,
              time-scales (such as lifespan and growth-rate) and sizes (such as genome length
              and density of mitochondria) scale with exponents that are typically simple
              powers of 1/4. The universality and simplicity of these scaling relationships
              suggest that fundamental universal principles underlay much of the generic
              structure, function and organization of many biological phenomena.  

The
              premise of this project is that regardless of size, almost all life is
              sustained, and ultimately constrained, by space-filling, fractal-like
              hierarchical branching networks (both real and virtual), which are optimized by
              the forces of natural selection. Previous work has shown how these principles
              explain universal quarter-power scaling and how they lead to a quantitative
              understanding of many diverse biological systems.  This project will continue
              to explore and elaborate on these universal principles by applying them to
              other fundamental problems in biology while extending the paradigm into other
              areas of science where their analogs might be applicable, such as corporate
              structures and urban development. The biological problems will include aging
              and mortality, minimum and maximum sizes of mammals, size and energy
              distributions in ecosystems, quantifying evolution including thermodynamic
              considerations, and understanding the scaling of genome size and its
              relationship to the complexity of the organism.

