Title       : National Center of Excellence for High Performance Computing Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0202452

Award Number: 0202452
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2985093            (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Robert Converse   (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Lusk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen G. George  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Witold Sieradzan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia Childers  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
A consortium of four community colleges, each serving a geographically defined
              region, together with seven affiliate supercomputer sites and business
              partners, constitute a National Science Foundation Advanced Technology
              Education Center of Excellence for High Performance Computing (HPC) technology.
              High Performance Computing refers to multi-processor computers performing
              complex computational operations with a particular focus on clusters. Each
              college in the consortium has at least one partner High Performance Computing
              facility, referred to as an HPC site. The National Center is partnering with
              business and industry to develop skill set standards and competencies needed
              for certifying HPC technicians and for developing an articulated Associate
              Degree program in HPC technology. The Regional Education and Training Centers
              (RETCs), established at each community college, are developing curricula in HPC
              Technology that articulate with four- year college information science,
              computer science, and high performance computing technology programs and that
              include the establishment of 2 + 2 agreements with regional high school Tech
              Prep Programs.

Maui Community College is the lead institution in a
              consortium with Wake Technical Community College, Pellissippi State Technical
              Community College, and Contra Costa College, each chosen because of the
              diversity of student populations, partnerships with HPC sites and regional
              business and industry, and potential four-year college affiliations. An NSF
              planning grant (award 0101643) supported a nation-wide survey that revealed
              that within the next 2 to 5 years, a) 71% of surveyed business and industry
              will utilize high performance computing, (2) PC-cluster use will grow by 9% and
              there will be a distinct shift offsetting the balance between PC-cluster and
              supercomputer use in favor of PC-clusters and c) industry will continue to
              struggle to recruit, train and/or retain HPC employees. 

The National Center
              administrator is responsible for (a) creating and administering a web-based
              certification examination for technical personnel, (b) overseeing curriculum
              development and teaching methodologies, (c) developing strategies for
              recruitment, retention and placement; (d) creating a national repository of
              PC-cluster software, curricula and training materials for HPC technician
              educational programs; (e) providing professional development activities for
              college faculty, secondary teachers and business professionals; (f) developing
              and providing a consortium communications infrastructure; and (g) supervising
              dissemination, evaluation and reporting activities.

RETC directors are
              responsible for (a) developing curriculum and learner centered teaching
              methodologies, (b) educating faculty, people from business and industry, and
              secondary teachers in PC-cluster construction, management and use; (c)
              providing professional development activities; (d) developing and coordinating
              professional internship programs at HPC sites and business for college faculty
              and secondary teachers; (e) coordinating student internship programs; (f)
              assisting with program graduate placement and (g) developing four-year college
              articulation agreements and local high school 2 + 2 agreements.

