Title       : Arithmetic and Lifting of Automorphic Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a0202989

Award Number: 0202989
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103904             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wee Teck Gan wtgan@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator proposes to study arithmetic questions arising in the 
theory
              of automorphic forms and linear algebraic groups, especially in 
the context
              of the Langlands program. As an example, it is well-known that 
a wealth of
              arithmetic information is contained in the Fourier 
coefficients of a
              classical modular form on the upper half plane. 
The investigator has an
              ongoing project (with B. Gross and G. Savin) 
to develope a theory of Fourier
              coefficients for certain modular forms on 
the exceptional group G2 and to
              extract arithmetic information from these 
coefficients. The investigator is
              also  
interested in constructing and classifying arithmetically interesting
              
cusp forms on reductive groups, and relating them to certain 
influential
              conjectures of Arthur. He intends to exploit the exceptional 
theta
              correspondence for the construction of some of these cusp forms.

The theory
              of automorphic forms is one of the main themes of modern 
mathematical
              research. Besides being a beautiful subject in its own 
right, it is
              intimately connected with other important areas of 
mathematics such as number
              theory (the study of 
properties of numbers, with applications to
              cryptography)
and representation theory (the study of symmetries, with
              applications to 
physics). Often, it has surprising applications to concrete
              problems, such 
as the construction of Ramanujan graphs which are of great
              interest
in communication and network theory. Particularly important and
              elusive in 
the theory of automrophic forms are certain primitive objects
              known as 
cusp forms. The investigator hopes to further our understanding of
              
these basic objects by giving explicit constructions of some of them. 
