Title       : Teaching Approved Methods of Tuning and Adjusting Heating, Ventilating, and Air
               Conditioning Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0202131

Award Number: 0202131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155324             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larraine Kapka lkapka@sinclair.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan Watton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gifford G. Solem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sinclair Cmty College
	      444 West Third Street
	      Dayton, OH  454021460    937/512-2525

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) industry is presently
              struggling with a problem that affects its credibility with owners and
              occupants of buildings: installed, renovated, and maintained building HVAC
              systems are not meeting the conditions, comfort, and economy of operation
              expectations of owners, occupants and other end users. As evidenced by articles
              and letters of concern in HVAC and building trade periodicals, building
              mechanical system owners, designers, installers, and occupant representatives
              need a commonly understood, scientific means of field testing HVAC system
              control performance which can more readily determine compliance with desired
              and specified operation. 

 A previous NSF grant to the Sinclair Community
              College (DUE 9544183) sponsored a symposium attended by national
              representatives of colleges and universities, HVAC industry professionals, and
              HVAC equipment manufacturers. At the symposium it was demonstrated that control
              systems performance could be analyzed through hard copy recordings of
              controller responses. This textbook-described method of analysis was in lieu of
              the non-scientific practice of visual monitoring, or vague "self tuning"
              programs used for observing and correcting controller behavior.

As the
              result of a request at the symposium, Sinclair faculty is developing a
              curriculum module to teach the utilization of a hand-held graphing calculator
              to be substituted for the fragile, expensive, sophisticated laboratory test
              equipment that was used at the symposium to demonstrate the method of
              controller behavior analysis based on textbook control theory.

 The
              curriculum module is used in existing HVAC control courses at Sinclair
              Community College and is available to other Associate and Bachelor degree
              programs in mechanical engineering technology. All materials and technology
              developed are disseminated through engineering education professional
              associations. The final report serves as the basis of technical papers
              presented to general meetings of such professional societies as ASHRAE, IEEE,
              ASEE, and ISA.

Development of curriculum is accomplished in cooperation with
              faculty from the University of Dayton, a professional advisory panel, and
              curriculum developers at the National Center of Excellence for Advanced
              Manufacturing Education. The Sinclair faculty researchers administering this
              development project have years of experience in designing and installing major
              commercial HVAC control systems. In addition, such material can find ready use
              nationally in continuing-education courses offered by two-year colleges to
              employees of local industry. With the articulation agreements and working
              arrangements that Sinclair has with such four-year colleges as the University
              of Dayton, Miami University of Middletown, University of Cincinnati College of
              Applied Science, University of Toledo, and Ferris State University, the
              developed material is being used in many engineering and technical programs.

