Title       : Investigation on Conformally Compact Einstein Manifolds and Related Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0202122

Award Number: 0202122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69345              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gang Tian tian@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaodong Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT DMS - 0202122.

The goal of this project is to study the geometry of
              conformally
compact Einstein manifolds and other related problems.
These
              manifolds were first studied by mathematicians about ten
years ago. New ideas
              and stimuli came up a couple of years ago when 
it was found that they are the
              mathematical framework for the new proposal 
ADS/CFT correspondence in string
              theory. Therefore the study of conformally 
compact Einstein manifolds has
              even become important for physics. The author 
has done work on the geometry
              of such manifolds, but there remain many problems 
to be studied. In the
              future the author hopes to tackle the problem of existence.
If the conformal
              infinity has enough symmetry one hopes to find explicit
solutions. The global
              uniqueness is also a challenging problem and
requires new ideas. Many recent
              results have shown that there is a
profound relationship between the global
              geometry of ambient manifolds
and the conformal geometry of the boundary. The
              author intends to further explore 
this direction.


This proposal studies
              a class of geometric objects called conformally
compact Einstein manifolds.
              They are not only mathematically interesting,
but also important for physics
              because they serve as the framework for
a deep correspondence in string
              theory. The author will study various
geometric aspects of these manifolds as
              well as problems arising in
physics. The study of this special class of
              noncompact manifolds whose
geometry at infinity is well under control will
              also provide insights
and ideas to study more general noncompact manifolds.

