Title       : Organization and Trade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0211748

Award Number: 0211748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408724             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene M. Grossman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elhanan Helpman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The nature of international trade has been changing. Historically, trade has
              consisted largely of an exchange of raw materials and finished goods. But now,
              "international production sharing is becoming more the norm.  Improvements in
              technology have made possible the division of the production process into an
              ever finer set of activities, so that specialized components and business
              services can be produced in various locations before being combined into a
              final product. Meanwhile, falling trade barriers, declining communication and
              transportation costs, and improvements in the legal conditions in many
              countries have made the internationalization of economic activity increasingly
              viable. Indeed, the process of international production sharing may well be the
              essential feature of modern "globalization." 

Globalization encompasses a
              variety of organizational arrangements, including the outsourcing of various
              components and business services in arms-length relations, the establishment of
              foreign subsidiaries to undertake activities such as assembly and marketing,
              the entry into long-term and possibly exclusive licensing agreements, and the
              establishment of joint ventures for production and marketing.  In this project,
              the principal investigators are developing theoretical models of foreign
              investment and trade that incorporate decisions about organizational form. 
              They are studying firms' choices about whether to obtain a component or service
              by self-provision or subcontracting together with their choices about where
              might be the best place to source or manufacture components.  As the project
              progresses, the authors also will consider hybrid organizational forms, such as
              "relational contracts" (self-enforcing long-term agreements) and joint ventures
              (where decision-making authority may reside with one party or the other
              depending on the contingencies that arise).  After developing their new models
              of trade and foreign investment, the authors will use them to address important
              policy issues, such as whether international production sharing has contributed
              to the adverse trends in income distribution in the United States and Europe
              and whether globalization hinders the ability of governments to regulate
              industry.  Further, they will investigate whether the internationalization of
              economic activity necessitates greater intergovernmental cooperation in the WTO
              (or elsewhere) in non-traditional areas such as standards and regulation.

