Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Community Responses to
               Low-Level Radioactive Waste Disposal Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0211704

Award Number: 0211704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11885              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sidney Tarrow sgt2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The purpose of this Dissertation is to determine why different communities
              respond with varying levels and types of activism when faced with an identical
              environmental grievance. The project also helps to explain how activism relates
              to environmental policy outcomes. 

The first phase of this project is a
              quantitative study of the twenty-two communities that faced a low- level
              radioactive waste disposal site proposal. This phase provides for a statistical
              test of a wide range of factors for the entire population of cases. The design
              considers independent variables such as the different legal and policy
              arrangements across the range of cases, various demographic characteristics
              (including race and income), as well as key elements of social movement theory
              (mobilizing structures, framing processes, and political opportunity
              structures). The quantitative study also provides an inductive context for the
              case selection in the subsequent qualitative phase. This second phase consists
              of carefully selected cases that are used to gain insight into the social
              mechanisms and processes that connect the objective conditions identified in
              the first phase. 

This project speaks to the policy process of siting
              dangerous waste disposal facilities. For the past twenty years the US has
              largely failed to implement disposal solutions for the increasing production of
              dangerous waste products. The findings of this project will address key
              questions about the implementation progress of siting efforts and the role that
              community responses may have played in this process. This information will be
              relevant for policymakers at all levels of government as well as the local
              communities and activist groups that face siting decisions. Second, this
              project provides a detailed environmental justice analysis. Rather than
              focusing merely on the distribution of environmental outcomes, the findings of
              this project will speak to the role that race and income play in the process
              that precedes site construction. Finally, this project is a comprehensive
              application of the political process approach to social movement activity. The
              research design operationalizes and tests the key concepts of social movement
              theory including: framing, mobilizing structures, and political opportunity
              structures. The qualitative study will add to social movement research by
              examining the mechanisms and processes that make these traditional elements of
              social movement theory work. 


