Title       : RUI: Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of Extracellular Complementation in
               Streptomyces coelicolor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0211974

Award Number: 0211974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanne M. Willey biojmw@hofstra.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hofstra University
	      Office of the Provost
	      Hempstead, NY  115491440    516/463-6810

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to elucidate the structure of a detergent-like
              molecule, SapB, required for morphological differentiation in the bacterium
              Streptomyces coelicolor. The developmental cycle of this microbe begins with
              the germination of exospores resulting in the extension of multinucleate
              vegetative hyphae into a solid substrate. These form a dense network of
              filaments until signaled to differentiate into upwardly growing hydrophobic
              aerial hyphae, which then septate into spores to begin the cycle anew.  Aerial
              hyphae formation is dependent on the products of the bald (bld) genes, which in
              turn regulate the production of SapB; bld mutants produce smooth colonies
              consisting only of vegetative substrate hyphae and are blocked in SapB
              biosynthesis. Extracellular complementation is observed when purified SapB is
              added to any bld mutant during growth on rich medium. SapB has a structural
              role in differentiation, functioning as a surfactant to facilitate upward
              growth of aerial filaments by releasing the surface tension at the colony/air
              interface. The gene(s) for SapB and its structure remain elusive. This program
              of research will use a biochemical approach to purify and elucidate the
              structure of SapB. Structural studies will begin with SapB purification. Its
              structure will then be determined by mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic
              resonance studies to be performed in the laboratories of Drs. Charles Iden and
              Francis Picard, respectively at the State University of New York, Stony Brook.
              

The resolution of the structure of SapB will advance the understanding of
              the role of extracellular communication in the morphological differentiation in
              this filamentous bacterium. In addition, this research will increase our
              appreciation of the role of intercellular communication in developmental
              processes in general. Undergraduate students will be involved in the project
              and trained in Molecular and Cell Biology.



