Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Surface Modification for Advancing New Separation
               Processes and Environment Protection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0211214

Award Number: 0211214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel R. Farrah sfarrah@micro.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : W223      STATE-REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0313040   Water Pollution                         
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0211214
Farrah

Description:  This award is to support a collaborative
              project between Dr. Samuel Farrah, Professor in the Department of Microbiology
              and Cell Science and in the Engineering Research Center for Particle Science
              and Technology (ERC/PS&T) at the University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
              and Dr. Nagui Abdel-Khalek, Central Metallurgical Research and Development
              Institute, Helwan, Cairo, Egypt.  The two scientists plan to investigate
              mechanisms involved in the application of biologically active species to
              achieve better solid/solid and solid/liquid separations, with the specific aim
              of separation of phosphate from its associated carbonates during flotation
              process and the dewatering of slimes of extremely fine particles.  The final
              objective is to develop a predictive methodology that can be used to optimize
              the process by determining the performance of various bacteria, their
              adsorption behaviors on the mineral surfaces, and the surface properties of the
              bacteria and the minerals.  The tasks of the project include microbial sample
              collection, growing and characterization of microorganisms, fundamental study
              of the adsorption of microorganisms onto apatite and dolomite minerals and clay
              sample, flotation of phosphate samples of different composition from the U.S.
              and from Egypt, and economic evaluation of the processes.  The two teams will
              share responsibilities in these tasks.

Scope:  This project aims to advance
              new processes for solid-liquid separation and also for solid-solid separation,
              particularly for those minerals of similar surface properties such as
              separation of apatite from dolomite and/or calcite. Flotation of dolomitic
              phosphates in both countries is not yet commercialized.  The United States and
              Egypt are both major producers of phosphate, which generates huge amounts of
              slime as waste from different industries.  Advancing new technologies that
              depend on surface modification of minerals through application of
              microorganisms during flotation or flocculation of fine and ultrafine particles
              will enhance their separation with high selectivity, with reduced adverse
              environmental impacts.  The ERC/PS&T and the CMRDI have the necessary
              facilities and resources to conduct this research. The results of this study
              are expected to benefit both countries, especially if the developed processes
              are be applied to other materials.  This project is being supported under the
              US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers
              in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.

