Title       : The Functional Organization and Evolution of a Novel Insect Visual System.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0211770

Award Number: 0211770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Hoy rrh3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elke Buschbeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1185,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lay Abstract
Hoy (0211770)
   The functional organization and evolution of a
              novel insect visual system.

The eyes of insects, which are called compound
              eyes, are generally constructed from thousands of tiny lenses, each of which
              captures a single image point in space.  Compound eyes are organized following
              a blueprint that is evolutionarily conserved throughout insects and even most
              crustaceans (shrimp, crabs etc.).  Surprisingly, the twisted-wing insect
              (Strepsiptera), does not follow this blueprint but instead has an eye that
              represents an intermediate form between an image forming lens eye, such as
              found in vertebrates, and the typical insect eye.  In this highly specialized,
              parasitic group of insects, several large lenses each capture a small image or
              "chunk" of the visual environment.  These lens-based building blocks together
              form a small eye that samples a wide visual field.  This project focuses on the
              functional organization of this unique eye.  This intermediate organization
              escapes some of the classical limitations of both the compound eye and the
              single lens eye.  A deeper understanding of the strepsipteran eye type could
              contribute to the growing field of biomimicry, where it could lead to new
              technologies for small sensors that sample wide visual fields.   

Much of
              this project will be devoted to investigating the neural substrate that
              integrates the partial images supplied by individual lenses.  In Strepsiptera
              the visual information from neighboring eyelets has to be integrated into one
              large coherent image.  Understanding the design that performs such integration
              may reveal novel neural mechanisms in vision research.  Because this eye is so
              different from that of all other insects, we will also investigate specific
              aspects of its development and use a comparative approach to investigate its
              evolutionary origin.  

There are two major aspects in which this project
              will have a broader impact on our society: (1) it will reveal the organization,
              development and evolution of unique neural and optical structures which are
              interesting as adaptations to a specific life style, and may have the potential
              to become the basis for future technologies, and (2) it will provide
              considerable educational benefits, both in terms of training students and in
              terms of educating the greater public.  Several undergraduate students will be
              involved at any given time throughout the project.  These students will have
              the opportunity to become members of an active research laboratory where they
              will be exposed to many different techniques andcross-disciplinary training. 
              Also, various forms of outreach and  public education, ranging from a web-page
              in lay language to the design of a museum exhibit will be pursued.  Interest of
              the public already has been expressed after initial publication on those eyes
              in Science, which lead to articles in National Geographic, Time Magazine, New
              York Times, Scientific American, Discovery, and others.


