Title       : Resonance Raman Studies of Electron-Nuclear Coupling, Time Resolved Dynamics,
               and Magnetic Perturbations of Biomolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0211816

Award Number: 0211816
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $740000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Champion champ@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J T. Sage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1164,1248,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this research are to achieve a better understanding of the
              optical properties of biological molecules, both in and out of equilibrium, and
              to apply this knowledge to elucidate their mechanism of action.  Resonance
              Raman scattering and its time domain analog, femtosecond coherence spectroscopy
              (FCS) will be used to probe the electronic and nuclear structure/function
              relationships in heme proteins like myoglobin, hemoglobin and cytochrome c.
              Related techniques such as electronic absorption, pump-probe kinetics,
              fluorescence, infrared, nuclear resonance vibrational (NRVS) spectroscopy, and
              magnetic field perturbations will also be used to characterize samples and aid
              in the assignment of the low frequency motions revealed using novel FCS
              techniques developed in the prior award period.  Picosecond methodology will be
              developed using synchronized self-modelocked Ti:sapphire lasers to carry out
              both time resolved resonance Raman scattering and to extend the range of
              kinetic studies into the ns regime.  Dynamic absorption lineshapes will be
              measured using broad-band continuum techniques so that time dependent resonance
              conditions can be properly incorporated into the analysis of vibrational
              relaxation obtained from the Stokes and anti-Stokes Raman scattering. 
              Theoretical advances in understanding the absolute magnitude and phase of the
              resonant FCS signals will be exploited to eliminate non-oscillatory background
              signals and allow improved detection of low frequency modes. Phase and
              amplitude excitation profiles will be carried out to reveal inhomogeneities and
              anharmonicities associated with the low frequency motions.  Low temperature
              measurement techniques will be developed so that FCS experiments can be carried
              out as a function of the sample "glass" transition.  

This project has a
              broad impact that underlies the field of protein dynamics that is crucial to
              our basic understanding of living systems.   This work  involves   the
              development  of  state-of-the-art laser based spectroscopy that is applied to
              biomolecular systems.  Instrumentation and theoretical development will enhance
              the infrastructure for doing time-resolved protein dynamics research by
              producing an effective FCS system that expands the use of this experimental
              technique by making it routinely accessible. These studies are significant not
              only in their relationship to the biological sciences, but also in their
              connection to our understanding of basic light-matter interaction associated
              with complex systems in the condensed phase.  Graduate and undergraduate
              students will be trained in cutting edge optical and biological techniques that
              benefit society through the enhancement of the human resource infrastructure. 
              This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division
              of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological
              Sciences and the Division of Physics in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate. 

