Title       : Reciprocal Signaling in Animal-Bacteria Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0211673

Award Number: 0211673
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret J. McFall-Ngai mcfallng@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret J. McFall-Ngai mcfallng@hawaii.edu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1119,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0211673
McFall

The light organ symbiosis between the squid Euprymna scolopes
              and the luminous bacterium Vibrio fischeri represents the most common type of
              animal-bacterial interaction; i.e., an association of extracellular bacteria
              with polarized epithelial cells that begins anew each generation.  In this
              two-partner model both the host and symbiont can be raised in the laboratory,
              and genetic approaches in V. fischeri have been developed to study not only
              bacterial differentiation, but also how the normal program of host gene
              expression is affected by genetically altered symbionts.  Many of the
              developmental effects of symbiosis on the host and symbiont, as well as the
              reciprocal signals that trigger development of the partners, have already been
              defined.   We propose to characterize the individual stages of the signaling
              process, and to begin to generate ways to model the process of bacteria-induced
              host development as a whole. 

The proposal will address the following
              specific objectives and questions: 
  I.  Describe the signals, signaling
              targets and pathways that control the bacteria-induced 
       development of
              two tissues critical in the specific initiation of symbiosis
               -
              What is the role of nitric oxide in the specificity and development of the
              light organ?
- Is the NF-kB/Rel family involved in symbiont-induced signaling
              and, if so, how?
 II.  Determine the role of stage-specific bacterial
              structures and activities in development
          - Are activities of the
              symbiont's flagellar apparatus essential for host signaling? 
          - What
              changes in symbiont gene expression are a response to interaction with the
              host? 
III.  Understand why bacterial bioluminescence is essential to host
              tissue development 
          - Is a host cryptochrome the photoreceptor in
              luminescence-induced crypt-cell swelling?

To understand the dynamics of
              animal-bacterial associations, experimental approaches must be interwoven and
              coordinated.  The two research groups collaborating in this proposal strive to
              achieve this integration.   Execution of most of the experiments outlined in
              the proposal will rely on microscopic, molecular genetic, and biochemical
              techniques that have been developed for the study of this system.  The proposal
              builds on past results within productive areas, such as studies of the role of
              nitric oxide in symbiotic development.  In addition, questions of a more
              exploratory nature will be asked with the aim of opening new experimental
              paradigms, such as how host NF-kB functions in both tissue development and
              response to bacterial colonization. 


