Title       : Topics in Nonlinear Econometrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0211418

Award Number: 0211418
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139562             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marine Carrasco csco@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project contains three areas of research: the Generalized Method of Moments
              (GMM) with an infinity of moment conditions; Nonparametric estimation of a
              density when data are observed with measurement error; Parameter stability and
              unit-root tests against nonlinear alternatives. First, the project extends GMM
              with a continuum of moments to account for time-series and correlated moment
              conditions. An important application is the estimation of continuous-time
              models used in finance. While in such cases the likelihood does not have a
              closed-form expression, the characteristic function is often known or can be
              estimated via simulations. The characteristic function gives rise to a
              continuum of moment conditions which, if fully exploited, permit efficient
              estimation of  the model. Special attention is devoted to the characterization
              of the moment conditions, which allow efficiency to be obtained in Markovian
              models. These results will also improve our understanding of how well
              efficiency can be approached in non-markovian cases.
        The second part
              of this project proposes a new nonparametric estimator of the density when data
              are measured with an additive error. The method consists in inverting an
              integral operator. It is shown that by imposing weak restrictions on the model,
              the estimator can achieve much faster rates of convergence than the usual
              estimators. The first two parts of this project draw from the statistical
              literature on integral operators and inverse problems. This research will
              highlight the usefulness of operator theory and contribute to make it popular
              in econometrics.
	Third, new methods are developed for testing when a nuisance
              parameter is not identified under the null hypothesis. This problem arises
              frequently in macro or financial econometrics. For example, in the presence of
              transaction costs, the real exchange rate is expected to behave in a nonlinear
              fashion. A natural specification is then a threshold model. In this context,
              testing whether the purchasing power parity holds consists in testing the null
              hypothesis of a unit root versus a stationary threshold alternative. The
              project proposes a test and derives its asymptotic distribution. This test
              should positively impact empirical work, as it is more powerful than existing
              tests. 
	

