Title       : Acquisition of a Reactive Sputtering System for Magnetic Oxide Thin Film
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0211117

Award Number: 0211117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Leighton leighton@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the MRI program supports the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
              with the acquisition of a reactive sputtering system for magnetic oxide thin
              film research and education. The ultra high vacuum system will incorporate d.c.
              and r.f. sputtering methods at high substrate temperatures, with controlled
              oxygen partial pressures. A novel gas injection mechanism will be employed to
              yield the largest possible control over the ratio of inert gas pressure to
              oxygen pressure, amenable to the deposition of a wide variety of epitaxial
              oxides. This, along with a load locked sample introduction chamber and
              multi-sample access will provide a highly flexible system with relatively high
              throughput as well as the capability to grow conventional metallic and
              insulating samples. The system allows growing novel magnetic oxide materials of
              current and future interest. Possibilities include the deposition of
              heterostructured samples involving combinations of non-magnetic metals,
              ferromagnetic metals and magnetic oxides and tunnel barriers. Thin film
              cobaltites, LaFeO3 exchange, and  antiferromagnet/ferromagnet superlattices
              will be studied.  In addition to the research opportunities the instrument will
              also support a unique educational tool for the training and education of
              graduate and undergraduate research students.
%%%
This award from the MRI
              program supports the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities with the acquisition
              of a reactive sputtering system for magnetic oxide thin film research and
              education. The system allows growing novel magnetic oxide materials of current
              and future interest. Possibilities include the deposition of heterostructured
              samples involving combinations of non-magnetic metals, ferromagnetic metals and
              magnetic oxides and tunnel barriers. Thin film cobaltites, LaFeO3 exchange, and
              antiferromagnet/ferromagnet superlattices will be studied.  In addition to the
              research opportunities the instrument will also support a unique educational
              tool for the training and education of graduate and undergraduate research
              students.

