Title       : Gene Silencing Mechanisms in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0211376

Award Number: 0211376
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Birchler birchlerj@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Genes transformed back into the organism of origin often cause silencing of
              dispersed homologous copies, including the endogenous gene.  Two types of
              silencing occur.  One is transcriptional and involves changes in chromatin
              structure as evidenced by the accumulation of Polycomb Group proteins on the
              silenced transgene insertion sites.  The other involves post-transcriptional
              RNA turnover in a similar manner to RNA interference.  Emerging evidence has
              indicated potential connections among RNA interference, post-transcriptional
              silencing and transcriptional transgene silencing.  In this project, a genetic
              and molecular approach will be undertaken to determine any relationship among
              these types of silencing.  Transgenes of the Alcohol dehydrogenase (Adh) and
              white (w) eye color genes in Drosophila will be used as a model system.  First,
              a series of constructs will be transformed that do or do not exhibit gene
              expression to determine whether transcriptional silencing requires the
              expression of the silencing gene to occur.  If silencing can only occur when
              the homologous sequences are expressed, an RNA mediated process would be
              implicated in causing the chromatin changes that are associated with the cases
              of transcriptional silencing.  Secondly, the interrelationship between
              RNAi-like mechanisms and transcriptional silencing will be examined.  A
              construct predicted to induce post-transcriptional silencing of Adh will be
              tested for its ability to produce either type of silencing.  Next, mutations
              that block post-transcriptional silencing will be tested for their influence on
              pairing sensitive silencing.  Further, a transgene predicted to generate double
              stranded RNA homologous to Adh promoter regions will be produced and tested for
              its ability to induce transcriptional silencing. 

Studies of gene silencing
              are likely to reveal new information about gene expression and nuclear dynamics
              in multicellular eukaryotes.  One role of these silencing mechanisms is as a
              protection against viruses and transposons, although many of the genes that
              have been identified in the process are also known to affect developmental
              mechanisms.  Understanding the basic processes of gene silencing has the
              potential to lead to virus protection and to have applications in gene therapy.
