Title       : Interfacial Water from Molecular to Mesoscopic Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0211626

Award Number: 0211626
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274185             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alenka Luzar alenka@zimm.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Alenka Luzar of the University of California, San Francisco, is supported by the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program for theoretical research
              directed toward assessing time scales of water dynamics in restricted
              environments on different length scales ranging from molecular events of
              hydrogen bond dynamics to kinetics of surface-induced evaporation on a
              mesoscopic scale.  On the molecular scale, a new methodology to analyze
              hydrogen bond kinetics will be developed and applied to solutions of selected
              amino acids and alanine-based oligopeptides with varying chain length.  This
              effort will utilize a combination of formal theory and molecular dynamics
              simulations, and will involve direct collaboration with neutron scattering
              experimentalists.  On mesoscopic scales, the development of powerful umbrella
              sampling/Monte Carlo algorithms, in conjunction with a coarse-grained model of
              confined aqueous systems, will enable calculations of activation barriers for
              capillary evaporation at increased surface separations.  This effort aims to
              extract a scaling law for the barrier height in order to bridge the gap between
              macroscopic measurements and limited-size model systems.  Finally, in a related
              project, the occurrence of spontaneous liquid-vapor microphase transitions in a
              hydrophobic pocket will be explored in molecular dynamics simulations. 
              Outcomes from this research are expected to impact disciplines concerned with
              dynamic aspects of interfacial water and hydrophobicity, ranging from colloids
              and materials science to biophysics.  

Understanding the molecular aspects
              of water dynamics in restricted geometries is central to variety of problems in
              biophysics and cell biology.  This research is expected to impact a number of
              fields where the effects of water are important, from the development of new
              bioactive compounds and improved optical fibers to research into biological
              structures such as proteins and self-assembling materials studied in
              nanotechnology. As well, research outcomes will assist in the design of
              surfaces that have optimized dewetting ability.  Such surfaces are promising
              for practical applications such as rain-repellent coatings. 

