Title       : Functional Analyses of Plant Gamete Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0211742

Award Number: 0211742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1135486            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila M. McCormick sheilamc@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In higher plants, each pollen grain contains two sperm cells that are delivered
              to the embryo sac. One sperm fertilizes the egg and this fusion gives rise to
              the embryo that eventually grows into the plant. The other sperm fertilizes
              another cell in the embryo sac and this second fusion gives rise to the
              endosperm, a nutritive tissue in the seed that is required for the development
              of the embryo. Double fertilization is arguably the developmental process of
              most economic value in crop plants, because most foods are seeds or arise from
              seeds. Double fertilization was discovered over 100 years ago. But because of
              the relative inaccessibility of plant gametes, the molecular biology and
              mechanistics of this unique feature of the higher plant life cycle are barely
              understood. In order to exploit gametes for crop improvement, it is necessary
              to know more about them.
To facilitate a more global understanding of plant
              gamete gene expression, cDNA libraries will be constructed from isolated sperm,
              eggs, and embryo sacs of maize. More than 5000 cDNAs from each library will be
              sequenced. Expression profiles for  about 200 diverse cDNAs from each library
              will be determined. Plants with fluorescently-tagged gametes will be
              constructed to facilitate analysis of gamete function in gene disruption lines,
              and to facilitate imaging of fertilization. Functional analyses will focus on
              genes predicted to encode surface-localized proteins that might mediate
              critical cellular interactions during double fertilization. All sequences and
              stocks from this project will be available to the research community. With this
              information about maize gamete gene expression, comparative genomics can be
              used to identify and manipulate gamete-expressed genes in diverse plant
              species.

