Title       : Dissertation Research: Aboriginal ecosystem management as a socio-natural system
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0211377

Award Number: 0211377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8982               (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin S. Orlove bsorlove@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Fire is a powerful resource management tool, perhaps the oldest to be used by
              humans.  Through the use of fire to open up forests and woodlands, establish
              grasslands and encourage the establishment of species beneficial to human
              survival, humans have modified ecosystems such that they have become dependent
              upon anthropogenic fire for maintenance.  This dissertation research project
              studies the socio-natural system of fire that has resulted from the repeated
              actions and reactions of both social and natural processes in Western
              Australia.  The student, a human ecologist from University of California,
              Davis, will explore the relationship between Australian Aboriginal management
              practices and the distribution and abundance of vegetation communities and
              kangaroo populations in the Kimberley region of tropical Australia. Analysis of
              the Aboriginal human-nature interaction will focus on the interactions between
              three components of the socio-natural system: resource use, management practice
              and reproductive biology. A two-fold approach to analyzing Aboriginal ecosystem
              management with fire will be carried out, using both ethnographic and
              ecological research methodologies. This research will document indigenous land
              management in a contemporary context while situating that context historically.
               Fire encapsulates the Aboriginal relationship with land, yet Western settlers
              and land management agencies heavily circumscribe fire practice.  Improving
              fire management is a priority both within and beyond Australia, and this
              research contributes to that need. 


