Title       : Generation of a Pristine Sapphire Surface by Oxidation and Solid State
               Conversion of a Sputtered Al Coating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0211078

Award Number: 0211078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen M. Chan hmc0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Vinci  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1676,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project consists of an in-depth investigation into the mechanisms behind a
              novel method for generating a pristine sapphire surface.  The process is named
              AGOG, representing the three processing steps: Al thin film deposition on
              sapphire, Growth of an aluminum Oxide layer, and grain Growth to produce a
              single crystal surface. Processing conditions at each step in the AGOG process
              will be varied systematically and correlated to the resulting changes in
              surface structure. The effect of Al film microstructure and thickness on
              oxidation behavior will be determined. Sapphire of (0001), (11-20), and (01-12)
              orientation will be used to identify the effect of interface conditions on the
              Al to alumina phase transformation. Studies of phase transition behavior will
              be carried out concurrently with oxidation/heating rate experiments. Once a
              polycrystalline alumina layer has been created, solid-state conversion
              processing conditions will be examined. Finally, strategies for eliminating
              hillock growth during the initial oxidation step will be explored.

Sapphire,
              the single crystal form of alumina, is utilized in many important commercial
              applications where the quality of the final surface finish is critical.  One
              example is the recent use as a substrate material for high-power blue light
              emitting diodes (LED's) and laser diodes.  These devices are required for a
              large number of applications including full color electroluminescent displays,
              and read-write laser sources for high-density information storage on magnetic
              and optical media.  The successful commercial production of blue LED's also
              offers the potential for bright, white light sources derived from solid state
              devices.  Advantages over conventional incandescent and fluorescent sources
              include far higher energy efficiency and increased reliability. Sapphire is
              also widely used for visible and midwave infrared (IR) airborne windows and
              radomes for guidance systems.  Currently, the surfaces of sapphire components
              are finished by a combination of mechanical and chemical polishing.  The final
              polishing steps are time-consuming, and typically make up a significant
              fraction of the total cost.  The AGOG process is a potentially more
              cost-effective method for achieving a high quality surface finish in
              sapphire.

