Title       : Iron-sulfur Cluster Assembly in Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0211384

Award Number: 0211384
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $624162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis R. Dean deandr@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Iron-sulfur clusters are small inorganic entities necessary for the activities
              of enzymes whose activities are essential to the life-sustaining processes of
              respiration, nitrogen fixation and photosynthesis.  One of the most important
              roles of iron-sulfur clusters is to serve as agents of the electron transfer
              reactions necessary for many biological processes.  Several proteins required
              for formation of iron-sulfur clusters have recently been identified and they
              are among the most conserved proteins found in living cells. These proteins
              have been designated IscU, IscS, IscA, HscB, HscA, and Fdx.  This project is
              designed to determine how these proteins work together to combine inorganic
              iron and sulfur to create the clusters.  Purified proteins will be used to
              duplicate the cellular process in vitro and the physiological and biochemical
              consequences of impairing the function of each protein in vivo will be
              assessed.  In nitrogen-fixing cells there is also a specialized set of
              homologous proteins that specifically target iron-sulfur cluster formation for
              the activation of nitrogenase.  This project will also involve analysis of
              these proteins to determine how they target iron and sulfur for the support of
              biological nitrogen fixation.  How iron-sulfur clusters are formed biologically
              is important because free inorganic iron and free sulfur are metabolic poisons.
               Furthermore, cellular defects in an ability to properly form iron-sulfur
              clusters is known to have a profound effect on the metabolism of iron, which
              can be manifested in a variety of debilitating genetic disorders.  Finally, the
              controlled manipulation of metabolic pathways by altering or increasing the
              cellular capacity for iron-sulfur cluster formation could have practical
              application in increasing crop yield, the prevention or treatment of microbial
              pathogenesis, as well as improving the capacity for certain microoganism to
              serve as agents of bioremediation. 
