Title       : Startup and Transients in Millisecond Chemical Reactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0211860

Award Number: 0211860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222180             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lanny D. Schmidt schmidt@cems.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Short contact time chemical reactors have great promise for conversion of light
              alkanes into useful chemicals with greater efficiency, lower cost, and less
              pollution.  Important applications of this technology are conversion of natural
              gas to liquid fuels and reforming of alkane fuels to hydrogen for fuel cells. 
              Implementation of this technology requires characterization of the processes
              and mechanisms.  Steady state behavior is fairly well understood, and the
              previous grant characterized performance and mechanisms of these processes. 
              However, transients must be characterized to develop lightoff protocols and to
              further understand the mechanisms of alkane oxidation in short contact time
              chemical reactors.
	We have a systematic program to examine the transient
              behavior of short contact time chemical reactors.  This research has two major
              objectives:  (1) use of transient experiments to further characterize the
              mechanisms of these processes and (2) the development of methods for fast
              lightoff and transients in applications such as fuel processing for small fuel
              cells.
	Experiments will involve mass spectrometric and temperature
              measurement of responses to step changes in feeds and isotope switching.  We
              will examine carbon and oxygen formation and removal on the catalyst by
              titration with flowing gases.  Startup transients will also be examined by
              ignition with different gas mixtures that react either catalytically or
              homogeneously to attain rapid heating to ignition temperatures.  Other
              experiments will involve periodic forcing of composition at different
              frequencies, gas-liquid reactions at short contact time, and reactions
              involving flash vaporization of fuel using fuel injectors.  We will also
              develop capabilities to examine time dependences and bifurcation behavior in
              startup and extinction of fast coupled exothermic and endothermic processes in
              the catalytic wall reactor.
	These experiments will be analyzed by
              computational fluid dynamics using elementary step models to simulate
              temperatures and coverages in startup and with transients.  This will lead to
              more fundamental elementary step models and characterization of bifurcation
              behavior in these systems that will be essential in developing new short
              contact time chemical processes.
	Fuel cells will not be practical unit fuel
              reforming methods and fast lightoff strategies are developed, and this research
              will be a key ingredient in these tasks.

