Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Reference Grammar of Wanano
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0211206

Award Number: 0211206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18487              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Fox bfox@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jule G. de Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is partially supported by the Office of International Science and
              Engineering of NSF. Under the direction of Dr. Barbara Fox and Dr. Jule Gomez
              de Garcia, Ms. Kristine Stenzel will collect data for her doctoral
              dissertation. She will conduct linguistic research on Wanano, a language of the
              Tucano language family spoken by approximately 1600 people living in the
              northwest region of the Amazon rainforest. Wanano is an endangered language
              that has yet to be fully described. Ms. Stenzel's fieldwork with the Wanano
              will involve direct elicitation of linguistic data, transcriptions of oral
              histories and folktales, as well as the recording of everyday conversations.
              She will produce a reference grammar of Wanano including features of Wanano
              phonology, morphology, and syntax. The grammar will take into account recent
              research in each of these areas and place Wanano in a cross-linguistic context.
              It will also overview the current sociolinguistic situation of the Wanano
              people. The grammar will be written within the framework of Basic Linguistic
              Theory with the overall goal of providing accurate information about the
              language so that researchers working within a variety of theoretical frameworks
              may find it accessible. 

This research is significant to three inter-related
              areas of linguistics: language description, linguistic theory, and language
              preservation. First, Ms. Stenzel's research will provide a detailed description
              of an endangered and underdescribed language. As the language family to which
              Wanano belongs is also underdescribed, this research will shed light on some of
              the poorly understood structures of the family, including tone, evidential
              marking, and word order. Second, Ms. Stenzel's analyses of textual and
              conversational data will be of use to linguists working on cross-linguistic
              comparisons. It is especially significant that most of the analyses will be
              based on conversational data, since some current grammatical theory suggests
              that conversational syntax provides a new window on the organization of
              grammar. Finally, this project will provide the community of Wanano speakers
              with a version of the grammar translated into Portuguese and modified for
              non-linguists. This grammar will enhance the Wananos' efforts to preserve their
              language and cultural heritage.



