Title       : Septins in Aspergillus nidulans: Organization of the Division Site and the Cell
               Surface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0211787

Award Number: 0211787
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Momany   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              All cells arise from existing cells. The doubling of contents and partitioning
              of those contents to daughter cells must be carefully controlled in all
              organisms. The septin family of proteins plays a central role in organizing
              proper growth and division of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
              likely plays a similar role in many other eukaryotes. Septin complexes appear
              to function as scaffolds, recruiting and tethering other proteins to
              appropriate sites. Among the proteins that localize to the yeast division plane
              in a septin-dependent manner are enzymes responsible for cross-wall synthesis
              and cell cycle regulators that appear to coordinate growth with nuclear
              division.

While most knowledge of septin function comes from elegant work in
              the unicellular fungus S. cerevisiae, septins have also been found in
              multicellular fungi and in animals. Five septin genes, aspA-aspE, have been
              identified in the filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans. In this
              multicellular fungus a single septin, AspBp, localizes to several different
              structures (septa, branches, and conidiophores). AspBp localization is
              post-mitotic at septa where the localization pattern changes from a single ring
              to a double ring back to a single ring during septal development. AspBp
              localization is pre-mitotic at branches where the localization pattern changes
              from a compact patch to a diffuse collar as branches emerge.

The central
              hypothesis for this research is that complexes at septa, nascent branches, and
              conidiophores in A. nidulans contain different combinations of both septin and
              non-septin proteins and that membership within the same complex will vary over
              time as development proceeds. This hypothesis will be tested using a variety of
              approaches.  Mutant phenotypes and localization will be examined for all five
              septins.  Interactions among septins and between septins and other proteins
              will be identified using genetic and biochemical methods.  Selected non-septin
              proteins that interact with septin complexes at septa will be localized.  These
              studies will exploit the ability to predict and manipulate the development of
              septa, and to a lesser extent other structures, in A. nidulans. The proposed
              studies will likely lead to a better understanding of septin function in
              multicellular organisms and of basic processes in the development of
              filamentous fungi.

