Title       : Moderate and High Resolution Spectroscopy of Reactive Chemical Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0211281

Award Number: 0211281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $690605             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry A. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In his project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Miller will conduct spectroscopic detection and
              characterization experiments on reactive chemical intermediates. The methods
              used are medium resolution, vibronically resolved and high resolution,
              rotationally resolved spectroscopy, based on laser-induced fluorescence (LIF)
              and cavity ringdown spectroscopy (CRDS) techniques. The systems under
              investigation are alkyl peroxy radicals discovered by the principal
              investigator during the previous grant cycle.

Chemical reactions proceed
              from initial reactants to the reaction products usually along one of several
              possible reaction pathways. The reaction intermediates are generally
              characterized by different short lifetimes. Knowledge of these reaction
              intermediates, the relative likelihood of their occurrence and their lifetimes
              plays an important role in predicting the flow of chemical reactions. The
              systems chosen for investigation are important to the chemistry of the
              atmosphere, some industrial process, and to our general understanding of
              reactive molecules. This research is designed to detect and characterize such
              intermediates. Students and postdoctoral research associates participate in
              this research. They thereby acquire important knowledge and skills in
              preparation for entry into the scientific/technological workforce. 
In his
              project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
              Division, Miller will conduct spectroscopic detection and characterization
              experiments on reactive chemical intermediates. The methods used are medium
              resolution, vibronically resolved and high resolution, rotationally resolved
              spectroscopy, based on laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) and cavity ringdown
              spectroscopy (CRDS) techniques. The systems under investigation are alkyl
              peroxy radicals discovered by the principal investigator during the previous
              grant cycle.

Chemical reactions proceed from initial reactants to the
              reaction products usually along one of several possible reaction pathways. The
              reaction intermediates are generally characterized by different short
              lifetimes. Knowledge of these reaction intermediates, the relative likelihood
              of their occurrence and their lifetimes plays an important role in predicting
              the flow of chemical reactions. This research is designed to detect and
              characterize such intermediates. Students and postdoctoral research associates
              participate in this research. They thereby acquire important knowledge and
              skills in preparation for entry into the scientific/technological workforce. 

