Title       : Transcriptome Responses to Environmental Conditions in Loblolly Pine Roots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0211807

Award Number: 0211807
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1651752            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey F D. Dean   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee H. Pratt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah F. Covert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott A. Merkle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marie-Michele Cordonnier-Pratt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Wood accounts for 25% of the value of all industrial materials produced in the
              U.S., and on an annual basis, the value of wood-derived products equals or
              exceeds that of virtually every other agricultural crop. However, losses in
              production forest acreage, coupled with increasing demands for paper and cheap
              fiber supplies from overseas, have put intense pressure on U.S. companies to
              increase wood yields per acre, particularly in southeastern forests.
              Unfortunately, our limited understanding of tree biology constitutes a
              significant barrier to attaining the productivity gains necessary to keep pace
              with the rising consumer demand for wood products. Efforts are underway to
              catalog genes expressed in the wood-forming tissues of loblolly pine (Pinus
              taeda), the predominant commercial tree species in the southeastern U.S.
              Although this collection of wood-specific genes provides an excellent step
              toward improved understanding of the basic genetic units governing wood
              formation, it will be incomplete with respect to many genes that will prove
              critical for increasing the productivity of tomorrow's forests.
This project
              will develop a collection of several thousand new genes derived primarily from
              other pine tissues of commercial and biological significance, in particular
              roots undergoing a variety of biotic and abiotic stresses. To the greatest
              extent possible, data from this project will be integrated with that from other
              projects focused on genomic studies of pine so as to create a seamless set of
              resources, such as a comprehensive unigene set, for the research community.
              Such comprehensive unigene sets will form the basis of DNA microarrays that
              will be used to identify genes whose expression varies in response to various
              environmental and developmental cues, particularly those responding to stresses
              that trees would likely experience when subjected to intensive management
              regimes. Identification of such genes will provide for better understanding of
              the molecular mechanisms trees use to respond to environmental and biological
              stresses, and will enable the development of techniques and tools, such as
              targeted microarrays, that could be used to monitor in near real-time the
              effects of silvicultural practices on tree growth and development. For example,
              microarrays of root genes that respond to specific mineral or nutrient
              deficiencies could allow silviculturalists to judge whether or not a new
              fertilization regimen was likely improve growth rates or wood quality well
              before the phenotypic responses could be detected. Such new techniques will
              provide the means for addressing current biological constraints that limit
              forest productivity in the southeastern U.S.

