Title       : Integrated Studies of Floral Development, Traditional and Molecular Systematics,
               and Floristics in the Violet Family (Violaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0211054

Award Number: 0211054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey E. Ballard ballardh@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shirley C. Tucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0211054
Ballard and Tucker
Generic distinctions and major subdivisions within
              many angiosperm families 
commonly hinge on characteristics of floral symmetry
              or architecture, and 
morphology of the reproductive structures themselves. 
              This is true in the 
violet family (Violaceae), a moderate-sized family of
              angiosperms with a 
broad range of growth forms from large tropical forest
              canopy trees to 
fingernail-sized Andean puna rosettes.  Predominately
              insect-pollinated, 
the family nevertheless boasts a wide range of floral and
              fruit 
morphologies on par with that in whole orders of other angiosperms.  An
              
apparently simple trend from actinomorphy to extreme zygomorphy, coupled
              
with increasing elaboration of staminal nectaries in floral spurs, has
              
figured heavily in generic concepts as well as in assignments to tribes and
              
subtribes.  Recent studies of generic relationships based on sequences of
              
the trnL-F and rbcL chloroplast regions, however, reject the simplistic
              
trend in floral symmetry and nectary development, as well as the current
              
traditional classification based on this trend, revealing instead several
              
independent origins of bilaterally symmetrical floral types with spurs from
              
different radially symmetrical spurless lineages.  Furthermore, pantropical
              
Hybanthus, the third largest genus in the family, splinters into 7 separate
              
groups distributed across the family, suggesting that its distinctive
              
"landing platform" flower is a recurrent evolutionary syndrome.  The second
              
largest pantropical genus, Rinorea, is also substantially heterogeneous and
              
non-monophyletic.  The proposed research program will integrate
              
comprehensive floral developmental investigations to clarify floral
              
evolution; systematic studies of macro- and micromorphological characters,
              
chromosome numbers, xylem anatomy and pollen morphology to reevaluate
              
circumscriptions and distinctions of genera and diagnosable segregates; and
              
inferences of generic relationships from chloroplast trnL-F spacer and rbcL
              
gene regions to provide a robust molecular phylogenetic foundation on which
              
to test relationships and develop a predictive classification.  Complete
              
generic circumscriptions using the new and pre-existing traits, and a new
              
intrafamilial classification, will then be developed using examinations of
              
key herbarium collections at the Missouri Botanical Garden in St. Louis,
              
Missouri; Royal Botanic Garden at Kew, England; and the National Museum of
              
Natural History in Paris, France.
	Field work in Latin America by the
              investigator and his students and herbarium and laboratory training for
              graduate students add to the broader impacts of the work, as does collaboration
              with a leading plant morphologist, Dr. Shirley Tucker at UC-Santa Barbara.

