Title       : LTREB: Long-term Research in Environmental Biology: Microevolution in the Fast
               Lane
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0211391

Award Number: 0211391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51608              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Bell mabell@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0211391
Bell
LTREB
Integrating pattern and process has always been a crucial
              but frustrating objective for
evolutionary biology. Analysis of rapid
              evolution in extant populations provides a unique means
to integrate
              evolutionary pattern and process. To that end, annual samples from the Loberg
              Lake,
Alaska population of threespine stickleback fish, Gasterosteus
              aculeatus, will be used to study
rapid evolution. This population was founded
              by a natural invasion of anadromous (i.e., sea run)
stickleback after the
              native stickleback population was exterminated in 1982. It has been
sampled
              annually since 1990, and lateral plate phenotypes have been scored in all
              samples.
Lateral plates are modified scales that form a single row of armor on
              each side of the body.
Lateral plate morphs (i.e., complete, partial, low) and
              low morph-plate number are heritable,
subject to strong natural selection, and
              exhibit extensive adaptive geographic variation in western
North America.
              
This study will document maximum evolutionary rates, the trajectory of
              evolutionary
change, and patterns of transient polymorphism. These patterns
              can be integrated with known
evolutionary mechanisms. The increasing frequency
              of low morphs and their declining mean
plate number can be explained by
              natural selection in many similar populations. Based on the plate phenotypes of
              the original Loberg Lake stickleback population before it was exterminated and
              comparison to other lake stickleback populations, lateral plate
divergence
              should continue in the Loberg Lake population until the low morph is fixed and
              mean
plate number declines to about five per side. This LTREB award will
              support continued annual sampling of the Loberg Lake population.
This study
              will provide an unusually detailed account of rapid phenotypic evolution with
              implications for divergence during speciation and post-glacial adaptive
              radiation of threespine stickleback. It will complement ongoing research in
              paleontology, functional morphology, natural selection, genetics,
              phylogeogaphy, and developmental evolutionary biology of G. aculeatus. It will
              prolong a long series of annual samples in which rapid evolution of plates and
              other traits and trait correlations can be studied.
