Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: A New Quality of Service Video Conferencing Model
               Across the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0211036

Award Number: 0211036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Magda El Zarki elzarki@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 5944,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0211036
Elzarki

Description: 
This award is for support of a joint research
              project by Dr. Magda El Zarki, Department of Information and Computer Sciences
              at the University of California at Irvine, Irvine, California and Dr. Hussein
              Eissa, Computer and Systems Department at the Electronics Research Institute
              (ERI), Cairo, Egypt.  The project addresses videoconferencing over the
              Internet.  The two investigators plan to develop a particular model for a
              differentiated services (diffserv) architecture and to evaluate this model
              through simulation.  They will explore the implementation of the diffserv
              architecture in the OPNET simulator, and study the performance of the
              architecture with both real-time and non-real-time traffic.  They plan to
              analyze the video/audio characteristics by using videoconferencing applications
              & capturing the generated packets to draw the packet PDF curves (packet size
              and packet interarrival time).  The new proposed model is to guarantee the
              required quality by using some of the Diffserv simple blocks at edge devices. 
              It also uses the IP Multicast mechanism where possible, to save more network
              resources. The new model is to rely on shaping the out-of-profile streams,
              dropping packets in case of real-time marked packets, and re-marking packets in
              case of non real-time marked packets.  By implementing these simple blocks in
              the edge devices, the overload on the core routers will be
              minimized.

Scope:
This project will provide better understanding of
              video/audio streams over the Internet.   and should advance the state of art in
              multimedia networking. The project will lead to a strong collaboration between
              the U.S. and Egyptian institutions. The collaboration between the two PIs is
              likely to be productive since they have had prior interaction, while Dr. Eissa
              was carrying out his doctorate research in the year 2000 in the United States. 
              The visits by the staff from UC at Irvine and the ERI will be beneficial to the
              two institutions, and will help graduate students in Egypt, especially with the
              experimental and simulation component tasks. 

