Title       : Dendrimer-Encapsulated Metal Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0211068

Award Number: 0211068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Crooks   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,7202,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
              Professor Richard Crooks and coworkers at Texas A&M University will synthesize
              and characterize dendrimer-encapsulated metal particles.  The potential
              advantage of these materials is convenient access to nanometer-sized metal
              particles, on the order of 1-3 nanometers, having both high monodispersity and
              good stability.  These nanomaterials are to be prepared by a two step process. 
              First, the dendrimer is exposed to a metal ion-containing solution.  This
              results in complexation between the metal ions and ligands within the
              dendrimer.  The second step involves chemical reduction of the
              organic/inorganic composite, which results in formation of an intradendrimer
              metal nanoparticle.  Each dendrimer acts as a discreet nanoreactor, and only
              those metal ions within the dendrimer coalesce into the resulting nanoparticle.
               This means that in principle every nanoparticle will contain the same number
              of metal atoms.  This is significant because at the present time there are few
              methods available for preparing monodisperse metallic metal clusters in the 1-3
              nm size range that are both surface active and soluble in many solvents.  This
              size range is interesting for a number of reasons, but mainly because it is the
              range over which metal atoms undergo a transition from atomic to metallic
              properties.  

Monodispersed metal nanoparticles have many applications to
              the technology sector. Applications include electronics, biomedical
              applications, fundamental studies of catalysis, and chemical and biological
              sensors.  In addition to these broader impacts, this work invites many
              collaborative research projects.  Catalytic properties of the
              dendrimer-encapsulated metal particles will be evaluated by colleagues at
              Trinity University.  Commercial applications will be evaluated with colleagues
              at the Michigan Molecular Institute.  Additional characterization of the
              nanoparticles is to be done with synchrotron experiments to be performed in
              South Korea. Finally, this proposal will support local high school students and
              undergraduates to work on the project during the summers.

