Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Modeling and Management of Process Induced Shape
               Distortion in Sheet Forming Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0211196

Award Number: 0211196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Sherif El-Gizawy elgizawya@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : W223      STATE-REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5944,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              0211196
Elgizawy

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project between Dr. A. Sherif El-Gizawy, Department of Mechanical and Aerospace
              Engineering at the University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri and Dr. Maher
              Younan, Department of Mechanical Engineering, the American University of Cairo,
              Cairo, Egypt.  The main goal of the work is to develop an understanding of the
              interactions between sheet-forming process variables and resulting properties,
              based on characterization and space-time evolution of process-induced damage. 
              The investigators plan to develop an effective method for characterization and
              management of process-induced distortion in sheet forming.  The nonlinear
              finite element method (FEM) is combined with an optimization scheme based on
              Genetic Algorithm (GA) for defining the process condition for global
              minimization of distortion in sheet metal products.  The developed numerical
              model will be verified experimentally using high strength sheet materials. 
              Implementation of the proposed approach in the stamping industry will increase
              the robustness of forming processes and improve the quality and consistency of
              stampings.  

Scope: 
Process-induced distortions due to spring-back,
              wrinkles, and excessive localized thinning alter the product geometry from the
              designed one, and cause difficulties in joining and assembly of sheet products
              as in the cases of auto-body and airframe assemblies.  The work is expected to
              yield models that can be used for design, control, and optimization of
              processes for fabrication sheet metal products.  The PI's novel approach is
              based on a combination of FEA and genetic algorithms.   The successful
              demonstration of the results could lead to commercial solutions for one of the
              major outstanding problem in design of sheet forming dies:  predicting and
              avoiding springback problems. This collaborative research will integrate
              modeling with experimental observations to determine the effects of different
              process parameters to characterize and manage process-induced distortions, and
              will provide unique training for conducting engineering research for graduate
              and undergraduate students in both Egypt and the United States.  This project
              is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants
              to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
              activities.

