Title       : Direct probing of low frequency motions in solution phase chemical dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0211894

Award Number: 0211894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338827             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Blank blank@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, David Blank will develop and apply novel experimental
              methods designed to address the role of intermolecular and low frequency
              intramolecular nuclear motions in condensed-phase reactive and nonreactive
              chemical dynamics.  The experiments utilize multidimensional femtosecond
              spectroscopic techniques, and can be divided into two types, based on the
              complementary information each will provide.  First, the response of low
              frequency motions in response to the progress of a dynamic event in solution
              will be probed by photo-initiating that event with an ultrafast laser pulse,
              and monitoring the response using third-order time domain Raman spectroscopy. 
              Second, the coupling between low frequency motions in condensed systems will be
              directly measured using a new resonance enhanced version of coherent
              two-dimensional time domain Raman spectroscopy.  These studies are expected to
              enable new insights into low frequency motions in solution phase chemical
              reactions.

The significant proportion of chemistry, from industrial
              reactions to the chemistry of biology, takes place in the solution phase.  This
              project aims at providing a microscopic description of chemical reactivity in
              solution, one of the central issues in physical chemistry today.  The proposed
              methods are direct and generally applicable techniques that will aid in
              understanding the scientific issues involved.  This work has applications
              ranging from modern optics and metrology to advanced materials characterization
              and fundamental research in condensed matter.  As part of this research effort,
              students from the undergraduate through the postdoctoral level are trained with
              state-of-the-art instrumentation in ultrafast laser technology, an emerging
              field in the physical sciences.

