Title       : Development of UW-PNNL Collaborative Curriculums in Nano-Science Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a0211666

Award Number: 0211666
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370718             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fumio S. Ohuchi ohuchi@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott T. Dunham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Stoebe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles T. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of this proposal is to develop a prototype for a new type of
              collaborative education
 that meets broad and expanding needs in the areas of
              nanoscience and nanotechnology that will build on the research and educational
              strengths of the University of Washington (UW) and Pacific Northwest
              National
Laboratory (PNNL) and their newly formed UW-PNNL Joint Institute for
              Nanoscience.

This project is primarily targeted to speed up undergraduate
              and graduate entry into the
nanotechnology field and enhance education and
              research by developing a new series of
interdisciplinary nanotechnology
              courses taught via a combination of local and remote
instruction. These
              courses will be taught by faculty at the University of Washington and
by
              researchers at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and be taken by students
              at both
locations, as well as other locations around the state, region, and
              country. Some of the
course offerings will be specifically oriented to making
              introductory interdisciplinary
nanotechnology courses available to students at
              smaller undergraduate institutions. 

.
Additional nanotechnology offerings
              will attract undergraduates into the nanotechnology
program and train future
              leaders for industry by providing hands-on research experience
and contact
              with faculty and researchers both within and outside of the UW. They
              will
broaden the nanotechnology curriculum and provide opportunities for
              students to explore
individual research projects and to collaborate with each
              other and with faculty and
researchers at both locations. The program will
              contribute to the interdisciplinary PhD
program in nanotechnology and other
              relevant sciences.

The courses to be developed will increase distance
              learning curriculum offerings, while
 also providing a new model of
              teaching/learning that can be adopted in other disciplines
 and across other
              geographies to enhance research, education, and faculty/student
              collaboration.

