Title       : Proposal for a Workshop on Research Directions for Communications After the
               Internet and Cellular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0211487

Award Number: 0211487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33093              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernd-Peter Paris pparis@sitevax.gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian L. Mark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In the future, communications systems are expected to be characterized
              as
ubiquitous, pervasive, very mobile, and highly distributed, among other
              at-
tributes. In contrast to current systems, such as cellular systems or
              the
current Internet, the reliance on central network components will be
              much
reduced and ad hoc methods for forming networks will become more
              preva-
lent. Additionally, the number of connected devices, including both
              sensors
and actuators as well as processors, will increase dramatically and
              many
network devices will operate autonomously. Massive quantities of data
              of
various highly structured formats will need to be accessed and
              distributed
across these networks. Wireless and wireline systems will
              interconnect with
optical fiber and free space communications media.
This
              workshop is intended to bring together a distinguished group of
research
              scientists/educators and industry and government experts to discuss
and
              identify critical research in communications to support this vision.
              The
workshop will provide an opportunity to interact with experts from
              related
fields, primarily computer science, working on different aspects of
              future
communication systems. A list of invitees for this workshop is provided
              in
the appendix.
The workshop aims to identify research challenges and
              opportunities as-
sociated with the emerging vision for future communications
              systems. We
expect a report to come out of the workshop reflecting the themes
              discussed.

