Title       : RUI: Physical Properties and Spectroscopy of Glasses Related to Intermediate
               Range Order
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0211718

Award Number: 0211718
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Feller sfeller@coe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mario Affatigato  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coe College
	      1220 First Avenue NE
	      Cedar Rapids, IA  524025008    319/399-8000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a Research at Undergraduate Institution (RUI) project.  It is funded by
              the Ceramics Program and the Condensed Matter Physics Program.  The glass
              science research focuses on the existence and effects of,
              "intermediate-range-order" in oxide glasses.  It will involve undergraduates in
              a variety of projects:  (1) Development of new solution chemistry for glass
              formation that avoids carbon dioxide retention and allows fabrication of
              glasses with high homogeneity and with extraordinarily high alkali
              concentrations.  (2) Development of novel glasses in binary vanadates, borates,
              bismuthates, and various ternary systems through rapid cooling.  (3)
              Determination of the relation between elasticity and other physical properties
              and the intermediate-range-order present.  (4) Exploration of packing as a
              universal measure of glass structure using computer simulation or experiments
              to achieve random mixing of constructed clusters of atoms in shapes
              hypothesized for glass. (5) Neutron scattering, NMR, FT-Raman, FTIR, ultrasonic
              velocity of sound, and Brillouin light scattering will be used to detect
              intermediate-range-order.  In particular, high-field NMR will be used for the
              first time to determine the intermediate site origins of tetrahedral boron atom
              in selected borate glasses and crystals. (6) Finally, students will help
              optimize a state-of-the-art twin roller-quenching system for glass fabrication.
               High school students and teachers will also participate in this work as a way
              of motivating these students to pursue careers in science. 

This is a
              Research at Undergraduate Institution (RUI) project.  It is funded by the
              Ceramics Program and the Condensed Matter Physics Program.  At least 12
              undergraduates and several high school students and teachers will participate
              in significant, publishable glass science research projects. The determination
              of intermediate range order (clusters of atoms) and the impact of this order on
              a variety of physical properties are the main scientific goals.  Novel glasses
              will be formed using rapid cooling and new chemical methods.  The atomic
              structure will be determined using various spectroscopies. Properties such as
              density, optical absorption, and thermal effects will be measured and compared
              to structure.  Students will be involved in instrument enhancement as well. 
              All participants will receive training and encouragement to pursue careers as
              scientists:  In the past 15 years, more than 100 students have been trained to
              do high level research at a school of ca. 1100 students.  In support of these
              goals, the project includes active collaborations with major research centers
              in the US, Europe, and Japan:  Rutherford-Appleton lab near Oxford, England and
              the Institute Laue Langevin, Grenoble, France (Neutron scattering);  Indiana
              University and Iowa State University (NMR); Iowa State University and NHRF,
              Athens, Greece (Raman and infrared spectroscopy);  Fudan University (Shanghai)
              second harmonic generation; Sojo University, Japan (ultrasound); Tsukuba
              University, Japan, (Brillouin and Raman Light Scattering); Rostock University,
              Germany, (x-ray diffraction). 

