Title       : Quantum Chemical Evaluation of Inter- and Intra-molecular Interactions in
               Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0211639

Award Number: 0211639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Merz MERZ@PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1164,1954,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of this project is to use modern quantum chemistry to provide
              accurate and unique insights into inter and intramolecular interactions in
              biomolecular systems, using a continuum representation for the solvent. The
              linear-scaling semi empirical divide and conquer algorithm coupled with
              standard Poisson-Boltzmann theory will be applied to biologically relevant
              problems to study inter and intramolecular interactions in proteins. Classical
              MD simulations and single point QM calculations will be carried out to estimate
              the value of the dielectric constant of a protein. The Poisson-Boltzmann charge
              transfer approach for the incorporation of charge transfer effects will be
              further developed. Experimental information generated on coiled-coil and salt
              bridge interactions in proteins and peptides will be used to validate the
              approach.    Given the advances in computer hardware and in numerical
              algorithms for the solution of the Schrodinger equation, quantum chemistry can
              now realistically contribute at the all-atom level to our understanding of
              macromolecular structure and function.  Modern quantum chemical approaches
              offer several advantages over classically based methods: (1)The electrostatic
              representation is more accurate because environmental, conformational,
              polarization and charge transfer effects are explicitly included unlike
              classical models. (2) There is no need to define the dielectric constant
              because dielectric relaxation is explicitly included in QM models. (3) The ways
              in which quantum chemical methods can be improved have been thoroughly
              documented (i.e., inclusion of correlation and improvements in the basis set).
              

This project will have a broad impact on the development of novel quantum
              mechanical approaches that can be applied to important biological problems. 
              The research  project will train students in formal theory, computer
              programming, biological structure and manuscript preparation/publication. The
              students will also have the opportunity to interact with other biological group
              at Penn State and at other universities in the USA and abroad. Indeed, each
              student will be required to attend at least one national or international
              meeting per year to present his/her results in either a poster or oral format. 
              A quantum bioinformatics database (QDB: http://qbiodb.chem.psu.edu/) has been
              created, which will aid in the dissemination and analysis of results from this
              work.  This work is funded jointly by the Theoretical and Computational
              Chemistry Program  in the Chemistry Division and the Molecular Biophysics
              Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.

