Title       : Transatlantic Transport Research Activities of the STAR Thematic Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0211499

Award Number: 0211499
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275690             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Black   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1352,1638,5914,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Transportation is a critical facet of contemporary life.  Transportation is
              essential for the conduct of economic activities and for the facilitation of
              the movement of people, goods, and services that affect the activities of
              people and institutions in myriad ways.  Transportation also is a major source
              or pollution, however, and the search for new transportation systems and
              approaches is a major priority for the development of more environmentally
              friendly, sustainable is a major goal in developed nations.  This award will
              continue support for the STAR (Sustainable Transport Analysis and Research)
              thematic network that involves geographers, transportation engineers, and other
              transport-related researchers from the U.S. in an evolving network of
              counterpart researchers from European nations who are active in the emerging
              STELLA (Sustainable Transport in Europe and Links and Liaisons with America)
              network.  STELLA has received major support from the European Community.  STAR
              is designed to enable U.S.-based researchers to actively engage in discussions,
              development of white papers, and other activities to stimulate collaborative
              international research on transportation and related themes in Europe, North
              America, and other developed nations.  The cooperative work between STELLA and
              STAR has three primary objectives:  (1) to create an institutionalized platform
              of exchange of scientific information, for pooling experience, and for
              facilitating research cooperation among European and North American
              transportation researchers; (2) to foster increased understandings of causes
              and backgrounds of mobility behavior in the two continents, with special
              emphasis on policy impacts; and (3) to foster and created conditions for
              comparative research in Europe and North America regarding behavioral motives,
              innovative strategies, and policy analyses associated with efforts to develop
              more sustainable transport.  STELLA and STAR will focus their efforts over the
              next three years on five functional focus areas:  (1) Globalization, E-Economy,
              and Trade; (2) ICT (Information and Communication Technology), Innovation, and
              the Transport System; (3) Society, Behavior, and Private/Public Transport; (4)
              Environment, Safety, Health, Land Use, and Congestion; and (5) Institutions,
              Regulations, and Markets in Transportation.  The majority of the funds provided
              through this award will support the participation of U.S. scientists in annual
              working group meetings associated with each of these five focus areas as well
              as overall cooperative linkages between STELLA and STAR leaders.  This award
              complements a substantial award made by the European Community to support
              comparable activities engaging European transport researchers.  This award
              renews support for activities undertaken with support from NSF Award
              BCS-0002695.

The STAR network will facilitate communication and
              collaboration among transportation researchers in the U.S. and Europe.  The
              cooperation of researchers in the STAR and STELLA networks will help to
              identify major research problems that need attention, and the workshops,
              seminars, exchanges, and other activities undertaken by these networks will
              help build research teams and foster development of research designs to make
              substantial progress in addressing critical questions of national significance.
               In addition to advancing scholarly research on sustainable transportation,
              STAR and STELLA will promote research that has great practical utility.

