Title       : Sixth International Conference on the Electrical Transport and Optical
               Properties of Inhomogeneous Media; July 15-19, 2002; Snowbird, Utah
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0211211

Award Number: 0211211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Golden golden@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven M. Blair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Graeme W. Milton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zeev Valy Vardeny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher R. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-0211211
PI: Kenneth Golden
Institution: University of
              Utah
Title: Sixth International Conference on the Electrical Transport and
              Optical Properties of Inhomogeneous Media

ABSTRACT

The "Sixth
              International Conference on the Electrical Transport and Optical Properties of
              Inhomogeneous Media" (ETOPIM 6) will be held in Snowbird, Utah, July 15-19,
              2002.  The conference will mark the 25th anniversary of the first ETOPIM
              conference, which was held in Columbus, Ohio, in 1977, and will be the second
              ETOPIM conference held in the US.

The electrical transport and optical
              properties of composites and inhomogeneous media are of fundamental importance
              to a broad range of highly interdisciplinary problems throughout science and
              engineering.  Photonic crystals and band-gap structures, semiconductors, porous
              media and rocks, conducting polymers, electrical activity in the heart and
              brain, composites with negative index of refraction, electrorheological fluids,
              optical networking, smart slime molds, optimal design of composite
              microstructures, imaging in geophysical, medical and industrial applications,
              transport in nanostructures, and the role of sea ice microstrucural and optical
              properties in polar biology and climate, are all examples of such problems. 
              ETOPIM 6 will address a broad array of active areas in the physics and
              engineering of inhomogeneous materials and expand the coverage of previous
              ETOPIM conferences to include problems of current interest in the biological,
              geophysical and mathematical sciences.

The conference is expected to have
              over 100 participant, representing 22 countries throughout Europe, Asia,
              Africa, the Middle East, Oceania, as well as North and Latin America.  Within
              the USA, 21 states will be represented.  The program will consist of more than
              30 invited lectures, about 60 contributed papers, and 20 posters.  Most of the
              talks, invited and contributed, will be in series.  Parallel minisymposia have
              been scheduled to focus on mathematical methods in homogenization, porous media
              and percolation problems in hydrology, and experimental results on random
              lasers and conducting polymers.  Through planned activities at the conference
              as well as recruiting, the conference organizers will try to maximize  the
              participation of younger researchers, from postdoctoral associates to graduate
              and undergraduate students, provide career development opportunities for them,
              and encourage interactions between junior and senior researchers.

	

