Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Djungar Mountains Archaeology Project: Modeling
               Prehistoric Pastoral Nomadism and Landscapes of Eastern Kazakhstan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0211431

Award Number: 0211431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fredrik T. Hiebert hiebert@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Fredrik Hiebert at the University of Pennsylvania,
              Michael Frachetti will conduct comprehensive archaeological survey and
              archaeological excavations in the Koksu River Valley of Eastern Kazakhstan. 
              This work will serve as the basis for his doctoral dissertation, in which he is
              developing new models to explain the emergence of pastoral nomadism during the
              Bronze Age in Central Asia.  
Humans have inhabited the steppe regions of
              Eurasia for more than 10,000 years.  In the Western Eurasian steppes, sheep,
              goats, cattle, and horses were domesticated by the 4th millennium BC, and
              nomadic pastoralism (as a distinct way of life) is thought to have emerged from
              settled agricultural contexts in western Eurasia during the 1st millennium BC. 
              In contrast, the nature and evolution of mobile pastoralism during the
              Eneolithic and Bronze Age in the Eastern Eurasian Steppe Zone remains generally
              unexplained. More specifically, the ambiguity in identifying the factors that
              distinguish a "nomadic" adaptation from any other pastoral lifestyle in this
              region has resulted in a scholarly assumption that some form of nomadic
              pastoralism characterized the ancient political economy of the steppes, without
              a clear archaeological definition of "nomadism" in a prehistoric context. 
              
Thus, the primary objective of Mr. Frachetti's project is to understand the
              ecological and social conditions that affected the strategies of Bronze Age
              groups in prehistory, by formalizing a new landscape methodology for studying
              mobile societies. Frachetti suggests that the main stumbling block in
              accurately understanding prehistoric nomadism (as substantially different from
              ethnographic cases) is that site-based archaeological studies of nomadic camps
              have been unable to provide a useful framework for discerning the patterned
              lifeway of mobile pastoralists.
The Koksu River Valley is particularly well
              suited for new studies of Bronze Age nomadic lifeways since it contains a rich
              archaeological record, as well as sharp contrasts in seasonal climate and
              resources.  Frachetti proposes an archaeological approach that considers the
              habitation ecology, the geography of ritual and ideological features, and the
              associations between archaeological monuments, landscape manipulation, and
              marking of group or individual identity, as aspects of life by which nomadic
              pastoralism fundamentally differs from other political economies.  Through
              detailed archaeological survey and excavation, environmental sampling, spatial
              analysis, and GIS simulation, landscape archaeology parses mobile pastoralism
              into various defining elements that are systemically related, though temporally
              and culturally contingent and unique. He suggests that ground-up modeling of
              various kinds of landscapes (ecological, ideological, political etc.) will more
              accurately depict the complex factors that conditioned pastoral strategies
              during prehistory.  Conceived in this way, the landscape approach serves as the
              vital link between theoretical questions concerning nomadic strategies at
              different places and times, and the analytical techniques available to
              archaeologists for discerning mobile pastoralism in prehistory.  
The proposed
              Djungar Mountains Archaeology Project will make broad contributions to
              archaeological theory and method, as well as provide new data. Most
              importantly, it will provide a grounded model of the development of pastoral
              nomadism in Eastern Central Asia during the Bronze Age. At the broader level,
              Frachetti's collaborative project will foster international relationships
              between American and Kazakh archaeologists, and open the door for future
              relationships between scientists from the United States and other Central Asian
              republics.

