Title       : New Mexico CETP Follow-On Funding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0211314

Award Number: 0211314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick B. Scott pscott@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to conduct a comprehensive summative evaluation
              of the results and impact of the Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher
              Preparation in New Mexico (NMCETP) for a period of three years. Accountability
              & Development Associates, Inc. (ADA), a private consulting firm in Albuquerque
              that has been assisting this CETP with evaluation expertise since 1998, is
              continuing to provide their expertise in this phase of NMCETP operations. The
              project is focusing on the impact of NMCETP on teacher quality and student
              learning in K-12 classrooms with the assistance of facilitators at New Mexico
              State University and the University of New Mexico. The New Mexico teacher
              induction/mentoring programs are in place, but locating, observing, and
              longitudinally tracking NMCETP graduates will be very labor intensive because
              they are located in dispersed, often rural, areas across the fifth largest
              state in the US. For purposes of this evaluation an NMCETP student will be
              defined as any who has 1) completed a degree at one of the NMCETP-participating
              four-year institutions, 2) been certified to teach, 3) secured a teaching
              position in New Mexico, and 4) taken at least one NMCETP new or reformed course
              as a part of pre-service education. These graduates will serve as the NMCETP
              treatment group. Data analysis will be structured to allow for comparisons
              across groups as well as those students who completed more than one NMCETP
              reformed courses. Control group participants will be matched demographically as
              closely as possible to treatment group participants, but will not have
              experienced NMCETP teacher preparation programs. A reformed course is defined
              for NMCETP as a course that has been changed or developed in mathematics,
              science, and education designed to strengthen the backgrounds of pre-service
              teachers by modeling best instructional practices and teaching pedagogies.
              Inquiry-based, hands-on methodologies were touchstones of these reformed and/or
              new courses. Two fundamental areas of inquiry will be the basis of the
              continuation evaluation: 1) post- preparation mathematics and science teacher
              quality, and 2) mathematics and science teacher preparation program
              sustainability. ADA will use instruments developed by the Center for Applied
              Research and Educational Improvement at the University of Minnesota for the
              Core Evaluation. ADA has participated in evaluation meetings in Minneapolis
              hosted by the Core Evaluation staff, and piloted some of the Core instruments
              with modifications to capture the complexities of NMCETP, which has met the
              needs of each participating campus in different ways.
