Title       : Functional Genomic Analysis of Fruit Flavor and Nutrition Pathways
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0211875

Award Number: 0211875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1159280            (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry J. Klee hjklee@gnv.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Giovannoni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Fruits are major components of the human diet contributing a large portion of
              vitamins, minerals, antioxidants, and fiber. While flavor and nutrition
              composition have clear potential for positive human benefit, they have proven
              to be difficult traits to modify via traditional breeding due to their
              generally complex biosynthetic and regulatory pathways. "Flavor" in many fruits
              is the product of a complex interaction among sugars, acids and multiple
              volatile compounds. Synthesis and accumulation of these compounds is the result
              of coordinated activity of many genes. In many cases, the pathways for
              synthesis of these compounds have yet to be established. This program will
              focus on the expression of the genes critical for metabolism of these compounds
              so that key regulators of fruit flavor and nutrient composition can be
              identified and eventually manipulated via the many possible routes available.
              

Specifically, the program will apply gene expression profiling to an
              extensive set of germplasm to 1) map regulatory circuits controlling the levels
              of important components of flavor and nutrition, and 2) identify genes encoding
              enzymes involved in metabolism of these components. Levels of expression of
              most of the genes expressed during tomato fruit ripening will be correlated
              with the abundances of specific metabolites in a diverse set of germplasm
              consisting of mutants, transgenic and recombinant inbred lines. Bioinformatics
              will be used to identify genes whose expression is linked to appearance of
              target compounds. The value of these markers as predictors of chemical
              composition will be tested by genetic mapping and transgenic manipulation.
              These experiments will have broad impact by 1) mapping critical steps
              controlling flavor and nutrition metabolic pathways, 2) identifying specific
              genes involved in either regulation or metabolism of critical components of
              flavor and nutrition, 3) providing useful tools for breeding and engineering
              improved fruit quality, and 4) establishing a correlative public database of
              metabolites  and global gene expression that will be accessible for a broad
              array of ripening-related studies.

