Title       : New Methods and Applications for the Dynamic Characterization of Proteins by the
               Combination of NMR Spectroscopy and Computer Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0211512

Award Number: 0211512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387668             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rafael P. Bruschweiler bruschweiler@nmr.clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to study protein dynamics by nuclear magnetic
              resonance (NMR) and computational approaches. NMR relaxation parameters are now
              routinely measured for the protein backbone, but less so for protein side
              chains. While side-chain relaxation studies have mainly focused on methyl group
              relaxation, the majority of side-chain carbon atoms belong to methylene
              moieties. If not partially deuterated, dipole-dipole cross correlations
              generally make their relaxation behavior and their interpretation difficult.
              New relaxation experiments are developed that efficiently suppress
              dipole-dipole cross-correlated relaxation in fully carbon-labeled proteins. The
              relaxation data will be interpreted in terms of reorientational eigenmode
              dynamics (RED) analysis that integrates NMR relaxation data with molecular
              dynamics simulations for studying motional correlation effects in the ns and
              sub-ns time scale range. Until recently, slower time-scale dynamics of proteins
              in the hundreds of ns to ms range have been very hard to assess for spins that
              do not show exchange broadening. The advent of residual dipolar couplings is
              now opening up this time window for comprehensive experimental investigations.
              By applying and improving the recently introduced model-free approach that uses
              dipolar coupling data in a variety of alignment media with different alignment
              tensors, protein dynamics on these slower time scales will be investigated for
              the protein backbone as well as for the side chains. The dynamics information
              will be retrieved in the form of averaged spherical harmonics that define an
              order parameter as well as the anisotropy of motion. Realistic analytical
              motional models will be developed to characterize motions of local protein
              fragments as well as collective motions involving amino-acid groups and whole
              secondary structural elements. 

Structural dynamics of proteins play an
              important role in biochemical processes. Detailed information on protein
              dynamics at an atomic level is of fundamental importance for understanding
              their function. The overall goal of this research is the exploration and
              development of new experimental and computational methods for a comprehensive
              description of complex protein dynamics on widely different time scales and to
              demonstrate their applicability to biologically relevant systems. 

