Title       : Conference: The Gordon Research Conference on the Molecular Basis of Microbial
               One-Carbon Metabolism; July 7 - 12, 2002, New London, Connecticut
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0211238

Award Number: 0211238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Krzycki   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlyle B. Storm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      The Gordon Research Conference on the Molecular Basis of Microbial
              One-Carbon Metabolism will be held this coming summer. This will be the third
              such meeting to be held as a Gordon Research Conference, but it is the eleventh
              in a twenty-seven year old tradition. This meeting brings together a diverse
              group of researchers who study a wide variety of microbes from the Eucarya,
              Archaea and the Bacteria that are unified by their metabolism of one-carbon
              compounds, and thus often use common genes and enzymes. The C-1 compounds
              metabolized by these organisms are of global environmental impact and many are
              of industrial interest. The pathways studied have implications for studies in
              evolution, structural biology, enzyme  mechanism, gene regulation, ecology, and
              applied biology. With recent advances in the biochemical, molecular biological,
              genetic, and genomic techniques used to examine C-1 utilizing microbes that
              have greatly augmented recent fundamental discoveries, the field is robust, and
              this vigor is reflected in the diverse selection of speakers representing
              different disciplines interested in microbial C-1 metabolism. 
       Previous
              year's conferences have been resounding successes, and have provided impetus
              and inspiration to both the established scientist and to those who are still in
              training. The dedicated nature of the conference to microbial C-1 metabolism
              provides a otherwise unavailable opportunity for the attendees to meet and
              interact with those sharing similar interests from around the globe. The
              auspices of the GRC provide an excellent environment in which the interaction
              of younger and more established scientists is fostered, and concerted efforts
              have been made by the organizers to have junior scientists share the main
              speaking platform with more seasoned workers. Partial funding for the
              conference is sought which will be used to establish a fellowship fund for
              those younger scientists who otherwise might lack the means to attend the
              conference. In addition, support is needed to in part defray the registration
              costs of speakers and discussion leaders.

