Title       : Biochemistry of the Anaerobic Dehalogenation of Chlorinated Aromatics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0211730

Award Number: 0211730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen W. Ragsdale sragsdale1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1166,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This study looks at a genus of microbes, Desulfitobacteria, that can detoxify
              halogenated organic pollutants such as polychlorinated biphenyls  (PCBs).  PCBs
              are listed as a "dirty dozen" persistent organic pollutant (POP) that, although
              banned, remain in the environment and cause lasting damage to animal health and
              the environment.  The long-term goal is to help achieve the aim of a 2001
              United Nations treaty to phase out and eventually eliminate these POPs.  Thus a
              better understanding of how to accelerate the natural biodegradation of such
              compounds would be of  significant value to society.  Through a process known
              as dehalorespiration, these microbes biodegrade halogenated compounds while
              gaining metabolic energy.  When Desulfitobacteria sense the presence of a
              halogenated compound, they produce a host of proteins that enable them to
              remove the chlorine substituent, which is the first step in its detoxification.
               A manifold of techniques are used to study dehalorespiration, including
              enzymology, molecular biology and genetics, spectroscopy, and electrochemistry.
               The first objective of this project is to elucidate the catalytic mechanism of
               the dehalogenase enzyme, which removes the chlorine substituent.  To achieve
              this aim, each of the steps in the dehalogenase catalytic cycle will be
              elucidated and the role of the metal cofactors (vitamin B12 and the iron-sulfur
              clusters) will be determined.  The second objective is to study the
              transcriptional regulatory protein (CprK) that controls when and how much of
              the dehalorespiration proteins are produced.  When CprK binds dilute solutions
              of the halogenated compound, it attaches to a specific DNA regulatory sequence
              and accelerates the rate of production of the components of the
              dehalorespiration system. Interactions between the transcriptional regulatory
              protein (CprK) and the xenobiotic and between CprK and the DNA sequence will be
              studied.  This project also includes plans to promoting teaching, training and
              learning; to enhance the University of Nebraska research infrastructure; and to
              broadly disseminate the research results.
