Title       : Functional Genomics of Phytophthora-Plant Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0211659

Award Number: 0211659
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1891617            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sophien Kamoun   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Waugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant pathogenic  microbes have the remarkable ability to manipulate
              biochemical, physiologc al
and morphological processes in their host plants.
              These manipulations are achieved through a
diverse array of virulence and
              avirulence factors that  an either promote infection or trigger
defense
              responses. Oomycetes, such as Phytophthora, downy-mildews and Pythium, form
              a
unique branch of eukaryotic plant pathogens with an independent evolutionary
              history. Among
the oomy etes, Phytophthora spp. cause some of the most
              destructive plant diseases in the
world, and are arguably the most devastating
              pathogens of dicot plants.  or example,
Phytophthora infestans, the Irish
              potato famine pathogen, causes late blight, a disease that
results in
              multibillion-dollar losses in potato and tomato production and is considered
              a
significant threat to global food security. Structural genomics studies of
              Phytophthora are well
under way within the framework of the Phytophthora
              Genome Consortium. However, despite
their economic  impact and singular
              phylogeny, oomycetes remain relatively understudied at a
molecular level and
              key molecular events modulating basc  pathogenicity and plant response
remain
              poorly understood. The overall obje tive of this project is to use the
              technology of virus-mediated 
gene expression to carry out high throughput fun
              tional screening of P. infestans
genes in plants. The specific objectives are
              to:
1. Perform high throughput functional expression screening of P. infestans
               DNAs in tomato and
tobacco using a potato virus X (PVX)-based vector to
              identify  DNAs that indu e resistance
responses, disease-like symptoms and/or
              altered disease susceptibility.
2. Characterize the selected P. infestans 
              DNAs and the encoded proteins with regards to
primary sequence, gene
              expression, biological activity, and cellular localization during
              infection.
3. Characterize the molecular and cellular responses of tomato and
              tobacco to the sele ted P.
infestans  DNAs.
The transient nature of the PVX
              expression system and the use of a recently developed
Agrobacterium binary PVX
              vector will allow functional analysis of pathogen genes at an
unprecedented
              high throughput rate. The functional screening will unravel a battery of
              novel
Phytophthora genes that trigger a variety of cellular and molecular
              responses in plant cells and
will firmly establish functional connections
              between pathogen genes and plant processes. The
knowledge gained from these
              studies will provide significant insight into key molecular
processes
              regulating an economically important pathosystem and will provide novel tools
              for
improvement of disease resistan e in crop plants. Information and material
              generated from this
project will be made freely available to the s ientific
              community through an interactive website
that will include an annotated
              database of the selected  DNAs and  corresponding phenotype
and expression
              data. The project will also offer outstanding opportunities for interdis
              iplinary
training and outreach activities in functional genomics and
              bioinformatics revolving around the
use of spectacular functional assays,
              historically and economically important disease
pathosystems, and challenging
              concepts on the interaction between plants and microbes.
