Title       : In-Situ High-Temperature Ferroelastic Phase Transformations in Oxide Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0211139

Award Number: 0211139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327313             (Estimated)
Investigator: Waltraud M. Kriven w-kriven@staff.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A compact, thermal-image furnace has been developed in conjunction with
              synchrotron radiation to collect in situ high-temperature powder diffraction
              data on selected oxide ceramics in air up to 2400 C.  The experimental data is
              analysed and compared with theoretical predictions by the Rietveld
              crystallographic, profile fitting technique. The ultimate aim of this research
              project is to investigate detailed mechanisms of crystal structure changes
              involved in ferroelastic phase transformations in selected materials, using in
              situ synchrotron XRD, hot stage optical microscopy and TEM techniques. 
              Specifically, phase transformations involving negligible or zero volume
              changes, but possibly some unit cell shape changes will be focused upon.  Phase
              transformations in tantalum oxide (Ta2O5) and lanthanide tantalates (LnTaO4),
              as well as lanthanide aluminates will be studied. In this manner, the
              structure-property relationships of the materials could be better understood
              and tailored for application, e.g., in toughening mechanisms, large force
              actuation and shape memory ceramics.  Preliminary studies will be made on some
              of the mechanical properties of key ferroelastic materials
 
This objective
              of this project is to undertake in-situ high-temperature studies of phase
              transformations in oxide ceramics, using our newly-invented, thermal-image
              furnace, capable of 2400 C in air, in conjunction with synchrotron radiation. 
              The emphasis is on oxide materials exhibiting polymorphic phase
              transformations, especially of a ferroelastic nature, at elevated temperatures.
               This is inline with our on-going research efforts in identifying potential
              materials with new, energy absorbing mechanisms, which have applications in the
              design of tough, high-temperature composites.  Furthermore, as a result of
              domain rearrangement by ferroelastic mechanisms, potential applications are
              possible in large force actuation and shape memory behavior.

