Title       : Functional Characterization of Two Distinct TCR Beta Genes of Teleosts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0211785

Award Number: 0211785
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Churchill McKinney cmckinne@microbio.umsmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Melanie R. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mississippi Med Cen
	      2500 North State Street
	      Jackson, MS  392164505    601/987-3500

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The TCR beta chain constant (TCRBC) regions of both channel catfish and bicolor
              damselfish are encoded by two substantially different genes in contrast to the
              situation in mammals where these two genes are extremely similar.  The
              objective of this project is to test the hypothesis that these major
              differences in fish TCRBC are important for immune functions. Determination of
              V region usage and expression of the two TCRBC in catfish will indicate whether
              the two genes use the same V region repertoire and whether cells expressing
              these genes are compartmentalized within host tissues. Development of
              monoclonal antibodies directed toward the two TCRBC gene products as well as
              antibodies to catfish CD3 epsilon and zeta family members (zeta and Fc-gamma)
              will be used in immunoprecipitation and Western blot analyses to differentiate
              members of the TCR receptor complex. Cloning of catfish lymphoid cells lines
              expressing different TCRBC region genes will allow in vitro comparisons of
              antigen-binding and receptor signaling processes using uniform cell
              populations. To identify the membrane associated accessory molecules used by
              cells bearing the different TCR receptors and to determine the initial
              signaling events following ligation of the TCR, two types of experiments will
              be done. First, the composition of immune synapses will be defined following
              receptor ligation using antibody reactive with TCR complex members or cholera
              toxin.  Secondly, the generation of intracellular signals including tyrosine
              phosphorylation and calcium mobilization will be measured. If differences in
              accessory molecules or signaling capacities are observed, hybrid genes formed
              from C region exons of both TCRB will be used to distinguish which portion of
              the C region influences the observed differences. Thus, these experiments will
              determine whether divergent TCRBC segments have the ability to recruit or
              activate different signaling peptides. Regardless of the outcome, these
              experiments will define the TCR complex used in catfish.  The phylogenetic
              significance of two very divergent TCRBC genes is unknown, but is potentially
              important for understanding the evolution of immune reactivity in all
              vertebrates. This project will determine whether the C regions of the two TCRB
              proteins have different regulatory functions or merely serve as scaffolds for
              assembly of TCR alpha/CD3/zeta and for holding the variable region distal to
              the membrane. 

Two substantially different T cell receptors are used by
              lymphocytes from certain fish species whereas those used by mammalian cells are
              essentially identical.  The goal of this research is to understand the impact
              of these fish T cell receptor differences on immune and host defense functions.
               This project will determine whether or not the different T cell receptors are
              capable of using the same antigen-binding segments, and thus directing immune
              function toward similar pathogens.  The research will also determine whether
              the two different T cell receptors use the same mechanisms to communicate with
              the inside of the cell, thus influencing the type or magnitude of ensuing
              response.  At present, the significance of these fish T cell receptor
              differences is not known, but may be important for understanding changes in
              host defense capabilities during evolution.

