Title       : Statistical Mechanics of Gene Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0211308

Award Number: 0211308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terence T.-L. Hwa thwa@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This theoretical research is funded jointly by the Divisions of Materials
              Research and Molecular and Cellular Biology.  Rapid advances in genomic and
              molecular technology have led to much excitement and opportunities in molecular
              biology.  A hugh amount of data have already been collected on genomic
              sequences, gene expression profiles, and protein-protein interactions. 
              System-level issues involving gene, protein, and cellular networks have emerged
              as the new challenges in quantitative understanding of molecular and cellular
              biology.  This research will study system-level issues in the context of gene
              regulation.  An explicit model will be used to describe the combinatoric
              control of gene expression, and using simple generic interactions of
              transciption factors with each other and with their DNA building sites. The
              model will be used to investigate how the molecular components may be put
              together to implement regulatory functions of increasing complexity, and how
              these regulatory systems can in turn be coupled to each other to form genetic
              networks exhibiting robust patterns of gene expression.  A key feature of this
              model is the identification of a subset of interactions that can be tuned by
              simple manipulation of DNA sequences in the regulatory regions.  They are
              referred to as "programmable" parameters and can be individually adjusted by
              the system in order to implement the imposed functional requirements.  The
              model can be cast in the form of an interacting spin system, and shares
              striking similarities with the "recurrent networks" studied in neural networks.
               It can also be reduced to a more versatile Boolean description in some cases. 
              Analytical and numerical studies will be done to characterize the properties of
              the networks, e.g., the complexity of the regulatory functions the system can
              implement, and the capacity of the stable expression patterns the network can
              maintain.  In particular, a stochastic "supervised learning rule" resembling
              the evolutionary dynamics of regulatory sequences will be studied to search for
              the programmable parameters of the system that best achieve the desired
              functional responses.  This dynamics can therefore be used also to study the
              evolvability of the regulatory control systems and the gene networks.  The
              evolution of the stability and complexity of these regulatory and interactive
              gene systems will also be studied.
%%%
This theoretical research is funded
              jointly by the Divisions of Materials Research and Molecular and Cellular
              Biology.  Rapid advances in genomic and molecular technology have led to much
              excitement and opportunities in molecular biology.  A hugh amount of data have
              already been collected on genomic sequences, gene expression profiles, and
              protein-protein interactions.  System-level issues involving gene, protein, and
              cellular networks have emerged as the new challenges in quantitative
              understanding of molecular and cellular biology.  This research will study
              system-level issues in the context of gene regulation.
***

