Title       : Photophysics of Metal-Organic and Organometallic pi-Conjugated Oligomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0211252

Award Number: 0211252
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk S. Schanze kschanze@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1968,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research by Professor Kirk S. Schanze of the University of Florida to
              pursue studies on the "Photophysics of Metal-Organic and Organometallic
              pi-Conjugated Oligomers".   Pi-conjugated polymers and oligomers comprise a new
              generation of molecular materials with technologically useful optical,
              electronic, and opto-electronic properties.  Research is underway to
              investigate the excited state properties of mono-disperse pi-conjugated
              oligomers that contain transition metal chromophores to gain a molecular level
              understanding of their excited state properties.  Objectives include an
              understanding of how transition metal chromophores modify the excited state
              properties of the pi-conjugated organic systems and how the pi-conjugated
              molecules modify the excited state properties of the metal complexes,
              particularly the properties of the triplet-pi, pi* manifold of the conjugated
              oligomer.  Metal ion complexes involved in metal-to-ligand charge transfer
              (MLCT) excited states include Ru(II), Os(II) and Rh(III) with alpha-thiophene
              oligomers that modulate the energy gap between the MLCT and triplet-pi,pi*
              manifolds in both mono- and polynuclear complexes.  The excited state
              properties of platinum-acetylide oligomers will be examined to provide clear
              information concerning the spatial extent of the singlet-pi,pi* and
              triplet-pi,pi* excitons and to understand how inter-chain interactions modify
              the excited state properties of the pi-conjugated Pt-acetylides.

The
              photochemistry of pi-conjugated molecules attached to transition metal ions are
              being investigated as to their basic photophysical properties with applications
              that include novel electronic light-emitting devices, light-to electrical
              energy conversion, laser light protection, and plastic electronic circuits. 

