Title       : International Conference on Mathematics in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0211991

Award Number: 0211991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17040              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis J. Gross gross@tiem.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne M. Lenhart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1649,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigators organize an international conference on
mathematics in
              biology.  The theme of the conference is
"Interdisciplinary Connections and
              Living Systems."  The goals of
the meeting are to highlight current top-level
              research, to
provide a perspective on future research areas, to
              provide
opportunities for career development to junior researchers, and
to
              foster interactions between established researchers and junior
researchers. 
              The conference is linked with a short course on the
mathematics of biological
              complexity designed for biologists, in
order to provide opportunities as well
              for new collaborations to
develop between empirical researchers and
              theoreticians.
     Quantitative approaches are becoming central to
              all
components of research in the life sciences.  With the rapid
expansion of
              bioinformatics, computational biology, and
proteomics, the underlying
              mathematical approaches that are
essential to these fields are recognized as
              critical to further
developments.  Applications of mathematics to many areas
              that
directly affect humans allows us to better evaluate the impacts
of
              alternative management of natural systems, develop new
techniques useful in
              biotechnology, and design more appropriate
responses to health problems.  The
              rapid developments in these
areas require opportunities in particular for
              young researchers
to gain perspective on the broad range of subjects that
              now
define mathematical biology.  The conference provides a method to
carry
              this out as well as allowing younger researchers to
participate in a formal
              mentoring program designed to enhance
their ability to pursue a successful
              scientific career.

