Title       : Emerging Party Systems in Post-Soviet Societies: How Developed Are They?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0211345

Award Number: 0211345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59216              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur H. Miller arthur-miller@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Klobucar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              



Recent political science literature reflects a growing controversy
              regarding the formation of political parties and party systems in post-Soviet
              societies. The eventual outcome of the controversy holds implications for a
              basic understanding of how party systems form and the role parties play in
              developing democracies.  The substantive debate is focused on the question of
              whether or not the political parties that have emerged in the newly independent
              states of the former Soviet Union exhibit the types of political
              characteristics that allow us to conclude that they constitute a competitive
              multi-party system. 

Two distinct camps have emerged on either side of this
              query. One set of scholars, drawing upon traditional theories of party
              formation, argues that the formation of institutionalized party systems in
              post- Communist states will be a long and arduous process because these
              societies lack previous multi-party socialization. They see the current
              post-Soviet parties as ephemeral, lacking a firm foundation in policy
              differences, thus reflecting nothing more substantial than a fan club for the
              party's leader.  On the opposite side of the argument, research from the early
              to mid-90s reveals a rapid rise in the proportion of post-Soviet citizens who
              identify with a political party and who vote for the party with which they
              identify. Other work also shows the development of party factions within the
              parliaments of the newly independent states. Collectively this research
              supports theories of endogenous party formation which suggest that parties,
              partisan support and possibly even party systems can form relatively quickly in
              response to contemporary political events and issue or ideological
              polarization. 

The proposed study provides the first comparative data on
              Russia and Ukraine that incorporates directly comparable evidence on the level
              of institutionalization currently attained by party organizations, parties in
              the electorate and the parties in government. What this proposal seeks is
              funding for cleaning, documenting, analyzing and releasing four recently
              collected data sets that deal with political parties as organizations (based on
              surveys with party activists) and as parties in the electorate (based on
              comparable surveys with ordinary citizens). 

These data, once they are
              cleaned and documented, would provide the very first comprehensive examination
              of party organizations in post-Soviet societies. The data will provide a
              benchmark for any future studies of party development in these new democracies.
              In addition, when combined with the survey data on ordinary citizens and
              parliamentary members this study promises to provide the most defmitive answer
              to the party formation debate outlined above. Moreover, the study promises to
              shed new light on the question of whether or not political parties function in
              a manner that provides a link between ordinary citizens and their elected
              representatives. Many other substantive questions could also be addressed with
              these data when they are released to the general academic community for
              secondary analysis. 




