Title       : Microarray/Mutation Studies to Identify New Virulence Genes in Erwinia
               Chrysanthemi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0211750

Award Number: 0211750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111621             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Cooksey Cooksey@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ching-Hong Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Substantial empirical evidence indicates that pathogenic bacteria express
              virulence genes at high levels only when they infect a host.  Indeed, it is
              likely that pathogens that can exist in various alternative ecological niches
              express unique gene sets in all of them.  Using microarray and in vivo
              expression technique (IVET), the gene expression pattern of a plant pathogenic
              bacterium, Erwinia chrysanthemi, grown in its leaf host as compared to growth
              in laboratory culture medium was studied.  These results have offered powerful
              insights into new pathogen genes that are important for virulence.  In
              particular, a substantial number of class III virulence genes were upregulated
              in planta.  The class III genes do not appear to be directly involved in
              damaging the host, as is the case with class I and II virulence genes, but are
              probably important in adapting the pathogen to survive and grow in the host
              environment. Mutations in several of the plant upregulated E. chrysanthemi
              genes were constructed.  Mutations in a putative class I virulence gene
              encoding a previously unidentified peptide synthase, and two novel class III
              virulence genes, all greatly reduced virulence of the bacteria on host African
              violet leaves.  The objectives of this project are to: (i) continue screening
              of host upregulated genes by IVET; (ii) perform systematic mutation and
              virulence assays of host upregulated genes obtained from IVET and previous
              microarray assays; and (iii) identify virulence genes regulated by the
              pathogenicity gene cluster hrp of E. chrysanthemi by functional cloning in E.
              coli cells carrying the cloned E. chrysanthemi hrp gene cluster.  These
              cross-complementary approaches are expected to identify new genes important for
              bacterial virulence on plant hosts.
