Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Globalization, Gender and Inequality in Rural
               Greece
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0211303

Award Number: 0211303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald M. Sider   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Graduate School
	      365 Fifth Avenue
	      New York, NY  100164309    212/817-7523

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0211303
Sider

This research project focuses on changes that have occurred
              over the last two decades concerning the social organization of labor in
              agricultural communities of Greece. Since the early 1980's Greek agriculture
              has become increasingly dependent on immigrant labor. At the same time women,
              who were traditionally an important source of labor in the subsistence
              economies of Greek villages, have been increasingly incorporated into the
              formal economy. Both these developments reflect the growing integration of
              Greece into transnational and global networks of exchange, particularly since
              its entry into the European Union, and have often been represented as the
              modernization and democratization of the Greek countryside. However, these
              developments also represent a fundamental transformation in the reproduction of
              social inequality from an older discursive framework centered on gender and
              kinship to a newer discourse centered on ethnicity and citizenship. This
              research project will examine shifting discourses of inequality in a rural
              Greek community as it has changed from a dependence on gendered, kin-organized
              labor to immigrant labor. Using methods of participant-observation and
              discourse analysis, the student will map out the relationship between the
              construction of gender and national ideologies and the mobilization of
              agricultural labor. The student will collect data both on how people think
              about inequality and on how social stratification is organized in order to
              uncover the processes by which social inequality is being reproduced at the
              local level. The project will advance our understanding of contemporary
              processes of globalization and their implications for local social
              organization. It will also advance our understanding of the roles of gender and
              ethnicity in Mediterranean social organization.


