Title       : Digital Lenses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0211283

Award Number: 0211283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Hicks ahicks@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Rosen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              During the past twenty years, the field of micro-electro-mechanical systems
              (MEMS) has developed remarkable capabilities and the possible applications are
              only beginning to be grasped. The combination of micro technology with optics
              to form micro-optical-electro-mechanical systems, or MOEMS, has already borne a
              considerable number of applications, projection technology being the most
              prominent. Recently, these devices have proved invaluable for switching in
              optical networks.

The MOEMS technology that we are most concerned with here
              is the digital micromirror array. These devices consist of a chip covered with
              an array of small mirrors, each of whose orientation may be separately
              controlled. We propose to use this type of technology for the purposes of
              imaging, rather than projection. By using mathematical tools developed for
              omnidirectional sensor design in computer vision, these arrays may be
              dynamically configured to mimic the behavior of curved mirrors. Additionally,
              due to their small size, micromirror arrays can change state very rapidly. The
              potential applications of such a technology are numerous, including as
              omnidirectional sensing, high resolution image acquisition and
              surveillance.

This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of 
              Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences
              (DMS).
