Title       : New Multicomponent SMB/Chromatographic Separations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0211208

Award Number: 0211208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296068             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip C. Wankat wankat@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chenchou Chiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing a number of improved simulated moving-bed (SMB)
              systems for both binary and ternary separation problems.  Selective partial
              withdrawal (removal of product during only part of the cycle) and dual product
              withdrawal (use of two product lines for the same product) are analyzed for
              both the raffinate and extract streams for 3 and 4-zone SMB systems.  Detailed
              computer simulations are used to optimize flow rates.  A number of additional
              new SMB cascades are being devised in the course of the research.  These new
              cascades are designed to result in better separations while using less or the
              same amount of desorbent.  This research uses detailed simulations to delineate
              binary separation problems for which the new SMB cascades have lower desorbent
              use and/or higher productivity than a standard 4-zone SMB while obtaining the
              same product purities. The most promising candidates are selected for
              experimental confirmation. Since ternary SMB separations are becoming
              increasingly important, particularly in the pharmaceutical industry, a number
              of new ternary SMB cascades are also being examined for both complete
              separation of the ternary system and for the case where only one product is
              desired from the ternary feed.  SMB cascades for quaternary feeds will also be
              analyzed.  Adsorption simulators are being introduced into graduate-level
              chemical-engineering courses.  


Simulated Moving Bed (SMB) adsorption
              systems have proven to be the most cost effective method for doing large-scale
              chromatography for binary separations and have been commercialized for a number
              of separations such as p-xylene purification, separation of fructose and
              glucose, and, most recently, optical isomer separations.  SMB systems are
              considered to be expensive separation techniques, with costs dominated by
              desorbent use and productivity.  If successful, this research will conclusively
              prove that desorbent use and productivity can be significantly improved
              compared to current 4-zone SMB technology.  The new cascades being developed
              for binary separations will significantly increase the productivity without
              increasing desorbent use, while the new cascades being developed for ternary
              separations will significantly increase the productivity and decrease desorbent
              use.  These new designs will have a significant impact on the design of SMB
              systems for industrial separations and hence on product cost.

