Title       : MAP Kinase Phosphatase and Cell Fate in the Drosophila Eye
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0211975

Award Number: 0211975
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $625000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Moses   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1190,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Perhaps our greatest remaining scientific challenge is to understand the
              biological basis for human consciousness.  To approach this we need knowledge
              of neurophysiology, systems neurobiology and the emergent properties of the
              human brain as a whole.  However, an important component is also to understand
              neural development, which involves the progressive unfolding of genetic
              information during development, through systems of signals between cells.  This
              investigator uses a simple system which is technologically accessible to model
              the development of the nervous system: the developing eye of the fruit-fly
              Drosophila melanogaster.  The fly eye is comprised of about 800 similar facets.
               Four days after fertilization, patterning begins when an indentation (called
              the morphogenetic furrow) begins at the back of the future eye and sweeps
              forward to the front edge.  A new column of precisely spaced cell clusters is
              laid down every two hours, and these found the eye facets.

	This
              investigator, and others, have found that the furrow involves the interaction
              of a small number of molecular signals.  One positive and one negative
              signaling protein act together, ultimately to control the activity of a
              crucial, central enzyme in the target cells: MAPK.  A simplified view is that
              the instruction of a cell to be a neuron is the activation of MAPK.  Recently,
              this investigator has used NSF funding to show that the two signals can
              integrate at the point of MAPK activity, through negative feedback via an
              enzyme that inactivates MAPK.  Four questions will now be pursued: 1) How does
              the negative signal control the inactivating enzyme?  2) Does this enzyme act
              on MAPK alone?  3) Does this enzyme act in other developmental processes?  4)
              Does the new enzyme interact with other pathways?

	Beyond his scientific
              work, this investigator makes service contributions to his field (organizing
              conferences, peer review for NSF, NIH and twenty different journals) and trains
              PhD students and post-doctoral fellows.  His wider contributions include
              mentoring high-school and undergraduate students and a high-school teacher.  He
              also participates in a program to co-train post-doctoral researchers in
              teaching as well as research, in partnership with local historically black
              colleges.

