Title       : A Set of Maize Transgenic Lines for Localized Mutagenesis Based on the Ac-Ds
               Transposon System Mutagenesis Based on the Ac-Ds Transposon System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0211547

Award Number: 0211547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugo K. Dooner dooner@waksman.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goals of this NSF Plant Genome project are to demonstrate that the
              transposon Ac (Activator) can be used as a gene identification and isolation
              tool, as well as a mutagen, in the complex maize genome, and to develop the
              necessary tools to facilitate that use. The first goal was met in the initial
              phase of this project where Ac was shown to insert exclusively in or close to
              genes and to be, therefore, an excellent gene-searching engine in the highly
              repetitive maize genome. A highly embryogenic bz wx inbred line was developed
              and transformed with Ac* and Ds* constructs that had been modified to
              facilitate the PCR isolation of the transposon-adjacent sequence. The main goal
              of the second phase of this project is to create a comprehensive set of
              transgenic lines that will serve as starting points for the production of
              future insertion libraries. This phase will occur in two well-defined stages.
              The first will be to demonstrate the germinal transposition of an engineered
              Ac* or Ds* element and the ready isolation of DNA adjacent to the transposon.
              The second will be to identify a method of maize transformation that will
              enable the production of a useful set of transposon lines for localized
              mutagenesis. Once the above two objectives have been met, the last stage of the
              project to produce a set of 124 transgenic lines with a uniquely marked element
              at evenly spaced locations in the genome will be initiated. In that set, most
              genes in the maize genome will be within 7 cM of a launching platform and will
              be, therefore, realistic targets in a localized transposon mutagenesis
              experiment. These lines will be deposited in the Maize Stock Center and will
              serve as starting materials for the generation of future insertion libraries by
              interested scientists.

