Title       : Environmental Justice: An Examination of Interaction Between Environmental
               Justice Activists and Opponents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0211105

Award Number: 0211105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68331              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorceta E. Taylor dorceta@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-0211105
Dorceta E. Taylor
University of Michigan

Environmental justice
              advocates oppose locating facilities (like incinerators, landfills,
              waste-treatment plants, and chemical factories) in minority communities in the
              U.S.  They maintain that such facilities expose minorities to disproportionate
              environmental risks, hazards, and dangerous working and living conditions that,
              in turn, lead to impaired health.  Economic conditions are important too
              because activists frequently operate in low-income, minority communities with
              high unemployment.  The environmental justice movement has been opposing
              corporations for two decades, very little is known about the dynamics of the
              movement or its potential for social change.  Hence, this study will examine
              (a) the relationship between the environmental justice movement and their main
              targets of influence or opponents - mainstream environmental groups, the
              government and corporations; (b) the range and effectiveness of movement
              tactics used by environmental justice activists; (c) how movement opponents
              adapt and respond to the tactical innovations of activists; and (d) the
              relationship between resource mobilization and movement insurgency.
This study
              will examine environmental justice activism and government and corporate
              responses to it from 1980-2005.  This time frame captures the full period of
              American environmental justice activism allowing the PI to track the rise of
              the environmental justice movement.  The study will use a multi-method approach
              to data collection and analysis.  The study has three basic components:  (a) a
              newspaper event history analysis of environmental justice issues, (b) an
              analysis of environmental justice organizations' accounting of the activities
              they have been engaged in, and (c) an examination of the amount of funds
              organizations receive from foundations and government (environmental) agencies.
               The researcher will use Lexis/Nexis, OCLC Firstsearch and Proquest to find
              relevant articles that appear in local, regional and national newspapers,
              journals and magazines.  Newspapers will be the primary source of the event
              history analysis.  However, other sources -- like published case studies --
              will be used for contextual information on particular issues.  .  A database
              will be established to record the structure, ideology, and actions in which
              organizations report they have been engaged.  This database will be compiled
              from surveys organizations listed in the People of Color Environmental Groups
              Directory (1994, 2000), from websites and information gathered from funders. 
              The unit of analysis is the environmental justice movement.  Though
              organizational-level data is being collected, analysis will be made at movement
              level.   
This study will provide valuable information on institutional and
              tactical interactions between the environmental justice movement, its opponents
              and supporters.   It will also provide valuable data that will help us better
              understand how environmental justice organizations and corporations frame
              issues, develop mobilizing strategies and cope with conflicts.  The study uses
              social movement theory to examine environmental justice movement dynamics.  It
              expands the boundaries of prior environmental justice research by seeking to
              examine both activist and corporate claims and government actions.  The study
              has the potential to answer questions of significant import as the researcher
              examines the relationship between environmental justice, corporate and
              government actors.


