Title       : Organosulfur Natural Products Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0211269

Award Number: 0211269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rabi A. Musah musah@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will explore the chemistry of unusual organosulfur compounds of
              natural origin.  Initially, new organosulfur compounds from a variety of plants
              in the allium (garlic and onion) genus from Africa, South America and the
              Middle East will be isolated, identified and characterized.  Synthesis and
              study of the organic reaction chemistry of these new organosulfur compounds
              will then be investigated.  Thermal decomposition of the natural products will
              also be studied since this study will be relevant to the fate of the plant
              constituents upon cooking.

With this Minority Research Planning Grant award,
              the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of
              Dr. Rabi A. Musah of the Department of Chemistry at the State University of New
              York at Albany.  Dr. Musah will work on the isolation, identification, and
              characterization of new organosulfur compounds from a variety of plants in the
              allium (garlic and onion) genus from Africa, South America and the Middle East.
               The synthesis and study of the organic reaction chemistry of these new
              organosulfur compounds will then be investigated.  Thermal decomposition of the
              natural products will also be studied since this study will be relevant to the
              fate of the plant constituents upon cooking.  Other plants within the allium
              genus are known to contain compounds with a host of biomedical science
              applications so there is a high probability that new compounds with biological
              activities will be discovered as a result of this work.  Students trained
              during the course of this work will gain skills needed by the speciality
              chemicals and pharmaceutical industries. 
