Title       : Dissecting Phytophthora Resistance In Soybean Using Expression Profiling and
               Analysis of Quantitative Trait Loci.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0211863

Award Number: 0211863
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6764462            (Estimated)
Investigator: Brett M. Tyler bmtyler@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne E. Dorrance  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M A. Saghai Maroof  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Some plant disease resistance genes (major resistance genes) confer high levels
              of resistance against particular pathogens.  These genes have been well studied
              over the past decade. Major resistance genes, however, are generally effective
              only against specific strains of a pathogen, and so become ineffective in the
              field when new pathogens strains appear.   In contrast, partial or quantitative
              resistance is effective against all strains of a pathogen, albeit providing a
              lower level of protection.   Multiple genes confer partial resistance, each
              making minor contributions, complicating the study of these genes.  As a
              result, less is known about how they operate. 

The goal of this project is
              to understand the mechanisms of quantitative resistance of soybean against the
              oomycete pathogen Phytophthora sojae, which is one of the most damaging soybean
              diseases. Oomycetes are fungus-like organisms that are actually most closely
              related to brown algae such as kelp and diatoms.  Phytophthora pathogens attack
              thousands of plant species, including many important crops. 

Two approaches
              will be combined to identify and characterize quantitative resistance genes. 
              First, genetic crosses between soybean cultivars differing in their
              quantitative resistance to Phytophthora will be analyzed to identify genetic
              loci (called quantitative trait loci or QTL) in soybean that contribute to
              resistance.  Second, the expression levels of thousands of soybean and
              Phytophthora genes during infection will be assayed using hybridization
              microarrays to determine the mechanisms of resistance contributed by different
              quantitative resistance loci. Pathogen gene expression patterns will be
              analyzed to determine the impact of plant defense mechanisms on the pathogen.
              Overall, it is anticipated that this research will result in new insights into
              plant defense mechanisms, new genetic and genomic resources for soybean
              researchers and breeders, and new statistical tools for analysis of gene
              expression data.

