Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Biodiversity of Aerobic and Anaerobic
               Alkalithermophiles & Their Industrial Enzymes, Form Alkaline Lakes (Wadi el
               Natron) & Hot Springs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0211100

Award Number: 0211100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Juergen Wiegel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 5944,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0211100
Wiegel

Description: 
This award is for support of a joint research
              project by Dr. Juergen Wiegel, Department of Microbiology, the University of
              Georgia, Athens, Georgia and Dr. Osama Sobieh, Biotechnology Institute, Mubarak
              City for Scientific Research and Technological Application, Alexandria, Egypt. 
              This project has two main goals: first, elucidation of the biodiversity of the
              multifaceted (elevated temperatures, alkaline pH, and (partly) high salt at the
              same time) extremophiles from Wadi el Natron and hot springs in Egypt and the
              characterization of the novel bacteria and second, production of industrial
              enzymes from these extremophiles at the bench scale, i.e., screening for the
              desired industrially important enzymes, optimization of production yields and
              expression of the target genes in a mesophilic host to aid in the purification
              of the thermophilic/stable proteins. Several of these harsh environments have
              been only superficially studied and only very few microorganisms have been
              isolated from them so far. This is especially true for the Natron Lakes of Wadi
              el Natron between Cairo and Alexandria and hot springs close to the Red Sea,
              both expected to harbor unique microorganisms. Only recently a novel group of
              extremophiles, the anaerobic alkalithermophiles, has been established by one of
              the PIs and not much is known about these bacteria 

Scope: 
Many
              biotechnological and industrial applications (e.g., laundry detergents) require
              enzymes, which are stable at elevated temperatures in a highly alkaline milieu.
               This research will identify organisms from a natural source in a foreign
              country that can produce enzymes at these extreme environments.  This
              collaborative project will foster scientific and educational exchanges between
              US and Egypt scientists in the area of biodiversity and industrial enzymes, and
              will support the participation of a U.S. graduate student in this international
              cooperative effort.

