Title       : Ceramics, Colonialism, and Household Practice at Zuni Pueblo, New Mexico, A.D.
               1300-1900
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0211034

Award Number: 0211034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98425              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Mills bmills@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Barbara Mills and her colleagues
              will conduct one year of laboratory analyses to investigate the effects of
              European colonization at Zuni Pueblo.  Zuni was the first Pueblo area reached
              during the Spanish entradas of the 16th century and is an excellent example of
              a Native American community lying on the frontier of colonialism. Like other
              Pueblo areas, population decline, settlement coalescence, religious repression,
              economic oppression, and the adoption of new foods and technologies all took
              place at Zuni while under Spanish, Mexican, and American governance. Although
              the Zuni area has enormous potential for looking at the processes of
              colonialism from an archaeological perspective, past work was conducted prior
              to modern systematic methods of excavations and analysis. A recent excavation
              project conducted by the Pueblo of Zuni has resulted in the first systematic
              collection of materials from one of the contact period Zuni Pueblos - Zuni
              Pueblo itself. Zuni Pueblo (Halona:wa) has been continuously occupied since the
              late 13th century and it provides a unique context to investigate the processes
              of colonialism in a Native American community. This project will support
              analyses of the large collection of ceramics, supplemental funding for
              botanical analyses, and travel for the faunal and botanical analysts to come to
              Arizona to participate in an advanced seminar on the project. Dr. Mills's
              research will include the analysis of ceramic assemblages from over six
              centuries of occupation at Zuni Pueblo, focusing on the following research
              objectives: (1) establishing a baseline chronology for the project; (2)
              investigating the timing and rate of change in Zuni diet and cuisine; (3)
              evaluating the impact of colonialism on the organization of household labor;
              and (4) exploring how Zuni identity was constructed and maintained through
              material culture. Intensive ceramic analyses will be conducted over one year,
              including analyses of production technology, changes in vessel forms, chemical
              analyses of food residues, and design analyses.  The ceramic data will be
              compared to the results of pollen, macrobotanical, and faunal analyses for a
              comprehensive analysis of how diet and food preparation changed through time. 
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide the Zuni
              people with information about their past that is only accessible through
              archaeological research.  It will also provide important insights into how
              cultures in contact interact, including changes in diet and cuisine, labor, and
              identity.


