Title       : Wild Rice Population Dynamics and Nutrient Cycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0211691

Award Number: 0211691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nancy C. Tuchman                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $543068             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Pastor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Populations of plants and animals typically undergo regular oscillations or
              boom-and-bust cycles in nature. Ecologists have long been interested in the
              causes of these oscillations. Ecological theory predicts that any delay in a
              population will cause it to oscillate. Most of the processes that have been
              proposed as causes of delays are purely population processes, such as delays in
              birth rate. But if the recycling of limiting nutrients between decaying plant
              material (litter) and live plants is delayed, this could also cause a
              population to oscillate.

Wild rice is an interesting wetland plant species
              whose populations have long been known to oscillate. Wild rice is an annual
              plant and so the population must meet all its nutrients requirements for growth
              from the release of nutrients in decaying litter from previous years. Almost
              all the nutrients wild rice needs for growth are taken up in a brief window in
              spring-early summer of the year. But litter from the previous year decomposes
              so slowly that it does not even begin to release nutrients until at least the
              end of summer or not even  until the second year of decay. We hypothesize that
              this delay in the recycling of nutrients through decaying litter causes wild
              rice populations to oscillate.

Besides being ecologically interesting, wild
              rice is an important staple food for members of Minnesota's Ojibway (Chippewa)
              tribe. Wild rice harvesting is a defining feature of Ojibway society. Ojibway
              culture includes legends of wild rice spiritual ceremonies conducted during
              harvest time. Wild rice approaches sacred food status and band members identify
              wild rice as a symbol of what it means to be Ojibway. The Ojibway tribe manages
              over a dozen wild rice lakes in northeastern Minnesota for wild rice production
              in as natural a manner as possible. Therefore, what causes oscillations in wild
              rice production is of interest, culturally and scientifically, to tribal 
              members as well as to a wider scientific community. This research will involve
              close collaboration with members of the Fond du Lac band of Ojibway.

The
              effect of delays in nutrient release on wild rice population dynamics will be
              tested by the following three-pronged approach: (1) making long-term
              observations of wild rice productivity, seed production, and nutrient
              availability in sediments in a series of wild rice lakes; (2) manipulating
              litter, nutrient inputs, and seed vs. seedling establishment in large mesocosms
              (stock tanks) and measuring total productivity and nutrient uptake, mean plant
              weight and nutrient uptake, seedling emergence, and nutrient availability; and
              (3) constructing and testing a computer model of wild rice nutrient uptake,
              productivity, litter decay, and seed production and emergence.

Students will
              be recruited from the tribal community college to assist in this work. This
              project will assist tribal biologists in addressing problems of natural
              resource management of significance to Ojibway values and show tribal students
              the potentials of a career in the environmental sciences. The tribe is
              anticipating that the results of this study will provide critical information
              for its development of nutrient criteria specifically for wild rice waters, and
              for improving management decisions from a better understanding of nutrient
              cycling in wild rice ecosystems. 

