Title       : A Re-evaluation of the Earthworks at Tikal, Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0211579

Award Number: 0211579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68492              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Webster DXW16@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Dr. David Webster will use National Science Foundation funding to investigate
              the largest known set of ancient fortifications in the Maya Lowlands of
              Mesoamerica.  When these fortifications were discovered at Tikal, Guatemala, in
              1966, the Classic Maya were widely regarded unique among ancient civilizations
              for their apparent lack of intense warfare.  The earthworks reported at Tikal
              were interpreted as defenses that protected not only the monumental
              architecture at the site core, but also a larger region of about 120 sq km
              where the bulk of the sustaining population lived.  
	Because Classic Maya
              inscriptions could not be read in the mid-1960s, these earthworks constituted
              early convincing evidence contradicting the "peaceful Maya" conception.  They
              also intrigued archaeologists who faced a vexing problem:  how can the
              boundaries of ancient Maya settlements or polities be detected where ruins
              extend more or less continuously over vast regions?  At Tikal the Maya
              themselves provided us with just such boundaries.  	
	Subsequent evidence for
              warfare soon appeared at other Classic sites, such as the earthworks at Becan,
              excavated by Webster in 1970.  Even more important was an avalanche of
              deciphered inscriptions after 1980, which are full of references to war between
              Maya kingdoms.  Historical chronicles from many centers now reveal great
              geopolitical struggles between Maya "superpowers" (Tikal among them) and their
              associated coalitions.  	
	Ironically, the Tikal earthworks have been entirely
              neglected by archaeologists since they were first reported.  Such neglect is
              particularly serious because they were initially described and mapped only in a
              very superficial way, and we have only the poorest grasp of when they were
              first constructed or when they were used.  No one has even confirmed the
              existence of the southern earthwork, which might be better called a rumor.
              Despite this paucity of information, the earthworks loom large in
              reconstructions of Tikal's military struggles and the demographic and
              territorial character of the polity.  
	Our project, slated for the dry season
              of 2003, represents the first phase of a larger effort to better document these
              intriguing features.  We plan to map the entire northern earthwork (about 9 km
              long) determine how it connects (or not) with large swamps on the east and
              west, and also record all associated settlement remains. We also hope to locate
              the more distant and elusive southern earthwork, and at least verify its basic
              features.  Results will set the stage for future excavations to better reveal
              how the earthworks were constructed, and how and when they were used.  We
              especially hope to eventually associate  use of the fortifications with
              recorded episodes of warfare.
	Our research will provide Mayanists with an
              important test of the congruence between historical and archaeological data,
              and the implications of these data for conflict, demography, and political
              organization.  It will also interest all archaeologists concerned with how to
              detect warfare in prehistoric contexts.  Most importantly, it will help us to
              better understand how war and conflict among the ancient Maya fits into our
              larger comparative perspectives about the role of warfare in the evolution of
              all ancient civilizations.

