Title       : Physiological and Biochemical Investigations on the Phototropins: Plant Blue
               Light Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0211605

Award Number: 0211605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Winslow R. Briggs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1136,1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The phototropins (phot1 and phot2) are a unique family of plant photoreceptors
              that bind two molecules of flavin mononucleotide (FMN) as their chromophores.
              Blue and UV-A light cause rapid autophosphorylation of these photoreceptors. In
              all plans thus far investigated, phot1 is associated with the plasma membrane
              and preliminary evidence indicates that phot2 is as well. The phototropins
              participate in phototropism (growth toward a blue or UV-A light source), light
              perception for chloroplast movement (avoidance by mutual shading in high light,
              moving to maximize light interception in low light), stomatal opening, rapid
              inhibition of growth of dark-grown seedlings, and likely solar tracking in
              those species that have that response. The FMN chromophores are bound tightly
              in specialized domains designated LOV1 and LOV2 (domains found in signaling
              proteins that respond to Light, Oxygen, or Voltage). The phototropin LOV
              domains undergo a unique photochemistry involving light-activated formation of
              a flavin triplet state that decays within microseconds to a metastable
              signaling state, a cysteinyl adduct at the C94a) carbon of the FMN. This
              signaling state decays to the dark state in a few seconds or minutes depending
              on which LOV domain is involved. The project will explore how this identical
              initial photochemistry (adduct formation) and biochemistry
              (autophosphorylation) can activate such different processes, some requiring
              cell-cell communication and other entirely cell autonomous. It will also
              explore the roles of the individual LOV domains in these various processes. We
              already know that only LOV2 is required for full autophosphorylation in phot1,
              but that either LOV1 or LOV2 can mediate phosphorylation of phot2. We also know
              that LOV2 is sufficient to restore the phototropic response in a null phot1
              mutant but do not know for any of the other responses. Sorting out the roles of
              the two phototropins and of the individual LOV domains in each of the responses
              is the first major goal of the project. A second major goal is to determine the
              cellular and subcellular distribution of phot2 (we already have this
              information for phot1), information basic to an understanding of its function.
              Finally we hope to identify downstream reacting partners in one or more of the
              responses and determine where the signaling pathways diverge for the different
              responses. 

The phototropins are vital to normal plant growth and
              development for several reasons: first, phototropism is a mechanism to insure
              maximal harvest of light energy for photosynthesis, clearly of importance in
              maximizing plant growth for whatever purpose-food, structural materials, fiber,
              production of medicinal drugs, etc. Second, for plants like cotton that have
              leaves that track the sun and remain at right angles to the direction of the
              incident sunlight the sun's angle changes, solar tracking of mature leaves
              serves the same function: maximizing photosynthesis and hence plant growth.
              Third, leaf expansion is an absolute requisite for photosynthesis. In the
              absence of the phototropins, leaves are dwarfed and curled, and severely
              impaired in their function. Fourth, the capacity to regulate the position of
              the chloroplasts in the leaf cells is essential a) to maximize photosynthesis
              by minimizing mutual shading in dim light, and b) to prevent photodamage to the
              chloroplasts by maximizing mutual shading in very bright light. Finally, light
              regulation of stomatal opening controls the rate at which carbon dioxide is
              taken in for photosynthesis balanced against loss of water. Without this
              regulation, normal photosynthetic function would be severely impaired. Thus
              along with the other known plant photoreceptors, the phytochromes and
              cryptochromes, the phototropins play a vital role in plant development and
              homeostasis. Their role in human welfare is clearly a major one. 


