Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant-- Reconstructing Middle Sican Fuel Use
               in the La Leche River Valley, Lambayeque, Peru (C.E. 950-1050)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a0211364

Award Number: 0211364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11557              (Estimated)
Investigator: Izumi Shimada ishimada@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee A. Newsom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Reconstructing Fuel Use from
              Archaeological 
Charcoal from the Middle Sican Period, Lambayeque, Peru (C.E.
              950-1050).
Under the direction of Drs. Lee Newsom and Izumi Shimada, Mr. David
              J. Goldstein will collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  He will continue
              his participation with the Sican Archaeological Project, a 23-year effort
              headed by Dr. Shimada to reconstruct the prehistory of the Lambayeque and La
              Leche River Valleys.  Mr. Goldstein will be the first scientist-in-residence at
              the newly constructed National Sican Museum in Lambayeque, Peru, to complete
              the analysis of 3 seasons of excavation at Huaca Sialupe a Middle Sican period
              metal and ceramics workshop.  In particular, he will be investigating the
              charcoal remains from metal furnaces, ceramic kilns, and domestic hearths to
              reconstruct the use of fuel resources during the period.  In conjunction, he
              will conduct two-months of systematic forest resource surveys, in the spring
              and fall, to collect comparative botanical materials to complete his analysis. 
              

The present state of forest preservation in the area is dire.  The area is
              sparsely covered by dry tropical forests that presently face destruction in
              light of agricultural clearance and fuel wood harvesting.  This clearance is
              problematic as the local forests enhance soil fertility and raise the
              groundwater level.  It is thought based on experiments carried out by Mr.
              Goldstein and Dr. Shimada's interdisciplinary team, that Middle Sican metal
              production severely impacted forest resources in a similar manner in the past. 
              This threat, due to the fuel intensive nature of ceramic and metal production,
              may have lead to forest conservation measures during the Middle Sican,
              including measured fuel apportioning between different industries.  Through a
              comparison between the different fuel-use contexts at Huaca Sialupe, and other
              sites in the area, he aims to pattern how and which fuels were used in each
              context during this period.  At the same time he will utilize a methodology
              that will investigate the ancient forest ecology in the area.

Mr. Goldstein
              will employ an approach developed by Dr. Newsom based on traditional wood
              anatomy methods to look at the functional growth anatomy of woody plants to
              identify the plants used as fuel and interpret the growth ecology of these
              plants.  To date, no studies of the ancient environment adequately describe the
              stature, extent, and composition of forests present in the area in antiquity. 
              This research will permit the reconstruction of the forest materials available
              to ancient artisans through comparisons with modern specimens and anatomical
              wood keys.  Ideally, the study will yield information on the manner in which
              humans extracted fuel resources from an ecosystem that is viewed as fragile in
              the present day.  Mr. Goldstein's research is a foundation work for the
              development of regional forest resource history, and will demonstrate how
              people used their available resources to provide fuel to satisfy their economic
              and subsistence needs in light of marginal resources.  Potentially, this
              investigation will allow local development projects to argue for patterned
              conservation measures in the area in an effort to preserve the few remaining
              areas still covered by forest today.  



