Title       : RUI Proposal: Learning the Rules that Govern the Folding and Stability of Coiled
               Coils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0211754

Award Number: 0211754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313353             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Fairman rfairman@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to explore the relationship between sequence
              and structure for very long coiled coils, such as found in myosin, using both
              protein folding and design approaches.  Three-pronged approach will be used to
              accomplish the goal.  First, synthetic genes that encode copolymers of 14-amino
              acid blocks will be constructed, whose sequences are based on de novo,
              minimalist-design principles.  These genes will be cloned into expression
              vectors to make dimeric coiled coils that range from 70 residues to greater
              than 1,000 residues per helix.  Specifically, this system will be used to test
              the role of intermediates in the assembly of long coiled coils, such as
              monomeric helix formation and nucleation of specific helix pairing interactions
              to dictate proper phasing of helices.  After expressing and purifying these
              designed proteins, their structures will be characterized using circular
              dichroism, analytical ultracentrifugation, and single molecule techniques such
              as atomic force microscopy and laser tweezing.  Second, to complement these
              design studies, a myosin coiled-coil rod domain will be used as a model system
              for folding studies involving segment swapping between designed and natural
              sequences.  In addition, the myosin coiled coil will be used to help develop
              biophysical protocols for studying designed coiled coils, using the instruments
              described above.  Finally, these synthetic peptide blocks will be used to make
              long copolymers for the study of other coiled coil topologies and higher order
              assembly to form fibrils.  Long copolymers are generated by forming staggered
              helical structures that act as templates for their own head-to-tail
              self-assembly.  Peptides will be synthesized and purified in the laboratory and
              then characterized using the same biophysical techniques described
              above.

The overall goal of this research is to understand the basic
              relationship between protein sequence and structure.  It is still not possible
              to predict protein structure and function from first principles, mainly because
              it is still not understood how proteins balance the major chemical forces in
              attaining their three dimensional shape.  Two approaches have been applied to
              study this problem, defining the fields of protein folding and design.  The two
              questions are the inverse of one another: scientists in the field of protein
              folding ask, "Can we predict the structure of a protein given its amino acid
              sequence?" and those who work on protein design ask, "Can we predict what
              sequence of a protein will result in a target structure?"   Both of these
              strategies will be used in the study of coiled coils.  These structural motifs,
              predicted to be in 1/3 of all proteins, involve the interaction between two or
              more alpha-helices.  The modular design of the experiments will allow students
              to make significant achievements over the course of a summer experience and an
              academic year working towards a senior thesis project.  This cohesive program
              in design, along with a strong modular component, should provide a rewarding
              experience for students interested generally in interdisciplinary sciences,
              including elements of biochemistry and biophysics.

