Title       : Early Nasca Craft Economies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0211307

Award Number: 0211307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76395              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Vaughn vaughnkj@plu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pacific Lutheran Univ
	      
	      Tacoma, WA  984470003    253/531-6900

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Kevin Vaughn will conduct
              three seasons of archaeological research in the Southern Nasca Region (SNR) of
              the south coast of Peru. The focus of the project will be understanding the
              production, distribution, and use of one of the most finely made classes of
              pottery in the Precolumbian Americas associated with the Nasca culture (ca.
              A.D. 1-750). For nearly a century archaeologists have studied Nasca polychrome
              pottery from museum collections, however relatively little work has focused on
              how the pottery fit into the wider sociopolitical and economic contexts of
              Nasca society. In short, research into what can be referred to as the craft
              economy of Nasca has been limited. Based upon preliminary evidence from recent
              fieldwork it appears that the pottery, although a "craft" in archaeological
              terms, is not one that fits easily into traditional models of craft
              specialization proposed by archaeologists. Although polychromes appear to have
              been reserved for individuals of high status in some contexts, recent work
              suggests that much of the pottery was available to all members of society
              regardless of their status. Despite this recent research, fundamental questions
              remain about this craft economy. Specifically, where was the pottery produced
              and in what contexts, how was it distributed and/or exchanged, to what extent
              was it used regionally, and how was this craft economy related to emerging
              leadership in Early Nasca society? This project is designed to address these
              questions in three seasons of fieldwork in the SNR. In order to determine the
              regional availablity of raw materials useful to ancient potters, the first
              season will consist of a material survey in the SNR to locate clays and mineral
              pigments used for the production of Nasca pottery. The elemental composition of
              these materials will then be determined through instrumental neutron activation
              analysis (INAA) and matched with compositional data generated from previous
              analysis to determine if the production of pottery was restricted to a certain
              area of the region and controlled by emerging elites, or if production was
              dispersed and not controlled. Focus in the remaining two seasons will turn to
              evaluating polychrome distribution and use. This will consist of evaluating
              seven Early Nasca habitation sites through mapping and excavations. The data
              collected in these seasons will determine how widely polychromes were
              circulated from the production zones that are delineated in Season #1. Data
              will also be collected to assess the quantities of polychromes used at
              residential sites, whether this was limited to elites, or if polychromes were
              available to everyone, and how this varied across the region. It is
              hypothesized that the farther away from the regional core of Nasca society, the
              greater the importance that polychromes had in tying local elites to
              increasingly exotic goods. The proposed research will add to our understanding
              of why crafts are important in pre-industrial societies, and how craft
              economies articulate with emerging leadership in these societies. This research
              will also increase our understanding of how Nasca polychromes fit into the
              wider sociopolitical and economic domains of Nasca society.
