Title       : Transition to Maize Agriculture Along the Pacific Coast of Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0211215

Award Number: 0211215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186354             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Kennett dkennett@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Douglas Kennett and his colleagues
              will conduct two field seasons of archaeological and paleoenvironmental
              research on the Pacific coast of Mexico.  The primary scientific aim of this
              work is to study the transition to maize agriculture in two different coastal
              settings-one in the state of Chiapas and the other in Guerrero-between 7,500
              and 2,700 years ago (BP). and the impacts that the emergence of intensive
              agriculture had on local environments in each area.  The most recent
              biogeographical and genetic studies indicate that maize evolved from a wild
              grass (teosinte) in the Balsas River Valley, which runs from the central
              highlands of Mexico to the Pacific Ocean.  A domesticated form of maize appears
              to have spread out of the Balsas River Valley as early as 7,500 BP.  One of the
              hallmarks of Middle American civilizations, maize agriculture was well
              established in a variety of different environments by 2,500 BP.  Recent work in
              Middle America indicates that the processes involved in this transition were
              complex and spatially variable.  At a minimum the sequence of events included:
              1) initial domestication of maize; 2) adoption of maize by foragers living in a
              wide range of habitats; 3) subsequent experimentation leading to agricultural
              development or stability of mixed subsistence strategies; 4) ultimate emergence
              of more intensive agricultural strategies in certain locations; and finally 5)
              spread of agricultural economies via adoption or population
              movement/replacement.  In an evolutionary sense, the initial adoption and use
              of key domesticates by foraging populations living in different environments
              was a crucial part of the ultimate development of agrarian life in Middle
              America.  

To study the process of adoption and development this
              multidisciplinary project employs: 1) archaeological survey and excavation of
              sites dating to this transitional interval, 2) off-site sediment coring, and
              associated geomorphological/pollen studies, to detect the initial introduction
              of maize into each area and to track vegetation changes and impacts to the
              landscape associated with intensified agriculture.  The emergence of
              agriculture is one of the most significant transitions in the cultural
              evolution of our species.  Its spread around the world was, and continues to
              be, a complex process and archaeological evidence from different parts of the
              world indicates that the details of this transformation varied greatly,
              particularly the types of domesticates adopted and the resistance of foraging
              populations to use them.  Reconstructing the foraging strategies that were in
              use in a variety of habitats prior to the spread of key domesticates, like
              maize, will provide us with a better understanding of the primary mechanisms
              underlying this fundamental economic transition.

