Title       : Technology Development: Novel Techniques for Discovery of Patterns of Gene
               Regulation Within Complex Eukaryotic Tissues.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0211857

Award Number: 0211857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $625227             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Galbraith galbraith@arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia N. Bailey-Serres  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop novel techniques for measurement of global gene
              expression within eukaryotic organisms which will permit analysis of the
              individual contributions of the different cell types contained within complex
              tissues.  

The project comprises a series of proof-of-concept experiments
              primarily using Arabidopsis thaliana.  Two strategies will be employed.  The
              first is to label nuclei in a cell type-specific manner using the Green
              Fluorescent Protein of Aequorea victoria translationally fused to proteins that
              accumulate within the nucleus.   This will be done by producing transgenic
              plants in which the production of a nuclear targeted form of GFP is under the
              control of cell type specific promoters.  The presence of specifically labeled
              nuclei will be verified by fluorescence microscopy, and the individual
              fluorescent nuclei purified from cellular homogenates using fluorescence
              activated sorting.  RNA will then be extracted from the nuclei and will be
              hybridized to DNA microarrays.  Proof-of-concept will first involve validation
              of the different technical steps of the strategy, using promoters that are
              constitutively active, and then will involve analysis of global gene expression
              within the cell types defined using promoters of known cellular specificities. 
              The second strategy is to label polyribosomes in an analogous cell-type
              specific manner. This will be done through epitope tagging of individual
              ribosomal proteins whose expression is regulated by promoters having cell
              type-specific patterns of expression.  Polyribosomes will then be prepared and
              the associated mRNA employed for microarray hybridization.  Proof-of-concept
              experiments, as before, will involve validation of the technical aspects of
              this strategy with constitutive promoters, followed by use of promoters having
              defined cellular specificities to chart global gene expression patterns within
              these cells.

The expected outcomes of this project are three-fold: a
              molecular toolkit (reagents, recombinant DNA molecules, plant lines), the
              associated descriptions of how to use this toolkit for examination of gene
              expression within living organisms, and the results of the experiments that are
              done to validate the methodology. All outcomes will be freely disseminated to
              the scientific community in a timely manner. The molecular toolkits will be
              provided to interested individuals on request.  The descriptions of the methods
              and the results from the experiments will be posted to the project website and,
              as appropriate, will be published in the scientific literature.  The methods
              are designed to be entirely general in scope, and should be transferable to
              other eukaryotic organisms, including those of other than the plant kingdom. 
              

