Title       : Prehistoric Maize in the Northern Andes: Pollen and Diatom Analyses of the Lake
               San Pablo Core, Ecuador
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2002      
File        : a0211168

Award Number: 0211168
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26923              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Athens iarii@aloha.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IARII
	      2081 Young St.
	      Honolulu, HI  968262231    808/946-2548

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Before the time of Columbus in 1492, maize was "the grain that civilized the New
              World."  Prehistoric maize farming societies were found throughout much of the
              vast continental areas of North and South America except in the most extreme
              environmental zones, and truly advanced social systems occurred in a number of
              areas.  With National Science Foundation support, Dr. J. Stephen Athens seeks
              to contribute to an understanding of how and why maize rose to such importance
              during prehistoric times by analyzing lake sediment cores from northern
              highland Ecuador.  This northern South American study region, situated in a
              temperate valley surrounded by presently and previously active volcanoes, is
              known for its high agricultural productivity and the traditional dependence on
              maize by its past and present indigenous populace.  The study cores are
              expected to contain long Holocene records of maize pollen preserved in the
              sediments.  The deepest appearance of distinctive maize pollen grains in the
              cores will indicate, along with radiocarbon dating, when it was first
              introduced to the region.  Combined with other regional studies, this
              information will help signal not only the timing, but the path of the spread of
              maize south from Colombia and, ultimately, southwestern Mexico, its apparent
              place of origin 7000 to 8000 years ago.  In addition, the study of diatoms,
              which are the microscopic remains of certain types of unicellular algae having
              silica shells, will serve to document the rise and fall of lake levels, in
              effect providing a long term proxy record of regional rainfall.  This will help
              to determine the specific environmental conditions under which the introduction
              and adoption of maize agriculture occurred in the mountains of northern
              highland Ecuador, as well as changing climatic conditions that prehistoric
              agriculturalists may have had to confront through time.  Related questions of
              interest this study will seek to address include 1) whether or not the
              appearance of maize coincides with the earliest appearance of agriculture in
              the northern highland region of Ecuador, or if maize actually post-dates
              initial agriculture; 2) the trajectory of the prehistoric intensification of
              maize cultivation over time; 3) the change of the natural landscape of the
              highland valley to a virtually entirely man-made landscape; and 4) an
              evaluation of the possible effect of major volcanic ash falls on the ecology
              and environment of the inter-Andean valley and the time required for recovery
              (e.g., is there evidence that humans abandoned the valley for a significant
              period following major eruptions?).  

The significance of the research is
              that it will advance our understanding of the history of the single most
              important New World agricultural domesticate, contributing to a baseline of
              information for the spread of maize from Mesoamerica and its adoption by
              indigenous prehistoric societies in the northern Andes.  Information on the
              history of maize in the northern Andes heretofore has been sketchy at best, and
              there have been very few detailed studies of its history of use at any single
              location.  In addition, the study will provide a long term perspective on
              climatic fluctuations, the natural environment, and human ecology in a region
              that is presently densely populated.  Such information may contribute to the
              development and guidance of a variety of public policy issues besides being of
              scientific interest to several disciplines.



