Title       : Effects of Species Composition and Environmental Context on Redundancy Within a
               Functional Group: A Test With Freshwater Mussels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0211010

Award Number: 0211010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caryn C. Vaughn cvaughn@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1182,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Species that are believed to play the same functional role in ecosystems are
              often placed in
functional groups, types or guilds, and redundancy of
              ecological function is predicted to be highest
within such groups. The concept
              of functional groups composed of interchangeable, redundant
species is
              appealing because it simplifies the study and management of ecological
              systems.
However, there are problems limiting the applicability of this
              concept. The degree of redundancy
among species assigned to many functional
              groups or guilds is unknown and we do not understand
the degree to which the
              functional roles of species change with environmental context. The
              vast
majority of our knowledge of species roles and how they are influenced by
              the environment comes
from studies of short-lived, terrestrial plants. We now
              need to broaden our understanding of
species roles in other equally important
              systems.

Freshwater systems, and streams in particular, are losing
              biodiversity at a higher rate than
terrestrial or marine systems, but few
              studies have examined functional redundancy in these
systems. Freshwater
              mussels are a functional group of long-lived, benthic, burrowing
              filter-feeders
that are thought to play an important role in stream ecosystem
              function. Within this functional
group, the potential for redundancy in
              ecological roles should be high because species have similar
life histories,
              typically occur as speciose assemblages, and there is little evidence for
              differences
in microhabitat or resource preferences between species. However,
              we have almost no quantitative
information on either the overall importance of
              mussel assemblages to stream function or the roles
of individual species. In
              recent years, many mussel populations have undergone a drastic decline.
In
              order to predict how this loss of both species and overall mussel biomass will
              impact stream
ecosystems, we must quantify the effects of both overall mussel
              abundance and individual species
on ecosystem processes, and we must
              understand how these relationships may change with
environmental
              conditions.

The proposed research will address the following questions: (1)
              What is the overall importance of
the mussel functional group to stream
              ecosystems? What ecological processes do mussels
perform in streams? How do
              these processes relate to overall mussel abundance/biomass? (2)
Are species
              within the mussel functional group ecologically redundant? Do mussel species
              vary
in their performance of ecological processes? Do ecological effects of
              mussel species within an
assemblage vary based on species composition and/or
              abundance? (3) How are the overall
importance of the mussel functional group
              and effects of species roles within the group influenced
by environmental
              context? Are the ecological effects of the overall mussel assemblage and
              of
individual species constant or do they change with environmental
              conditions? A series of
complementary laboratory stream and field enclosure
              experiments will measure the ecological
function of single and multi-species
              assemblages of mussels under varying abundance and
environmental conditions.
              Laboratory stream experiments will focus on ecological processes
performed by
              mussels (eg. filtering rates, nutrient excretion) and field enclosure
              experiments will
examine the effects of mussels on the rest of the benthic
              community. Small-scale laboratory
experiments and analyses will quantify the
              potential contributions (eg. nutrient excretion and
biodeposition rates) of
              different mussel species to streams under differing conditions, and
mechanisms
              underlying differences in ecological function between species (eg. gill
              morphology,
behavior). Finally, experimental results will be combined with
              quantitative information from an NSF-funded mussel biodiversity inventory to
              make predictions about mussel functional role and
redundancy in different
              stream systems.
