Title       : Collaborative Research: Ecological Correlates of Introgressive Hybridization
               Between Native and Introduced Populations of Salmonid Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0211818

Award Number: 0211818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149286             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret B. Ptacek mptacek@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This proposal focuses on the ecological and genetic impacts of the introduction
              of non-native rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) on native gene pools of
              threatened Yellowstone cutthroat trout (O. clarki bouvieri).  In addition to
              competition, predation and the introduction of disease organisms by introduced
              species, for some native fish species, a major threat is that of hybridization
              with the introduced species.  Hybrids, if fertile, can spread and cause the
              complete replacement of parental genes with those of the introduced species. 
              This study is designed to determine the extent of hybridization between
              Yellowstone cutthroat trout and rainbow trout as well as the degree of genetic
              dilution that has occurred in native gene pools.  In addition, the study will
              also test whether particular features of the environment (temperature,
              elevation, stream flow, etc.) are correlated with the presence or absence of
              pure species or hybrids.  In this manner, the study will determine if
              particular environments favor the spread of hybrid fishes, or provide an
              advantage to the remaining pure populations of Yellowstone cutthroat
              trout.

This study will provide the first documentation of the pattern of
              genetic invasion of rainbow trout and begin to explore the ecological
              mechanisms that are responsible for this pattern.  If environmental correlates
              are found which predict the success of native Yellowstone cutthroat trout over
              hybrids, such habitats can be given top priority for conservation.  Only
              through a combined approach of understanding both the ecological and genetic
              factors that influence the success of invasive species, can we ever hope to
              deter their spread and save native gene pools 

