Title       : Exploring Mode Selective Behavior in State-Resolved Unimolecular Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0211496

Award Number: 0211496
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amitabha Sinha asinha@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Sinha will conduct research on unimolecular reactions that
              deviate from the traditional description by the RRKM statistical theory.  Gas
              phase molecules are prepared in selected ro-vibrational states above the
              dissociation limit of the ground electronic state by double resonance
              excitation.  These excited molecules revert to lower energies, dissociate at a
              given rate, and present a final product state distribution.  The resonance
              energy and the line widths provide information about the potential energy
              surface, whereas the final product state distribution reflects the dynamics of
              the system as it evolves from the transition state to the products.  Systems to
              be investigated include hypochlorous acid, pernitric acid, and methyliodide, as
              these are believed to exhibit non-statistical reaction dynamics.

This
              research deals with fundamental aspects of chemical reactions in the gas phase.
               Whereas many reactions can be described by a statistical theory, there are
              some for which a statistical theory of reactions does not apply.  This research
              is focused on the reaction dynamics of several molecular species for which
              non-statistical behavior is suspected.  The results of this work will add to
              the fundamental understanding of reaction chemistry, and may be applicable to
              problems of atmospheric and combustion chemistry.  Students will participate in
              this research and thereby acquire knowledge and skills in preparation for entry
              into the scientific/technical workforce. 

