Title       : Dissertation Research: "Revitalizing" Salvador: Race, Gender, Black Women and
               Community Organizing in Brazil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0211081

Award Number: 0211081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund T. Gordon etgordon@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 5913,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project--to be conducted in Salvador de Bahia,
              Brazil, by a cultural anthropology student from the University of Texas
              (Austin)--tests hypotheses regarding the roles of women in neighborhood
              political movements, and how the forms of participation affect the relative
              success of their activities. The project examines the efforts of emerging
              neighborhood movements to block or change the course of urban renewal projects
              that are intended to enhance leisure tourism but do so at the expense of black
              residential communities. As a theoretical foundation, the researcher draws from
              feminist theory, critical race theory, and recent work in urban politics. The
              research focuses on the participation of black women as major actors in these
              social movements and their role in grassroots mobilization.  Data collection
              strategies include ethnographic interviews, surveys, participant observation,
              GIS-based mapping and archival research. The results of this study will
              contribute to the body of theory regarding black women's organizing, race
              relations in Brazil, and urban space. The student has established a
              collaborative affiliation with the Department of Human Sciences at the
              Universidade Estadual de Feira de Santana, thus enhancing cooperation in the
              international scientific community.  Additional broader impacts of the project
              include its direct responsiveness to concerns expressed by the World Bank and
              Inter-American Bank about the status of "Afro-Latinos" in economic and
              political development.  
