Title       : Comparative Evolutionary Genomics of Cotton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0211700

Award Number: 0211700
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3800001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan F. Wendel jfw@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The convergence of modern genomic approaches with other areas of biology holds
              great promise for insights into central problems in development and evolution. 
              One of the more vexing challenges has been to unravel the complex relationship
              between morphological and developmental change and evolutionary processes at
              the molecular level.  In this project morphological, evolutionary, and genomic
              approaches will be integrated in an analysis of the genetic basis of the
              developmental transformations that occurred during cotton fiber evolution.  By
              dissecting distinct stages in this morphological series, unparalleled insight
              will be gained into the genes involved in evolutionary transformations of
              cotton fiber during: (a) divergence among wild species; (b) early stages of
              domestication; (c) modern crop improvement; and (d) chromosome doubling. 
              Cotton is unique in that four different species were independently domesticated
              from different wild ancestors, two each in the Old World and New Worlds.  The
              former have two sets of chromosomes (they are "diploid") whereas this number is
              doubled (they are "polyploid") in the latter.  By including all of these
              species, the research will detail the comparative genetics of plant
              domestication and the extent to which parallel selection has led to convergent
              or parallel patterns of gene expression change.  In addition, the experiments
              will shed new light on the intriguing hypothesis that genome doubling has led
              to novel avenues for crop improvement.  Additional experiments will reveal the
              patterns of genome size change among species that vary several-fold in genome
              size, and lead to insights regarding the molecular mechanisms responsible for
              this evolutionary change.  In addition this project will contribute
              significantly to enhancement of the world's leading textile fiber through the
              development of important tools and resources necessary for long-term
              sustainability.  These include an expanded set of expressed sequence tagged
              genes ("ESTs"); a "fingerprint map" for the cotton genome; an improved resource
              of bacterial artificial chromosomes ("BACs") for ready cloning of important
              cotton genes and other uses; and detailed information on gene expression for
              key stages in cotton fiber development.  Human resources will also be
              developed, with special emphasis given to members of historically
              under-represented groups, through myriad connections to undergraduate and
              graduate education, K-12 and outreach efforts, and scientific exchanges.   
