Title       : Time-Resolved Measurements of Secondary Structure Formation in Single-Stranded
               Polynucleotides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0211254

Award Number: 0211254
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $710000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anjum Ansari ansari@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goals of this project are to obtain quantitative information on the
              intrachain dynamics of single-stranded polynucleotides, and to determine how
              these dynamics influence the kinetics of secondary structure formation. The
              kinetics will be monitored using transient absorbance measurements with ~ 10
              nanosecond time-resolution after a laser temperature-jump.  The experiments are
              designed to fill a big gap in the folding studies of RNA molecules, namely the
              time-scales and pathways associated with the collapse of a single-stranded
              chain and the formation of nucleating hairpins, which occur on time-scales of
              several nanoseconds-to-microseconds.  Previous measurements on hairpin
              formation have been limited to microsecond time-resolution and have failed to
              provide a complete picture. In particular, this work will test the hypothesis
              that transient trapping in misfolded conformations is responsible for reducing
              the effective diffusion coefficient for intrachain dynamics and for the
              observed non-Arrhenius temperature dependence of the closing times. Kinetics of
              hairpin formation will be measured for varying stem sequences designed to
              significantly enhance the probability of mis-matched stems; the kinetics will
              also be measured for varying solvent viscosity.  A recent statistical
              mechanical study of the folding/unfolding of a 21-nucleotide RNA hairpin, which
              included misfolded states in the statistical ensemble, predicted biphasic
              kinetics with a rapid phase occurring on sub-microseconds.  This prediction
              will be tested.  Finally, direct measurements of the first contact time between
              the two ends of a single-stranded chain will be measured using triplet-triplet
              energy transfer between a donor and an acceptor attached to the two ends of the
              chain.  To verify the predicted contact times expected for an ideal chain, the
              measurements will be done under conditions where the self-interactions of the
              chain are minimized.  The contact times relevant for hairpin formation will be
              measured under solvent conditions that enhance self-interactions and induce
              local secondary structure.

The significance of this study is to develop a
              quantitative understanding of how a single-stranded polynucleotide organizes
              itself into simple stable structures and to extend the insights gained from
              these simple structures to a deeper understanding of the intrachain dynamics
              and interactions that lead to successively more complex RNA structures. Close
              comparison between kinetics measurements and statistical mechanical studies of
              the folding of RNA will provide an ideal ground to test, not only the details
              of the statistical mechanical models, but also the thermodynamic parameters
              used for predicting secondary structures in single-stranded DNA and RNA. The
              primary educational goals are to implement an undergraduate program in
              Biophysics. A new course for undergraduates "Introduction to Biophysics" will
              be developed as a way of attracting students into the Biophysics major.  A
              higher level course "Molecule and Cell Biophysics" intended for advanced
              undergraduates and beginning graduate students was developed two years ago and
              is now offered each year.

