Title       : Computer Engineering Course for K-12 Teachers Assisted by First-Year ECE
               Undergrads
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0211207

Award Number: 0211207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124593             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Patton patton@eece.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A sophomore-level course will be designed that introduces computer
              engineering
fundamentals to pre-service science and math teachers in a highly
              interactive, hands-on
environment, using active, cooperative learning methods.
              In cooperation with existing
efforts, it will also be adapted to appeal to
              in-service teachers seeking a Masters degree in
science or math education. It
              will illustrate how to use microprocessor based, mini-data
acquisition
              systems, and robotics to create projects demonstrating physics and
              math
concepts satisfying the Maine Learning Results and other national
              education standards.
These materials will be distributed over the web.

A
              unique aspect of this effort will be the recruitment and engagement of
              honors-level
first-year Electrical and Computer Engineering and pre-service
              College of Education
students to help develop curricular content that will
              interest middle and high school
students. In-service teachers will be included
              in the development of pedagogy that
efficiently conveys the engineering
              material to future science and math teachers.

This project will introduce
              the engineering application of science and math, as well as
providing a bridge
              between such informal science innovations as First Robotics, First
Lego
              League, Bot Ball, etc. and the classroom environment. The major benefit,
              however,
to the engineering establishment will be the application of and
              emphasis on engineering
concepts to the science/math K-12 infrastructure.
              Through this course, pre-service and
in-service teachers will be equipped with
              the tools to illustrate engineering principles and
how they relate to concepts
              normally taught in conventional science and math courses.

