Title       : Continued Development and Application of 40Ar/39Ar Dating for Archaeometric
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0211172

Award Number: 0211172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269497             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Deino adeino@bgc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Renne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Berkeley Geochronology Cen
	      2455 Ridge Road
	      Berkeley, CA  947091211    510/644-9200

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Argon dating is extremely important to paleoanthropologists because it can be
              used over almost the entire last 6 million years; this is the period when
              hominids emerged and developed. Many significant archaeological and
              paleontological sites are located in volcanic regions such as Eastern Africa
              and contain strata which can be dated by this technique. With National Science
              Foundation support the Berkeley Geochronology Center (BGC) will continue to
              develop the technique of 40Ar/39Ar dating and apply this technique to a series
              of significant paleoanthropological sites. The BGC has collaborated with
              researchers at a number of sites in Africa, Europe and Asia, and with NSF
              support such projects will be continued and expanded.
The 40Ar/39Ar dating
              method is based on the radiometric decay of a fraction of natural potassium in
              geologic materials over time. The products of the decay include 40Ar, which
              remains trapped in certain types of geologic materials, such as crystals within
              volcanic rocks. Measurement of the amount of 40Ar that has accumulated in a
              rock or mineral, combined with knowledge of the material's potassium content,
              yields the age of crystallization. In 40Ar/39Ar dating, the material to be
              dated is irradiated in the core of a nuclear reactor for minutes to days, in
              order to transmute some of the potassium to an artificial isotope of argon.
              Then, both the artificial isotope, which stands in for potassium, and the
              radiogenically produced argon, can be measured at the same time in a highly
              sensitive and accurate mass spectrometer.
The facilities at BGC include three
              fully automated dating systems, each of which is capable of dating anywhere
              from a single small crystal of geological material weighing less than a
              milligram, to hundreds of milligrams, by the 40Ar/39Ar method.
As in the past,
              Archaeometry support will be vital both to maintaining routine availability of
              40Ar/39Ar dating for the archeological and paleoanthropological communities, as
              well as advancing the capabilities of 40Ar/39Ar dating methods. Though routine
              in many regards, evolving technology permits continued improvements in the
              method's capabilities,.  Such improvements pay large scientific dividends by
              expanding the scope of problems that can be solved. The principal motivations
              for this development effort are to: 1) sustain routine access to high-quality
              40Ar/39Ar data for archeological and paleoanthropological research worldwide;
              2) continue refinement of 40Ar/39Ar methods to improve precision and accuracy,
              particularly in dating younger, smaller, or less potassic materials, and 3)
              replace or augment old equipment to maintain high levels of productivity and
              scientific excellence.
Grant funding will be focused primarily in three areas:
              1) replacement of a Nd-YAG with a CO2 laser for heating geological materials on
              one of our Argon extraction lines, 2) installation of a robust UPS power supply
              that will permit uninterrupted lab operation in the face of increasingly
              frequent power outages, and 3) modernization of the computer control systems on
              our automated extraction line/mass spectrometer combinations. The benefits of
              converting to a CO2-laser based heating system are derived primarily from an
              ability to incrementally heat large amounts of feldspar with a broad laser beam
              with uniform energy profile, while accruing the benefits of extraction-line
              blanks that are many times lower than the conventional resistance-furnace
              heating device currently in use. Enabling the laboratory to weather short power
              outages (< 1hr in duration) will provide for continued efficient operation of
              three extraction lines while protecting equipment from the occasionally
              devastating effects of sudden power loss. Modernization of the computer control
              systems is necessitated by obsolescence of software and hardware components,
              and is essential if innovation is to continue.

