Title       : Acquisition of Nanomechanical Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a0211706

Award Number: 0211706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146135             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fuqian Yang fyang0@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The grant provides support for the acquisition of a nano-indentation system,
              consisting of a nano-hardness tester (NHT) and an atomic force microscope. Many
              diverse research groups that are involved in the characterization of materials
              and in nanomechanical stress analysis will benefit from the acquisition of the
              NHT. The nano-indentation system will be devoted to the study of
              micromechanical behavior of MEMS materials on both the micrometer and the
              nanometer scale. It allows a wide variety of tests, including submicron-sized
              hardness tests, micro-scratch tests, contact fatigue during cyclic indentation,
              and constant load creep tests. The instrument will be used in several research
              projects: (1) the measurement of micromechanical properties of MEMS materials
              as a function of microfabrication processes and temperature to provide both the
              micromechanical properties for modeling and the understanding of
              processing-properties relationships of MEMS microcomponents, (2) the
              investigation of the contact fatigue of silicon wafers and surface crack
              initiation associated with cyclic contact between two silicon surfaces or
              accumulated damage to identify the key variables responsible for contact damage
              and failure in MEMS devices, and (3) the study of adhesion phenomena between
              two surfaces of MEMS microcomponents due to interfacial forces, such as
              capillary, van der Waals, and electrostatic forces to understand the dominant
              mechanisms controlling the bonding between solid contact surfaces on the
              microscale. 
%%%
This nano-hardness tester is the first of its kind at the
              University of Kentucky. It will have a large impact on research dealing with
              micromechanics of MEMS structure and characterization of MEMS materials and
              nanomaterials. For example, it is clear that surface and interface stresses
              play an important role in determining the deformation characteristics of MEMS
              microcomponents due to the high surface area to volume ratio. The
              micromechanical properties determined via nanoindentation tests will allow for
              consideration of surface effects, such as surface stresses. The long-term
              research goal is to develop an understanding of the material properties
              (including elasticity, plasticity, adhesion, and fracture) of advanced
              materials relevant to micro-electromechanical systems. 

