Title       : Dissertation Research: Social and Environmental Consequences of Land Tenure
               among Marin County Ranchers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0211287

Award Number: 0211287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10599              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Durham eb.whd@forsythe.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Public sentiment toward private use of federal lands has become increasingly
              contentious in the United States, particularly in the West where agriculturists
              rely heavily on both private and federal lands to maintain viable operations.
              This research focuses on understanding how ranchers' use of private and federal
              lands affects the strategies they choose in the face of external economic,
              political, and cultural threats. In so doing, it asks how land tenure affects
              environmental use patterns, the social structure of ranching communities, and
              economic decisions made by agriculturists. Research will be conducted on Point
              Reyes National Seashore (PRNS) and in a nearby portion of private land in Marin
              County, California. The student will examine the ways in which land tenure and
              landscape valuation variously promote and discourage ranch longevity and
              environmental integrity. Free listing, structured surveys, in-depth interviews,
              and daily work diaries will be used to elicit information on the land use
              practices, economic circumstances, and perceptions and values regarding the
              land for two matched sets of ranchers in Northern California: 1) ranchers using
              primarily the federal lands of PRNS, with 2) a matched set of ranchers across
              Tomales Bay, who primarily use private lands east of Tomales Bay. Network
              analysis will be used to contrast social interactions within each community.
              Historical analysis of ranch boundaries, former neighbor interviews, and
              personal and county economic data and tax records will be used to examine
              economic strategies. The research will test the hypothesis that land tenure
              shapes productive strategies; in so doing, it contributes to property theory by
              exploring the effects of private and federal tenure on resource management. The
              research also shows the relevance of a developing body of theory on cooperation
              to a complex, market-integrated agricultural society. 

