Title       : Sequencing the Maize Genome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0211851

Award Number: 0211851
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4293099            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joachim W. Messing messing@mbcl.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rod A. Wing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              One plant genome, Arabidopsis, has been sequenced, and a second one, rice, is
              nearing completion. These plant species represent the major taxonomic division
              of the plant kingdom and include the first major crop. Rice is also a member of
              the cereals that include crops like wheat and maize, which are much larger in
              genome size, 35-times and 5-times, respectively, and, therefore, more difficult
              to sequence. However, since maize is a major crop in agriculture and a
              significant factor to the economy of the United States, sequencing its genome
              will provide a critical infrastructure to advance food supply, quality, and
              safety, with simultaneous reduction of risk to health by chemical pollution. To
              enable sequencing the larger maize genome, this project seeks to provide sets
              of overlapping cloned DNA fragments, about 150 kb in size that are placed on
              the genetic map of maize. This placement will be greatly facilitated by zip
              code-like sequences of these cloned DNA fragments. These zip codes are in
              particular valuable since a certain percentage is conserved in sequence and
              order between maize and the closely related rice genome (synteny). Since the
              rice genome sequence is aligned to the rice genetic map, ordering the sets of
              overlapping maize DNA fragments will be greatly enhanced in regions of synteny.
              The resulting map of DNA fragments will be used to generate contiguous genomic
              sequence. This will show whether the larger size of the maize genome, largely
              due to non-genic, repeat sequences, will require a different method for
              obtaining the gene content of maize. A few examples of long stretches of maize
              genomic DNA provide biologists for the first time information about the
              variability in gene density and a correlation of the genetic and physical map
              over several centiMorgans. Such genetic distances are already long enough to
              demonstrate to breeders how genes are discovered based on linkage of traits to
              DNA.
