Title       : Targeting Induced Local Lesions in Genomes (TILLING) for Plant Functional
               Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0211732

Award Number: 0211732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $568551             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Henikoff steveh@fhcrc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luca Comai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : F Hutchinson Canc Res Ctr
	      1100 Fairview Ave. N.
	      Seattle, WA  981091024    206/667-4868

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              There exist numerous genome-scale methods for obtaining mutations useful for
              functional analysis. In traditional genetics, random mutagenesis is followed by
              phenotypic analysis. However, the availability of large-scale genomic and cDNA
              sequence data encourages reverse genetic approaches. In plants, reverse
              genetics based on transposon mutagenesis or directed anti-sense inhibition have
              succeeded in some cases, but the methods can be labor-intensive and
              unreliable.

TILLING is a new reverse genetic strategy that combines random
              chemical mutagenesis with PCR-based screening of gene regions of interest. This
              provides a range of allele types, including missense and knock-out mutations,
              which are potentially useful in a variety of gene function and interaction
              studies. TILLING is especially suitable for plants, even for those that lack
              well-developed genetic tools. A low-cost high-throughput TILLING method has
              been developed and applied to screening mutagenized Arabidopsis populations.
              This effort has resulted in the Arabidopsis TILLING Project, which provides
              allelic series of point mutations in genes of interest to members of the
              general Arabidopsis community. Concomitantly, the TILLING team also introduced
              interactive web-based tools needed to identify gene regions most suitable for
              TILLING, to design optimal PCR primers for mutational screening, and to analyze
              the resulting mutations. 

The successful delivery of several hundred
              sequenced mutations in Arabidopsis genes encourages the application of TILLING
              technology to crop plants. One goal of this proposal is to establish a
              high-throughput rice TILLING service utilizing mutagenized rice populations
              from the International Rice Research Institute and others. A second goal is to
              utilize the TILLING facility and resources for dissemination of TILLING
              technology to the broader plant biology community.
Accomplishment of these
              goals should contribute to the understanding of gene functions for both crop
              plants and model organisms, and to the improvement of the plant genomics
              infrastructure for research and education. TILLING technology has potential
              benefits for agriculture, where methods are needed for crop improvement that
              avoid the expensive regulatory process required for transgenics and that are
              widely acceptable to consumers.

