Title       : Special Semester Program on Automorphic Forms, Shimura Varieties and
               L-functions; January 1-May 31, 2003, Fields Institute, Toronto, Canada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0211133

Award Number: 0211133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Freydoon Shahidi shahidi@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Georgios Pappas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The theory of automorphic forms is a wide and deep subject touching many areas
              of mathematics, such as  number theory, harmonic analysis and geometry.
              Langlands' program is an ambitious plan to develop the theory of automorphic
              forms in a systematic way.  It opened a new frontier in Mathematics, and has
              given new insights and techniques in solving old problems. In fact, the
              solution of Fermat's last theorem by Andrew Wiles is one of the achievements of
              the Langlands' program.
There have been many exciting new developments in the
              theory recently: the global Langlands correspondence for GL(n) over a functiona
              field by L. Lafforgue, using the ideas of Drinfeld; the local Langlands
              correspondence for GL(n) over a p-adic field by M. Harris and R. Taylor, using
              Shimura varieties, and by G. Henniart, using L-functions; Langlands'
              functoriality for symmetric cube of cusp form of GL(2) by H. Kim and F.
              Shahidi, and symmetric fourth of cusp form of GL(2) by H. Kim, using The
              Langlands-Shahidi method and the converse theorem of Cogdell-Piatetski-Shapiro.
              
It is an ideal time to have a special program in automorphic forms to review
              these new developments. These have far-reaching applications in classical
              number theory. Especially, Langlands' functoriality of symmetric cube and
              symmetric fourth have direct applications to analytic number theory. In fact,
              one of the goals of the program is to bring experts in automorphic forms and
              analytic number theory to find applications of automorphic forms in analytic
              number theory, vice versa. 

One of the most important mathematical ideas of
              the second half of  the 19th century is that an analytic formula often encodes
              discrete information. For example, one might want to count the number of
              solutions of a particular equation, but discover that the solutions are very
              hard to find. On the other hand, one might want to count the number of
              solutions to a sequence of equations and have the answers as a sequence.
              Mathematicians call these kinds of problems 'discrete'. The functions that
              appear in calculus, and for which calculus works so well, are not 'discrete',
              but 'analytic.' Amazingly, the right kinds of  analytic functions often provide
              the answers to the discrete problems. 
An L-function is a type of generating
              function formed out of data associated with either a geometric object that is
              related to number theory or with a kind of 'analytic' function, called an
              automorphic form, which are determined by groups of linear transformations. 
              These L-functions provide the right kinds of analytic functions. In the past
              thirty years, the study of these examples of L-functions has been systematized
              into a branch of number theory. In recent years many people have found new ways
              that L-functions encode discrete information, though there is still much to be
              discovered. The chief purpose of this program is to bring together experts in
              analytic number theory, automorphic forms, and geometry so that we may find
              more of the ways that arithmetic information is encoded by L-functions.

