Title       : RUI: Osteology and Phylogeny of Early Tertiary Perissodactyls (Mammalia) of
               Eurasia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0211976

Award Number: 0211976
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith E. Skog                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132383             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luke T. Holbrook holbrook@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Osteology and Phylogeny of Early Tertiary Perissodactyls (Mammalia)
              of Eurasia

	A grant has been awarded to Dr. Holbrook at Rowan University to
              study how different groups of perissodactyls are related to one another.
              Perissodactyls are a group of mammals that includes the living horses,
              rhinoceroses, and tapirs, as well as a host of fossils that date back to as
              early as about 55 million years ago.  Although perissodactyls are well known,
              their origins and the pattern of their evolution is not well understood.  One
              reason for this is that fossil perissodactyls are known from many parts of the
              globe, and few studies have even attempted to cover this broad geographic
              distribution in their investigations.  Another reason is that, for many years,
              teeth were the only specimens known for most fossil perissodactyls, so most
              analyses limited themselves to studying tooth characteristics.  This study will
              therefore accomplish two goals.  First, it will provide the most extensive
              combination of data from North American and Eurasian perissodactyls, covering
              the two most important areas of early perissodactyl diversification.  Second,
              it will include data from previous neglected areas of perissodactyl anatomy,
              specifically the skull and the postcranial skeleton.

	During the course of
              this study, Dr. Holbrook and his students will examine specimens of fossil and
              living perissodactyls found in museums throughout North America and Eurasia,
              including collections in the United States, the United Kingdom, France,
              Belgium, Germany, Russia, and China.  They will examine teeth, skulls, and
              other elements of the skeletons of these specimens looking for features shared
              by different perissodactyls that will help elucidate their relationships. 
              Ultimately, these data will be analyzed by computer in order to determine the
              best supported hypothesis of relationships.  Once the pattern of perissodactyl
              evolution has been investigated, Dr. Holbrook and his colleagues will use this
              information to investigate other questions regarding perissodactyl evolution,
              in particular how perissodactyls came to be distributed on the various
              continents through geologic time.

	Throughout the course of this study,
              undergraduate students will be working with Dr. Holbrook and learning a great
              deal about the process of science and the techniques of vertebrate
              paleontology.  This background will prepare the students for postgraduate
              study, including academic training as scientists.  The results of this work
              will ultimately be presented at national and international scientific meetings
              and published in scientific journals.

