Title       : CSHL Conference on Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages; Madison,
               Wisconsin, August 20-25, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0211493

Award Number: 0211493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages Conference, traditionally held at
              Cold
Spring Harbor and now being held in alternate years at the University of
              Wisconsin in Madison
and at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, is a central
              forum for the presentation of new results
in prokaryotic molecular genetics.
              On the order of 200-400 participants attend, representing
laboratories
              throughout the world, and most present either short talks or posters. Its
              breadth
makes it an important focus for the exchange of information in this
              era of scientific
specialization. Topics covered include fundamental work on
              bacterial replication,
recombination, repair, transposition, transcription,
              control of gene expression, translation,
signalling, heat shock, protein
              folding and secretion, cell development and division, and
pathogenesis.
For
              many graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, this is the first large
              meeting at
which they have an opportunity to speak. Due to its highly
              interactive nature, the meeting
provides an important opportunity for these
              young scientists to meet and talk to the senior
scientists they know from the
              literature. In response to the large numbers of students who attend
the
              meeting and the diversity of topics covered, established and distinguished
              scientists are
invited to chair each session. This strengthens the meeting
              because each chairperson gives a
short introduction in which he or she
              summarizes some of the key facets of the field to be
covered and provides a
              conceptual framework for the major questions that the talks will address.
As
              an additional benefit, publicizing the judiciously chosen chairpeople and
              session topics in
announcements of the meeting, encourages the submission of
              abstracts in exciting new areas and
stimulates attendance by a larger
              constituency
