Title       : Mechanism of Viral RNA-dependent RNA Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0211996

Award Number: 0211996
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $603159             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Cheng Kao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Replication and transcription from RNA templates are required for RNA viruses to
              cause diseases. These processes are also mechanistically interesting since the
              viral replication enzymes are the only class of template-dependent polymerases
              that naturally initiate and terminate RNA synthesis from the termini of the
              templates. Viral replication enzymes, hereafter called the replicase, are
              generally composed of a virally encoded RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp),
              and additional viral and host subunits.  The replicase from Brome mosaic virus
              (BMV) can be enriched and solubilized from infected plants, thus permitting
              biochemical characterization.  The BMV replicase can specifically recognize BMV
              RNAs and then precede through a number of biochemical steps, including de novo
              initiation, elongation, termination, and RNA recombination. Requirements for
              these steps in vitro nicely mimic the requirements for replication and
              recombination in vivo, thus providing insight into the least understood class
              of template-dependent polymerases. The goal of this project is to better define
              how the BMV replicase recognizes specific RNA sequences and goes through
              different steps of RNA synthesis.

This research has four specific aims: 1)
              to examine the interaction between the replicase and core promoter RNAs; 2) to
              identify and characterize RNA sequences that cause pausing of the elongating
              replicase complex during RNA synthesis; 3) to examine the mechanism of RNA
              recombination in vitro; and 4) to further purify and characterize the
              components in the BMV replicase.  Knowledge gained from the execution of these
              objectives will contribute to the basic understanding of virus replication. 
              The use of BMV as a model system will directly benefit less well-studied
              systems that can cause diseases such as encephalitis, measles, and hepatitis. 
              The detailed understanding of the different steps in viral RNA replication
              should uncover targets for the design of highly specific antiviral drugs.
