Title       : Collaborative Research: Reconstructing the Early Evolution of the Bees and the
               History of Bee/Angiosperm Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0211837

Award Number: 0211837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112164             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sedonia D. Sipes ssipes@plant.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Bryan N. Danforth of Cornell University and Dr.
              Sedonia D. Sipes of Southern Illinois University at Carbondale to investigate
              the systematic relationships among bees, and the history of interactions
              between bees and flowering plants.  Bees are a large group of insects ( ~20,000
              species) whose history is intertwined with that of flowering plants.  Today,
              bees are the most important pollinators of many of the world's food crops. 
              Additionally, many wild plants depend upon bee pollinators for reproduction;
              thus bees play an important role in maintaining plant biodiversity. Yet, little
              is known about the earliest bees, or about the early flowering plants they may
              have pollinated, because all known bee fossils are either relatively recent in
              age, or are of highly advanced rather than primitive species.  Moreover, the
              relationships among the seven families of bees are unclear from the study of
              their morphology alone.  Danforth and Sipes propose to 1) reconstruct the
              relationships among the bees, with emphasis on the most primitive taxa (the
              "short-tongued" bees), using DNA sequences from three genes combined with
              morphological data.  Additionally the investigators will use the DNA data in a
              model-based approach to estimate dates of key events in the history of the
              bees, and relate these dates to angiosperm history as recorded in the fossil
              record.  

This project will expand our understanding of the relationships
              and classification of the most important pollinators of flowering plants
              (bees), and will have implications for crop pollination, biodiversity, and
              conservation.  This project will provide educational and research training
              opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students at both SIUC and Cornell
              University.  Students involved with the project will gain broadly applicable
              experience in basic molecular biology as well as training in the specific
              fields of insect systematics and pollination ecology.  Additionally, the award
              will provide professional-level training for a postdoctoral researcher at
              Cornell.

