Title       : Structure and Dynamics of Polymer Blends Exhibiting Strong Intermolecular
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0211056

Award Number: 0211056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Runt RUNT@EMS.PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The first objective of this effort is a quantitative investigation of
              crystallization and structure formation in model polymer blends directly at the
              lamellar level, using tapping mode atomic force microscopy. A number of
              questions that are key to developing a complete understanding of polymer
              crystallization, in the neat state and in melt-miscible blends, will be
              addressed.  For example, does lamellar growth proceed uniformly, or are local
              growth rates time-dependent and variable from lamella to lamella? How are the
              answers to this and other fundamental questions influenced by the presence of a
              high Tg, amorphous polymer diluent? To supplement the experimental work,
              findings will be compared with predictions of a finite element model. The
              second objective of the project is to develop insight into the dynamics of
              miscible polymer blends exhibiting intermolecular hydrogen bonding, as probed
              by dielectric spectroscopy. There has been little research in this area,
              particularly with respect to the influence of intermolecular interactions on
              the fragility of the glassy state and the dynamics of hydrogen bonding. The
              motivation for this work was partly shaped by current interest in
              thermoreversible networks and hydrogen-bonded, self-assembling supramolecular
              structures. The focus of the dielectric experiments will be on model binary
              blends of copolymers in which the number of intermolecular hydrogen bonds can
              be systematically varied by changing copolymer composition. Certain blends in
              this study will satisfy the assumptions of the LRC model for the dynamics of
              reversible networks, and will provide a good test of the model. Finally, with
              the support of an NSF - MRI grant, a hybrid instrument is under development
              that will be capable of performing simultaneous dielectric and two-dimensional
              infrared spectroscopic measurements. This new instrument will undoubtedly have
              an important impact on the research described above.
The results of this
              research will have broad impact on our understanding of both crystalline
              polymers and polymer blends, areas of great importance in the industrial
              sector. In addition to the direct educational impact on graduate and
              undergraduate students involved in the research activity, research results will
              be incorporated into graduate level courses taught by the PI. Research findings
              will be disseminated through publication in peer-reviewed journals, as well as
              through presentations by the PI and group members at major scientific
              meetings.

