Title       : Collaborative Research: Roots of Agriculture in Southern Arabia and Mid-Holocene
               Environmental Changes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0211490

Award Number: 0211490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80825              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric A. Oches oches@chumal.cas.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the National Science Foundation, Dr Joy McCorriston (The
              Ohio State University), Dr. Eric Oches (University of South Florida), and their
              colleagues and students will conduct three seasons of field research in the
              Hadramawt region of southern Yemen in order to investigate environmental and
              cultural impacts of the middle-Holocene (ca. 5,000 years ago) monsoon decline
              and accompanying aridification.  Changing middle-Holocene climatic patterns in
              southern Arabia forced people in the early stages of developing agricultural
              subsistence economies to adapt their cultivation technologies, water management
              practices, and herding strategies to an increasingly arid landscape. Specific
              research objectives include: (1) reconstruct human economic behaviors in the
              southern Arabian uplands during the wetter early- to middle-Holocene, (2)
              provide wider regional context for high-resolution archaeological and
              palaeoecological records by comparing sequences from different highland areas
              (Wadi Sana and Wadi Idim), and (3) develop high-resolution chronology for the
              archaeological and sedimentary record of environmental changes associated with
              the middle-Holocene climatological shift in precipitation. 

The
              interdisciplinary team headed by an archaeologist (McCorriston), geologist
              (Oches), and Yemeni ethnographer (Bin .Aqil) will reconstruct the
              archaeological record of human behavior in the context of sedimentary and
              fossil records of vegetation, hydrology, and climate. Archaeological
              excavations will focus on rock-shelters, pit-house dwellings, and water
              management structures that have been identified in previous fieldwork and are
              dated by radiocarbon and artifact typology between ca. 9,000 - 5,000 (calendar)
              years ago.  The team will conduct research and train interdisciplinary students
              through archaeological survey and excavation, ethnoarchaeology, artifact
              analysis, paleovegetation studies, sedimentological analysis, and
              paleohydrological reconstruction.  Efforts will be made to include Yemeni
              researchers and students in field studies in order to provide archaeological
              and geological training.  

Results of the study will be used to develop
              conceptual and GIS (Geographic Information Systems) models to explain the
              cultural and environmental factors involved in the adoption of agriculture in
              the changing middle-Holocene paleoenvironments of southern Arabia and to
              contribute toward paleoenvironmental knowledge of a little-known region. The
              research areas in southern Yemen, with their good preservation of all-but
              abandoned landscapes once shaped by early Holocene human and environmental
              processes, provide an unparalleled context to resolve Arabia's role in the
              spread of early agriculture and its record of past climate and environmental
              changes. 


