Title       : Phylogeny of Didelphid Marsupials, a Taxon-Dense Approach Using Data from
               Nuclear Genes and Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0211952

Award Number: 0211952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon A. Jansa jansa003@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been Sharon Jansa at the University of Minnesota and Dr. Robert S.
              Voss at the American Museum of Natural History, New York to study the
              evolutionary history of South American didelphid marsupials (Didelphimorphia:
              Didelphiadae), commoly known as New World "opossums."   The16 extant genera of
              didelphid marsupials comprise 75 species and represent the most diverse
              surviving lineage of the old endemic mammalian fauna in South America; today
              these species constitute the only substantially intact radiation of marsupial
              mammals outside Australasia.  While didelphids have long been of interest to
              biogeographers and comparative biologists, their evolutionary history remains
              poorly understood.  The principal goal of this project is to infer the
              historical relationships among didelphid marsupials in order to provide a
              secure framework for interpreting their evolution and historical biogeography. 
              We will collect and analyze DNA sequence data from five, slowly-evolving
              nuclear genes with a wide range of biochemical functions for a core group of 42
              species representing all 16 genera of didelphid marsupial.  The resulting 8
              kilobase dataset will be the largest comparative molecular dataset for these
              species and will provide critical data for reconstructing their evolutionary
              history.

Among other applications, the results of this study will contribute
              to historical biogeographic research in South America, provide a framework for
              understanding the morphological evolution of marsupials, and inform the future
              use of didelphid exemplars in comparative biology and palaeontology.  In
              addition, the resulting database of DNA sequences will provide materials for
              understanding gene function and the dynamics of molecular evolution in
              mammalian radiations.  Didelphid marsupials have long been overlooked in
              studies of mammalian systematics and molecular evolution.  The results of this
              study will fill a conspicuous gap in our understanding of mammalian
              evolutionary biology.awarded to Dr. 

