Title       : Gated Electron Transfer in Copper(II)/(I) Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0211696

Award Number: 0211696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Rorabacher dbr@chem.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Taschner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0510303   Kinetics                                
Program Ref : 0000,1968,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              David Rohrabacher of Wayne State University and Michael Taschner of the
              University of Akron are supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and
              Organometallic Chemistry Program for research on effects of coordination site
              geometry on rates of electron transfer reactions of cuprous (Cu(I)) and cupric
              (Cu(II)) complexes. The main focus of the research will be to explore how
              ligands that constrain geometry about one or both copper centers influence the
              kinetics and mechanism of electron transfer (ET) between the two copper atoms.
              Main interest will be on the influence of solvent molecules on the ET rates of
              complexes involving macrocyclic and tripodal ligands, effects of trigonal and
              trigonal-pyramidal ligands that mimic coordination sites in specific copper
              proteins, and reorganization barriers in metastable intermediate species in
              reactions that involve macrocyclic ligands. Electron transfer reactions in
              related complexes containing both ruthenium and copper will also be
              investigated. New ligands to be used in each of these research areas will be
              synthesized at The University of Akron. Kinetic, electrochemical and
              spectroscopic studies will be performed at Wayne State University.

Electron
              transfer reactions involving transition metal ions are of central importance in
              many areas of industrial chemistry and biochemistry and also in the emerging
              field of molecular electronics. This study focuses on rate processes that are
              known to be controlled, in greater or less degree, by conformational changes in
              the first coordination shells of the metal ions. This type of process has also
              been identified (sometimes quite tentatively) as playing a major role in many
              more-complex systems of practical interest. The relatively uncomplicated cases
              that are studied in this project are exceptionally suitable for developing and
              testing understandings that can then be applied to the more complicated cases
              that are of central importance in biological and technological applications.
              



