Title       : Beta-Diversity of Caterpillars (Lepidoptera) in Tropical Rainforests: Testing
               Predictions of Host Specificity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2002   
File        : a0211591

Award Number: 0211591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340471             (Estimated)
Investigator: George D. Weiblen gweiblen@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yves Basset  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott E. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vojtech Novotny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Differences in species composition among insect communities at different sites
              (i.e. species turnover, or beta-diversity) are poorly known in tropical
              rainforest. This is unfortunate as the patterns of beta-diversity are important
              for setting conservation priorities, as well as for our understanding
              ecological and evolutionary factors, which generate extraordinary species
              diversity, found in tropical ecosystems. This study investigates the
              beta-diversity of insect herbivores in lowland rainforests as a product of
              changes in vegetation and changes in insect communities feeding on particular
              host plants. Beta-diversity will be examined using caterpillars (Lepidoptera)
              feeding on selected host plants in New Guinea. Herbivores feeding on rare and
              wide spread plants will be compared to test the significance of host plant
              distribution and specificity for beta diversity. This project represents one of
              the most comprehensive studies of insect beta-diversity in the tropics and one
              of the first attempts to quantify beta-diversity of species-rich rainforest
              communities on a regional scale. In contrast to previous, largely descriptive
              studies, it separates and tests the effects of key factors, viz. host plant
              distribution and host specificity, in generating beta-diversity patterns of
              tropical herbivores. The project also promotes graduate student training and
              involves underrepresented Pacific Islanders in scientific research through
              parataxonomist training. The proposal also builds capacity for New Guinean
              entomology through training of local students, strengthens a local research
              station and develops the national insect collection. Furthermore, results can
              be applied to developing conservation strategies for NG and parataxonomists
              will have additional impacts through landowner education.
