Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Domestic Violence and the 'Family Man':
               Courtroom and Community Narrative About Domestically Violent Fathers in Rural,
               Urban and Suburban Settings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0211778

Award Number: 0211778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Francesca M. Cancian fmcancia@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This study examines narratives about domestically violent family men within
              three civil courtrooms situated in three geographically, racially, and
              economically diverse counties in Northern Kentucky. This research explores
              comparative narratives about domestic violence, family, and fatherhood in order
              to determine the ways in which the "domestically violent family man" may be
              differentially constituted by geographic location, race, and class. This study
              pays particular attention to the role of the legal institution in producing and
              reproducing these narratives through an examination of the power that legal
              institutional discourses have in shaping definitions of gendered identities,
              such as "domestically violent father." More specifically this study asks: What
              are people within and who encounter the legal arena saying about the
              intersections of domestic violence, family, and fatherhood? What are the
              processes by which visitation decisions are given to or denied from
              domestically violent fathers during protective order hearings, and what does
              this say about how the legal institution and society conceive of the
              intersections of domestic violence, family, and fatherhood?  This research is
              comparative and will utilize a multi-method ethnographic approach to data
              collection including participant observation, content analysis of courtroom
              hearings, and open-ended interviews. The broader impacts of this research
              include informing the training and teaching received by those working with
              domestic violence in the legal arena about child witnesses to domestic violence
              and domestically violent fathers.
