Title       : C-RUI: Identification of Genes Regulating Cell Wall Integrity in Aspergillus
               nidulans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0211600

Award Number: 0211600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562861             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry W. Hill hill@rhodes.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Darlene M. Loprete  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rhodes College
	      2000 North Parkway
	      Memphis, TN  381121624    901/843-3850

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1091,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An essential determinant of fungal growth and development is the fungal cell
              wall.  Little, however, is known about the mechanisms by which the wall is
              constructed or developmentally modified.  The goal of this research is to
              characterize a newly identified set of genes (Cal genes) in the model
              filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans, whose primary phenotype
              (hypersensitivity to the wall-compromising agent Calcofluor) has been
              correlated with the presence of structural defects in cell walls.  Presumably,
              the functional alleles of these genes play roles in synthesizing or
              transporting wall constituents, in wall maturation and modification, or in
              signal transduction pathways that regulate wall metabolism.   The work will
              proceed in three phases.  In Phase I the number of available cal mutants will
              be increased by standard genetic methodology (six cal mutants have been
              identified to date, but the screening shows no signs of saturation), and
              extensive phenotypic profiles will be established for all mutants with regard
              to effects on cell wall chemistry, timing and morphology of spore germination,
              hyphal morphology, cytokinesis (septal placement), and the mitotic cycle.  The
              objective of Phase II is to identify each of several Cal genes by 1)
              transforming cal mutants with cosmid or plasmid vectors carrying genomic (wild
              type) DNA and sequencing those inserts that cause phenotypic rescue, 2)
              identifying the complementing genes through transposon-mediated inactivation of
              each candidate open reading frame, and 3) determining the phenotypic effect of
              null mutations via targeted gene replacement.  In Phase III, Cal gene products
              will be localized within the cell, either by construction of fusions between
              Cal genes and a green fluorescent protein gene or by epitope tagging and
              immunocytochemistry (EM and LM).

Many fungi play important roles as
              producers of commercial products or as pathogens of plants and animals, and our
              ability to manipulate fungi to our advantage is limited by how well we
              understand the basic mechanisms of their growth and development.  This research
              will increase our knowledge of fungal growth and development by identifying
              novel genes that affect cell wall integrity.  Because undergraduate college
              students will play active, central roles in all aspects of this research, the
              project will also advance undergraduate education in the sciences and provide
              talented young people with experience relevant to making a choice to pursue
              research careers. 

