Title       : The Role of Terpene Synthases in Floral Scent Emission in Arabidopsis thaliana
               and Related Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0211697

Award Number: 0211697
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eran Pichersky lelx@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Arabidopsis thaliana is the most important plant model organism, and the
              sequence of its entire complement of genes is now known. Although it is
              generally believed that A. thaliana flowers mostly self-pollinate, we have
              discovered that the flowers emit scent volatiles of the terpene class of
              compounds, and previous reports do suggest that an undetermined level of
              cross-pollination does occur in nature. The A. thaliana genome has 33 genes
              with homology to known terpene synthases (TPSs), and we have shown that under
              normal conditions, five of these genes are expressed exclusively in flowers,
              and 14 more are expressed in flowers as well as in some other tissues. In this
              project, Dr. Pichersky's lab will characterize the floral scent of A. thaliana
              plants from different environments, characterize the activity of the enzymes
              encoded by all the flower-expressed TPS genes, perform a detailed examination
              of the tissue-specific expression of these TPS genes throughout the plant,
              identify insect visitors to A. thaliana flowers, and estimate the level of
              cross-pollination caused by such visits. Related species that are more
              noticeably scented will also be compared. This project is an interdisciplinary
              investigation of the biosynthesis of floral scent and its effect on the success
              of cross-pollination, encompassing methods from molecular biology to
              biochemistry to ecology. The results will provide detailed understanding of an
              important plant life trait that has hitherto been little understood. This new
              knowledge will also be highly applicable to crop plants, many of which depend
              on cross-pollination for seed and fruit set. Knowing how scent genes are
              activated in the A. thaliana model system will facilitate the discovery and
              manipulation of scent genes in important crop plants to enhance scent
              production and attract beneficial pollinators. Finally, the project will
              provide excellent interdisciplinary training and education for graduate and
              undergraduate students both in the PI's lab and in formal courses, and the PI
              will continue to disseminate the results to the general public in addition to
              reports in scientific journals.
