Title       : Disordered Oxidic and Non-Oxidic Mesostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0211029

Award Number: 0211029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2186700            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Pinnavaia pinnavai@cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S. D. Mahanti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Thorpe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mercouri G. Kanatzidis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simon  J. L. Billinge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 7202,9161,9179,9239,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This renewal team award made to Michigan State University by the Advanced
              Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry is to study oxide and non-oxide
              mesoporous structured materials. With this award, Professor Pinnavaia and a
              team of other senior scientists with expertise in complementary research
              activities in synthetic inorganic chemistry, theoretical and experimental
              condensed matter physics, structural modeling and electronic structure
              calculations, and charge transport and thermal transport characterization will
              study the following: the oxide mesostructured materials; aluminosilicate
              mesostructure assembly from zeolite seeds and fragments with intrinsic acidic
              and hydrothermal stabilities; preparation of organofunctional mesostructures,
              wherein more than half of the framework metal atom centers are linked to
              accessible and reactive organic groups; mesostructure carbon replication for
              optically active monoliths using phase transfer assembly techniques with
              mesostructured silica as templates; and related experimental and theoretical
              studies for the assembly mechanisms and to elucidate the fundamental
              relationships between structure and performance properties of disordered oxidic
              mesostructures.  This team will also study different chalcogenide mesoporous
              materials that act as the "inside-out" versions of array of quantum dots,
              narrow-gap semiconductors, biological iron sulfide clusters; and other
              electronically active, mesoporous chalcogenide solids with highly ordered pores
              yielding a variety of new materials with novel shape-selective redox, optical
              and electrical properties.  The synthetic approaches will be complemented by
              characterization, modeling and theoretical calculations. 

With this award, a
              team of scientists with expertise in synthetic inorganic chemistry, theoretical
              and experimental condensed matter physics, structural modeling and electronic
              structure calculations, and charge transport and thermal transport
              characterization will study oxide and non-oxide mesoporous materials.  Active
              industrial collaborations for potential applications of these materials as
              catalysts will be part of these research activities.  In addition, this highly
              collaborative effort will bring together materials scientists, chemists,
              condensed matter physicists and structural and theoretical scientists, and will
              provide educational and research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
              students, postdoctoral associates and visiting scientists.
