Title       : Functional Genomics of Root Growth and Root Signaling under Drought
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0211842

Award Number: 0211842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4549050            (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry T. Nguyen NguyenHenry@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia Gross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hans J. Bohnert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Sharp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon K. Springer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel P. Schachtman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              


Henry T. Nguyen NguyenHenry@missouri.edu (Principal Investigator
              current)
Julia Gross (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Hans J. Bohnert
              (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Robert E. Sharp (Co-Principal Investigator
              current)
Gordon K. Springer (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Daniel P.
              Schachtman (Co-Principal Investigator current)                Georgia Davis
              (Co-Principal Investigator current) 
 
The roots of plants play vital roles
              in water and mineral acquisition which are essential for plant growth and
              development. Under conditions of drought, roots can adapt to continue growth
              while at the same time producing and sending "early warning" signals to shoots
              which inhibit the plant growth above ground. A "Plant Root Genomics Consortium"
              has been formed and is dedicated to root genetics and physiology.
The broad
              aim is to develop an understanding of the molecular mechanisms used by plant
              roots to acquire water and minerals from the soil, to elucidate the role roots
              play in adaptation to drought conditions, and to transfer this   knowledge to
              crop improvement through biotechnology. This project focuses mechanisms of root
              growth maintenance and root to shoot signaling under water deficits. The
              research approach is interdisciplinary encompassing whole plant physiology,
              genetics, genomics, and proteomics.
The specific aims are to identify the
              genes and biochemical networks: controlling the mechanisms of root growth and
              root to shoot communication under drought through four specific
              objectives:
(1) Characterization of the transcript profiles in elongating and
              non-elongating regions of roots under water deficit in sensitive and tolerant
              maize lines, an abscisic acid (ABA)-deficient mutant and near-isogenic lines
              differing in ABA accumulation. (2) Characterization of the changes in protein
              profiles, especially cell wall proteins, in the different root regions to
              identify factors associated with root growth maintenance and tolerance to water
              deficit. (3) Investigation of the production and transport of root signals to
              provide a better understanding of root to shoot signaling under drought. (4)
              Development of genetic and genomic resources for further investigations of root
              growth and signaling in the field.
This knowledge will lead to novel
              approaches for improving drought tolerance in maize through genetic and
              metabolic engineering of root functions. All materials will be made publicly
              available. A Plant Root Genomics Web site will be maintained and integrated
              with the maize genome database (MaizeDB) at the University of
              Missouri-Columbia.


