Title       : GOALI: Investigation by Ultrasonic Methods of the Very long Life Fatigue
               Behavior of Structural Aluminum and Magnesium Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0211067

Award Number: 0211067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360631             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Wayne Jones jonesjwa@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Allison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the long life fatigue behavior of cast aluminum and
              magnesium structural alloys that find application in automotive and other
              technologies where lightweight materials are required. An objective of the
              study is to develop accurate models of crack initiation and short crack growth
              that can be used for predicting fatigue life. Very long lifetimes will be
              achieved in a practical timeframe using ultrasonic fatigue in which cyclic
              loading is applied at frequencies of approximately 20 kHz. The proposed method
              is far more cost effective than the conventional techniques that are extremely
              time consuming. The proposed program will examine the fundamental mechanisms
              responsible for the presence or absence of endurance limits in this important
              set of alloys. A significant effort will be focused on the potential use of
              ultrasonic fatigue techniques as a viable alternative or replacement for more
              conventional testing methods, especially where critical fatigue lives are in
              the very long life regime. This proposed GOALI program would continue a
              successful collaboration between the University of Michigan and the Ford
              Research Laboratories (FRL) of Ford Motor Company. The co-PI will co-advise a
              PhD student on this project. The educational impact of this work lies in close
              contact of the graduate students with the industrial counterpart through summer
              internships as well as the research direction by the co-investigator from
              Ford.

This project provides an opportunity to graduate research students and
              university personnel to work with industrial counterparts at the Ford Motor
              Company in developing cast aluminum and magnesium alloys with very long fatigue
              life. The results of the study will benefit not only automotive industry but
              also technologies that require lightweight fatigue resistant metallic alloys.
              The research will establish new techniques of characterizing very long fatigue
              lifetimes that find many practical applications by taking advantage of the
              expertise and facilities at the academia and industry.

