Title       : Comparative Analyses of Resistance Gene Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2002      
File        : a0211923

Award Number: 0211923
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3031729            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Michelmore rwmichelmore@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We will utilize a comparative genomics approach to understand the evolutionary
              forces and genetic events that have determined the outcome of the interactions
              between a major group of bacterial pathogens and diverse crop species.  A broad
              range of genetic mechanisms has been shown to influence the evolution of
              disease resistance in plants.  It is becoming apparent that different
              mechanisms may have been important at different stages and influence different
              parts of the resistance protein and that resistance genes may exhibit different
              rates of evolution.  These different rates of evolution may be indicative of
              different characteristics of the pathogen ligands detected and suggest
              different efficacies in disease control strategies.

We will characterize
              related series of bacterial proteins involved in pathogenicity, the plant
              targets they interact with, and the plant resistance genes that detect these
              genes. This will be done by: 1) identifying the majority of the so-called "Type
              III effector" genes in four strains of strains and species of the bacterial
              pathogen Pseudomonas; 2) determining the genetic variation in the plants
              ability to detect these effector proteins by analysis of diverse germplasm of
              lettuce, tomato, and Arabidopsis as well as a less detailed analysis of at
              least five other crop species; 3) isolating a subset of the plant targets of
              these effectors from Arabidopsis and the crop species; 4) characterizing the
              rates and evolution of known and novel resistance genes as well as the genes
              encoding the target proteins and to correlate the rates of evolution with the
              prevalence and fitness contribution of the ligands detected.  This will provide
              a related series of these three interacting determinants of resistance and a
              matrix of the interactions between them.  This will also provide insights into
              the basis of non-resistance and the potential durability of resistance
              genes.

Understanding the molecular determinants of disease resistance has
              practical as well as fundamental importance.  Lettuce and tomato are two of the
              top ten most valuable crops in the US and disease resistance is one of the most
              agriculturally important traits targeted in crop improvement programs. 
              Understanding the molecular basis of specificity in plant-pathogen interactions
              and the events resulting in resistance will provide new possibilities for
              developing more durable disease resistance in pants and decrease the use of
              chemical protectants.

