Title       : Characterization of a Novel Regulatory Protein Required for Cytokinesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0211801

Award Number: 0211801
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309028             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denis A. Larochelle dlaroche@black.clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with the mechanism whereby a cell divides into two. 
              In general, cell division in animal cells ("cytokinesis") results in the
              production of two daughter cells that are nearly identical to each other.  The
              process of cytokinesis ensures that the newly duplicated nuclei, along with
              half of the cytoplasm, are equally partitioned into the resulting daughter
              cells. This process occurs at a very specific time in the cell cycle, and at a
              very specific location, usually the equator. However, how the timing and
              location of cytokinesis are regulated at the molecular level has remained
              largely unknown. 

Dr. Larochelle has generated mutant Dictyostelium
              discoideum vegetative cells and screened these cells for defects in
              cytokinesis.  This approach had been used successfully in the past to identify
              racE and lvsA, two unique genes that are required for normal cytokinesis. Dr.
              Larochelle has now isolated a new cell line that is defective in cytokinesis
              due to a disruption in a novel gene, which is the focus of this research
              project. 

The specific aims of this research are to characterize the
              specific cytokinesis defect that results from the disruption of this novel
              gene, determine the location and mechanism of how the encoded protein functions
              in cytokinesis by conducting a careful analysis of the various domains that
              compose this protein, identify and characterize proteins that interact with
              this novel protein, and provide training for graduate and undergraduate
              students, as well as high school students and teachers, in the areas of cell
              biology and molecular biology. By making use of the ease with which one can
              manipulate the Dictyostelium genome, coupled with the Dictyostelium genome
              sequencing project, the experiments will combine molecular genetics with cell
              biology to dissect the exact nature through which this newly identified gene
              regulates cytokinesis. The potential to identify additional proteins that
              participate in the control if this important cellular event is suggested
              through the presence of multiple signaling domains (a phosphatase domain, a
              rho-related domain, two kinase domains, and eight WD-40 repeats) in the newly
              identified protein. These domains will be examined in isolation and coupled
              with neighboring domains, as well as through deletion analysis, to dissect
              their role in cytokinesis regulation. Preliminary results, in which one of the
              kinase domains was over-expressed in wild-type cells, resulting in a
              cytokinesis defect, is a promising indicator that this approach will be
              successful. Because Dictyostelium is easily cultured and is highly amenable to
              molecular genetic manipulation, while at the same time exhibiting the same
              cellular behaviors observed in cells from higher eukaryotic organisms, it is
              ideally suited for the training of budding scientists in the areas of cell and
              molecular biology. The development of a strong research program, in an
              atmosphere where high school, undergraduate, and graduate students interact
              with each other and faculty on a daily basis, will provide unique training
              opportunities for all participants.

