Title       : Understanding the Role of Bank Loans and the Importance of Disaggregation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0211912

Award Number: 0211912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51804              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wouter Denhaan wdenhaan@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research project is to use disaggregated data and theoretical
              models to study the behavior of bank balance sheet variables like loans and
              equity and their importance for real activity.  The motivating factor is that
              the additional variation observed across the disaggregated elements of the data
              provides an enormously rich source of new empirical information that can be
              used not only to learn about the behavior of the disaggregated variables but
              also to understand the behavior of aggregate variables.  The contribution of
              this project consists of constructing and disseminating consistently defined
              disaggregated data sets of bank loans.  Bank loans are disaggregated into three
              bank loan components: Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans, real estate, and
              consumer loans.  Empirical as well as theoretical studies typically focus on
              total bank loans, even though the observed time series behavior of the three
              components clearly differs.  Bank loans are also disaggregated by region.  The
              advantage of disaggregating bank loans by region is that one can match regional
              financial measures like bank loans with corresponding regional real activity
              measures.  Several studies have documented that this link is quite strong for
              business loans.  This is because these loans are not standardized products and
              the relationship between firms and banks is clearly an important element in the
              market for business loans.  The data are also disaggregated by bank size.  This
              is important because the balance sheets of small banks are quite different than
              those of large banks and because of, for example, informational asymmetries,
              small banks are more likely to suffer from financial frictions in obtaining
              time deposits.  The data are posted on the investigator's website. 
