Title       : Collaborative Research: Preceramic Chronology in the Norte Chico Region of Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0211014

Award Number: 0211014
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73256              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Haas Haas@fmnh785.fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The present project represents the first phase of a planned long-term
              investigation into the very beginnings of civilization in the Western
              Hemisphere.  In an area on the north-central coast of Peru, known as the "Norte
              Chico" ("Little North")  a remarkable culture arose in the 3rd millennium B.C.
              In three small adjoining valleys, Supe, Pativilca and Fortaleza, a complex of
              more than 20 major archaeological ruins have been recently discovered, all
              dating roughly to the time between 3000 and 1800 B.C.  With enormous platform
              mounds, round ceremonial plazas and extensive areas of socially stratified
              residences, these sites appear to be the earliest florescence of centralized,
              hierarchical, complex societies anywhere in the Americas.  

The research on
              this project will explore sites in two of the valleys, Fortaleza and Pativilca
              with two primary goals: 

1. Determine the specific chronology of occupation
              and monument construction at each of the major sites.  All of the sites
              identified for testing share one significant characteristic: they all lack
              ceramics.  While there are interesting implications to the absence of ceramics
              in terms of technology, it has more immediate importance in terms of dating
              these sites.  Since ceramics were introduced to Peru in the century between
              1900 and 1800 B.C., sites without ceramics can be inferred to generally date
              prior to 1900 B.C.  While this provides a useful tool in the basic
              identification of the early sites, it is insufficient to make assessments about
              whether the sites were occupied all at the same time or sequentially over the
              span of a thousand years. Precise dates are needed to determine whether the
              monumental platform mounds were constructed in a single massive building event
              or numerous smaller events over a long period of time.  In order to answer
              these central questions about chronology a specific effort will be made to
              obtain materials for Carbon 14 dating from different parts of each site and
              from within the monuments.

2. A second subsidiary goal is to obtain samples
              of artifacts and tools as well as plant and animal remains in order to begin
              reconstructing the economy, technology and lifeways of the people who belonged
              to this precocious early civilization.  In the absence of ceramics, the
              analysis of stone tools assumes central importance.  Yet, to date, there has
              been no work done on the myriad stone tools that litter the surface of these
              sites - scrapers, blades, knives, drills, pounders, grinders, hoes and picks.
              An attempt will also be made to reconstruct diet. While all later civilizations
              in the Americas had staple diets based largely on maize (corn), this New World
              crop was not introduced in Peru until well after all the Norte Chico sites were
              abandoned.  Inhabitants appear to have survived on a wide mix of fruits and
              vegetables with a heavy dose of anchovies, sardines and shellfish thrown in for
              protein.  Because there is excellent preservation on the Peruvian coastal
              desert, plant and animal remains are found in abundance in the trash midden
              areas.  To obtain collections of stone tools and the plant and animal remains
              test pits test pits will be excavated in different parts of each site
              associated with various kinds of residential architecture and reflecting the
              full extent of the site area. 

The ultimate goal of the project is to
              provide an archaeological window into the past to examine the very beginnings
              of an early culture that ultimately gave rise to the Inca and their
              predecessors in Peru.

