Title       : Chemical Defenses Against Floral Enemies: Costs and Benefits of Toxic Nectar to
               Nectar Robbing, Pollination, and Plant Fitness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0211480

Award Number: 0211480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn S. Adler lsadler@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca Irwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ADLER - 0211480
In natural systems, organisms face simultaneous direct and
              indirect interactions with mutualists and
antagonists, yet our understanding
              of the relative importance of these competing pressures in
shaping the
              evolution of phenotypic traits is still rudimentary. For example, flowering
              plants may
face the dilemma of attracting pollinators while discouraging
              floral enemies, such as nectar
robbers. Because robbers are competing with
              pollinators for the same resource (e.g., nectar), it may
be particularly
              difficult for plants to evolve defensive mechanisms that are effective
              against
antagonists without also deterring mutualists. The goal of the
              proposed research is to determine
how a ubiquitous but poorly understood
              floral trait, toxic nectar, influences interactions with both
nectar robbers
              and pollinators, and how these simultaneous interactions shape selection on
              this
phenotypic trait.
Toxic nectar, or nectar that contains secondary
              compounds, is a widespread trait that may confer
resistance to floral robbers,
              but at a potential cost to pollinator attraction. Currently, the costs
              and
benefits of toxic nectar are unknown. In addition to resistance traits,
              plants may cope with
antagonists via tolerance. The concepts of resistance and
              tolerance have traditionally been used in
reference to herbivores; however,
              nectar robbers, like herbivores, have profound effects on plant
fitness and
              plants are likely to use resistance and tolerance as defensive mechanisms
              against
robbers. The proposed research will extend resistance and tolerance
              concepts to a wider range of
plant-animal interactions through an examination
              of the role of nectar traits, such as nectar toxicity
and production, as
              mechanisms of resistance and tolerance to nectar robbing.
The aim of this work
              is to understand the ecological role of toxic nectar within the context
              of
interactions between mutualists (pollinators) and antagonists (nectar
              robbers), and to determine the
extent to which resistance and tolerance
              mediate the impact of nectar robbers on plant genotypes.
The research proposed
              will experimentally manipulate nectar toxicity in Gelsemium sempervirens,
a
              perennial vine with documented alkaloids in its nectar, to determine the impact
              of toxic nectar on
the community of insect pollinators and robbers as well as
              on male and female plant reproduction
and offspring success. In addition, this
              study will manipulate nectar robbing and pollination in
genotypes of G.
              sempervirens with known variability in nectar toxicity to determine the direct
              and
indirect effects of nectar robbing on plant fitness, genetic variation in
              resistance and tolerance to
nectar robbing, and costs of toxic nectar in the
              absence of nectar robbing. The research combines
manipulative field
              experiments with observations to address four main questions: 1) Is
              there
genetic variation in nectar toxicity? 2) Does toxic nectar benefit
              plants by increasing resistance to
nectar robbing without reducing pollinator
              attraction? 3) Does nectar robbing reduce plant fitness
directly or
              indirectly, and do plant genotypes vary in their resistance or tolerance of
              nectar robbing?
and 4) Is there a cost of toxic nectar in the absence of
              robbing?
The work proposed here is novel in that it integrates the costs and
              benefits of resistance associated
with a ubiquitous but poorly understood
              floral trait, toxic nectar, in the context of joint forces of
selection
              exerted by both mutualistic and antagonistic floral visitors. This work extends
              an existing
conceptual framework and provides empirical insight into the
              diversity of roles a single floral trait
can serve, from attraction to
              defense. Consideration of the broader context in which organisms
evolve is
              fundamental to our understanding of how multiple-species interactions shape
              genetic and
biological diversity at ecological, microevolutionary, and
              macroevolutionary scales.

