Title       : Relationship Among Host Tree Species Diversity, Soil Fertility, and Carbon
               Availability in Maintaining Belowground Ectomycorrhizal Community Structure and
               Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0211848

Award Number: 0211848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Henson jhenson@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth W. Cullings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1182,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Integrated studies of interactions among plants, microbes, and the soils they
              inhabit are
critical to our understanding of ecosystem function. We propose to
              use a combination of
biochemical and molecular-genetic methods to determine
              effects of artificial defoliation of
Pinus contorta (lodgepole pine) on
              structure and function of ectomycorrhizal (EM)
communities in pure P. contorta
              and mixed P. contorta/Picea engelmannii (Engelmann
spruce) stands. We will
              defoliate only the pine in both pure P. contorta and mixed P.
contorta/P.
              engelmannii patches formed within mixed stands by small-scale disturbance.
              We
will then determine how defoliation affects EM fungal community structure,
              activities of
enzymes that break down litter, and enzymatic function of soil
              fungal communities. We will
sample across a soil fertility gradient created by
              a transition from relatively nutrient-rich
andesite, through a transition zone
              created by glacial activity, to nutrient-poor rhyolite. By
doing so, we will
              determine how interactions among carbon flow to roots, tree species
diversity,
              and soil fertility influence ectomycorrhizal fungal diversity and function, for
              the
first time.
Our preliminary data from this system indicate that
              defoliation of pine only in a patch of mixed
pine/spruce can 1) significantly
              affect the EM community of mixed P. contorta/P. engelmannii
stands, and 2)
              affect the EM of non-defoliated spruce. Our data also show that soil fertility
              plays
a pivotal role in influencing EM community structure, and the work of
              others demonstrates that
soil fertility can moderate effects of defoliation
              and insect herbivory. We will be the first to
investigate how alteration of
              carbon flow to roots affects EM community structure, EM
enzymatic function,
              and below-ground function in a mixed tree species forest, and the first
              to
combine these factors with soil fertility. We will conduct this study in
              Yellowstone National
Park, the centerpiece of the 11-million acre Greater
              Yellowstone Ecosystem, which includes
several National Forests in three
              states. By using a combination of biochemical and molecular
methods, we will
              provide the most comprehensive picture of these aspects of ecosystem
              function
to date. Thus, we will add greatly to our understanding of a
              pristine, economically important, and
geographically dominant ecosystem.
Our
              education/outreach and broader impacts will be far-reaching. For example,
              Cullings is
adjunct at a Hispanic-Serving Institution and will teach classes
              and seminars there, and students
from that institution will be invited to
              participate in the study. In addition, Cullings is a member
of the Ames Native
              American Advisory Council, an education/outreach organization within
NASA
              dedicated to bringing science education to reservations. Henson has volunteered
              for 12
years as an ASM minority educator/lecturer, and has been a preceptor
              for NIH (Institutional
Student Minority Development) and NSF (Minority Access
              Program, Science and Engineering
for All) minority education grants. In
              addition, and for the past 10 years her lab has hosted
Native American high
              school students and teachers through the American Indian
              Research
Opportunities (AIRO) program on campus. Her group also assists YNP
              park personnel with their
microbiology brochures and videotapes for the
              general public, and maintains a Web site about
their work in Yellowstone
              (www.montana.edu.hotfungi). Henson also participates in ASMs on-
line science
              mentoring project. Students from all programs will be recruited to participate
              in this
project.
