Title       : Functional Genomics of Hemicellulose Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2002      
File        : a0211797

Award Number: 0211797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4945077            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Keegstra Keegstra@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan D. Walton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Natasha V. Raikhel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Curtis Wilkerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant cell walls play crucial roles in the development of plants, their
              resistance to diseases, and communication between cells.  A fundamental
              understanding of cell wall biosynthesis has potential practical applications,
              including the development of crops plants better able to fend off pathogens and
              of plants that provide enhanced nutritional attributes or new polymer products
              for various industrial uses. This project is aimed at understanding how
              hemicellulosic polysaccharides, a particular class of polymers found in plant
              cell walls, are synthesized.  Cell wall biosynthesis requires hundreds of
              enzymes, but only a few of these proteins and the genes that encode them have
              been identified and characterized.  Through strategies employing the tools of
              genomics, proteomics and bioinformatics, the principal investigators will
              identify candidate genes involved in the synthesis of plant cell walls and
              evaluate their function.  The studies will be conducted in three plant systems:
              cotton fiber cells during a period of development in which large quantities of
              primary cell wall components are manufactured; developing nasturtium seeds that
              store large quantities of xyloglucan, a major cell wall component; and rice
              tissues undergoing rapid growth.  Rice is chosen as one of the plant systems
              because the recent completion of the rice genome sequence will aid in matching
              the proteins linked to cell wall biosynthesis with their respective gene
              sequences.  The principal investigators expect to identify genes involved in
              many aspects of cell wall biosynthesis and will make their results and
              resources freely available to researchers in the plant biology community.  The
              project will provide valuable training for undergraduates, graduate students,
              and postdoctoral research associates.  It will also provide summer laboratory
              experiences for underrepresented students.
