Title       : Pattern Formation in Homogeneous and Micro-Structured Chemical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0211264

Award Number: 0211264
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oliver Steinbock steinbck@chem.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Oliver Steinbock of Florida State University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to examine pattern information in homogeneous
              and micro-structured chemical systems, and to develop novel experimental
              methodologies for control of the underlying spatial coupling.  The chemical
              origins of the anomalous dispersion in the 1,4-cyclohexanedione
              Belousov-Zhabotinsky (CHD-BZ) reaction will be investigated, and the results
              utilize to formulate a reaction model capable of reproducing experimental
              observations from stirred reaction systems.  Combined numerical and
              experimental approaches will be used to distill the characteristic features of
              spatially extended media, and also to analyze the interplay of attractive and
              repulsive interactions between traveling oxidation pulses and the resulting
              shock-like front dynamics.  In other studies, the CHD-BZ reaction will serve as
              a model for chemical self-organization in large arrays of coupled
              micro-reactors.  Recently developed methodologies, such as soft
              photolithography, will be applied for construction of custom-made arrays in
              which each reactor will hold a polymer-bound CHD-BZ volume of less than 100
              picoliters.  These reactor arrays will be employed to examine a broad spectrum
              of chemical instabilities that give rise to novel wave structures and
              Turing-like patterns.  Results are expected to lead to experimental strategies
              to control reactions on micro-patterned reactor chips and a thorough
              understanding of the rules that govern spatial coupling of localized
              "lab-on-a-chip" processes.  Ultimately, the outcomes will contribute valuable
              information for systematic exploration of compartmentalized reaction-transport
              systems of the sort that are successfully exploited by living matter for a
              variety of complex syntheses and sensors. 

This research project is highly
              interdisciplinary because its fundamental results will aid in the analysis of
              complex systems in biology and elsewhere.  In particular, the outcomes will
              impact the diverse fields of neurophysiology, engineering, and statistical
              physics.  Moreover, the development and fabrication of spatially coupled
              micro-reactor arrays is expected to have promise for future applications in
              advanced combinatorial chemistry.  The manufactured reactor arrays will be made
              broadly available to other research groups for their use.
