Title       : RUI: Cycloaromatization of arenediynes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0211577

Award Number: 0211577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144000             (Estimated)
Investigator: K C. Russell russellk@nku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol A. Parish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Kentucky Univ
	      University Drive
	      Highland Heights, KY  41099    859/572-5100

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9150,9229,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI's group will first synthesize a number of ten-membered ring enediynes
              where alkene is part of an aromatic ring or heterocycle.  Thermal reaction
              conditions will then be used to induce Bergman cyclizations of these molecules
              and the rates and activation energies of these reactions will be measured.  The
              alkene containing components of the endiynes will be varied so that
              tautomerization, charge dependence, etc (ie electronic effects) on the rates of
              these reactions can be studied experimentally.  The co-PI's group will perform
              high level calculations to theoretically determine how the electronic character
              of the ene is related to the experimentally determined rates of these
              reactions.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              is supporting the research of Dr. K.C. Russell of the Department of Chemistry
              at Northern Kentucky University and Dr. Carol A. Parish of the Department of
              Chemistry at Hobart William Smith College. Drs. Russell and Parish will study a
              chemical reaction known as the Bergman cyclization.  The Bergman cyclization is
              a chemical reaction which is central to the mechanism of action of a number of
              anticancer antibiotics.  Understanding the electronic effects of changing the
              structures of the molecules which participates in this type of reaction may one
              day have revelance in understanding clinical chemistry.  Students trained
              during the course of this work will gain experience in experimental and
              theoretical and organic chemistry and be aquiring skills needed by the
              pharmaceutical and speciality chemical industries.
