Title       : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Course on Cell & Developmental Biology of Xenopus;
               April 2003 - 2006; Cold Spring Harbor, New York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2002    
File        : a0211094

Award Number: 0211094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0211094
Grodzicker

Dramatic progress has been made in the fields of cell and
              developmental biology in recent years, largely due to the application of new
              technical approaches to classical problems.  This has led to the need for
              advanced courses to train new investigators to study those animal models, such
              as Xenopus, that have been important in making new discoveries.  Funds are
              being sought to continue the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory course on "Cell and
              Developmental Biology of Xenopus" which has been taught for eleven years as
              part of an integrated set of courses in a number of areas of modern biology. 
              This course provides extensive laboratory exposure to the biology and
              manipulation of embryos from the frogs Xenopus laevis and Xenopus tropicalis. 
              Xenopus is a vertebrate uniquely suited for studies of early development since
              large numbers of embryos, from fertilization onward, can readily be obtained. 
              Development is rapid and the large size of the embryos facilitates their
              micromanipulation.  This allows analysis (at the single cell level if
              necessary) of such important issues as maternal regulation and embryonic
              inductions that are not feasible in mammalian, avian or fish embryos.  The
              course is suited both for those who have a knowledge of molecular biology and
              developmental biology, but have had no experience with Xenopus, as well as
              those with some Xenopus experience who wish to learn newly developed, advanced
              techniques.  The specific areas that will be covered are (1) Care and handling
              of Xenopus adults, removal of oocytes, induction of ovulation, egg collection,
              testis isolation, and in vitro and natural fertilization; (2) Stages of
              embryonic development and anatomy; (3) Whole mount in situ hybridization and
              immunohistochemistry, including double probe staining; (4) Microinjection of
              eggs and oocytes with lineage tracers, antisense morpholino oligonucleotides,
              mRNA and DNA constructions; (5) Use of oocytes to make conditioned medium
              containing growth factors; (6) Micromanipulation of embryos, including
              induction and transplantation assays; (7) Oligonucleotide antisense techniques
              for "knock-out" of maternal molecules; (8) Preparation and use of cell cycle
              extracts for construction of transgenic embryos; and (9) Use of Xenopus
              tropicalis as a genetic model.
	
It is anticipated that the basic
              organization of the course and much of the course material will remain
              unchanged during the proposed period of support.  However, fast-developing
              topics, such as new promoter sequences for use in transgenesis and the
              availability of transgenic and mutant lines, will be discussed and integrated
              into the course as the field progresses.
              





























