Title       : Pressure Effects on the Kinetics of Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0211290

Award Number: 0211290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $663053             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dexter B. Northrop dbnorthrop@pharmacy.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The effects of high pressure on reaction rates of enzyme-catalyzed reactions
              will be measured as a function of substrate and inhibitor concentrations. These
              reactants will be mixed, placed in a steel pressure bomb, and the progress of
              their reaction will be monitored spectrophotometrically while being subjected
              to hyperbaric conditions up to 3,000 atmospheres of pressure. Initial
              velocities of the enzyme-catalyzed reactions will be extracted from the
              progress curves and fit to original rate equations in order to quantify
              pressure-sensitive kinetic parameters and to perform model discriminations
              between reaction mechanisms. The results will be compared to similar effects
              with isotopically-labeled substrates to determine the effect of pressure on
              isotope effects. These measured quantities will document the presence, sign and
              magnitude of volume changes associated with: (1) binding of substrates and
              inhibitors, (2) rates of chemical transformations including the expression of
              isotope effects, (3) rates of product dissociation, and (4) rates of protein
              conformational changes. This is a wholly innovative technological approach to
              enzymology that will deliver new information regarding the fundamental secret
              of life: how these modest proteins called enzymes bring billions of orders of
              magnitude of rate acceleration to the complex biochemical reactions that make
              up metabolism. For example, this is the first technology to return an exact
              measurement of a physical parameter associated with a transition-state, namely
              the activation volume. How activation volumes change with changing conditions
              will provide a new window of insight into the transition-state chemistry of
              enzymes. The ultimate goal of this research is to test and challenge the
              dominant theories of enzymatic catalysis, namely that enzymes accelerate
              reaction rates by stabilizing transition-states and by binding substrates more
              tightly in those transition-states.
