Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Role of Clay Structures in Clay-Epoxy
               Nanocomposite
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2002    
File        : a0211253

Award Number: 0211253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hassan E. El-Shall helsh@mse.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Beatty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : W223      STATE-REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0211253
Elshall

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project between Dr. Hassan El-Shall and Dr. Charles Beatty, both at the
              Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Florida,
              Gainesville, Florida and Dr. Mervat Hassan, the Central Metallurgical Research
              and Development Institute, Cairo, Egypt.  The three investigators plan to
              perform a systematic study of the factors and conditions that will lead to a
              significant improvement in the mechanical, thermal and solvent resistant
              properties of epoxy/clay nanocomposite used to manufacture tubesheet for high
              temperatures and chemically aggressive environments. Clay nanolayers are more
              effective in improving mechanical properties, thermal stability, dimensional
              stability and solvent resistance of the epoxy glassy matrix.  Basic
              understanding of the mechanisms involved and role of clay properties are
              relatively unexplored. 

Scope: 
The results of this research will benefit
              researchers in academic and industrial organizations in both countries. 
              Polymers reinforced by low weight percentages (1-10 wt.%) of nanoscopically
              dispersed organically modified layered silicates are attracting the attention
              of researchers because of the unprecedented suite of new and enhanced
              properties relative to the unfilled resin. The PIs have considerable experience
              in studying minerals and have the appropriate background to carry out this
              research.  The subject is of particular interest to Egypt where high value
              added products derived from inexpensive starting materials are in great demand.
               This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which
              provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
              these cooperative activities.

