Title       : From Proplastid to Chloroplast: Understanding Plastid Differentiation in Maize
               through Microarray and Proteome Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a0211935

Award Number: 0211935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3827647            (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaas VanWijk kv35@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Stern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Clemente  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Brutnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lori A. Allison  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Although best known for their role in photosynthesis, plastids perform several
              essential functions, which include synthesis of hormones, amino acids, fatty
              acids, lipids, vitamins, nucleotides and secondary metabolites. Despite their
              essential role, little is known of the developmental signals that help drive
              the process of plastid differentiation.. To address this important agricultural
              and biological problem, we will take advantage of new tools that have been
              developed for genomic and proteomic studies. The availability of extensive
              plant genome sequences has enabled us to identify a set of approximately 1500
              maize EST sequences that encode chloroplast targeted proteins.  Through array
              profiling, we will examine the expression of these genes in the two
              photosynthetic cell types in maize, the bundle sheath and mesophyll.  In
              parallel, we will initiate a broad survey of the estimated 3,000 proteins
              predicted to accumulate in plastids using highly sensitive mass spectroscopy
              techniques.  The bioinformatic integration of proteomic and expression
              profiling data will provide a detailed picture of transcription and
              translational control mechanisms utilized by the maize photosynthetic plastids.
               Finally, transgenic plants carrying bundle sheath and mesophyll cell-specific
              markers will be constructed to help monitor the differentiation process.  These
              GFP constructs will permit a detailed analysis of bundle sheath and mesophyll
              cell biology and facilitate the analysis of a series of maize plastid mutants. 
              Several results are expected from this project, such as an improved
              understanding of the biochemical functions of the different plastid types and
              novel insights into the differentiation process. As several chloroplast
              functions are directly related to the agronomic performance of the maize plant,
              these studies will greatly improve our understanding and ability to engineer
              this important crop plant. 



