Title       : PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0211313

Award Number: 0211313
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason S. Lawrence jason.lawrence@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : J,Lawrence
	      6 Washington Street 7th Floor
	      New York, NY  10003    212/998-8742

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 7182,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this Post-Doctoral Research Fellowship in the Behavioral and Social
              Sciences  is to determine the developmental processes involved in White
              children's knowledge and use of the stereotype that alleges Black Americans
              have low academic ability. Four experiments will be conducted to determine how
              the stereotype influences White children's perceptions and attributions of
              their Black peer's academic ability. Experiment 1 will test whether White
              children over 9 years of age judge a Black student as lower in ability than a
              White student with the same performance. However, to allow us to tease apart
              whether participants' judgments are due to stereotyping or due to ingroup bias,
              the participants will also make judgments of basketball shooting ability of
              Black, Asian, and White American children. Experiment 2 will determine whether
              White children of all ages may attribute Black students' academic failures and
              White students' academic successes to internal factors such as ability. It will
              also investigate whether White children over 9 years of age explain away Black
              students' academic successes and White students' academic failures by
              attributing these performances to external factors such as task difficulty or
              internal unstable factors such as effort. As in experiment,
participants will
              make the same kinds of judgments of Black, Asian, and White Americans'
              basketball shooting ability. Experiments 3 and 4, were designed to determine
              whether White children over 9 years of age incorporate teacher feedback that
              suggests that a Black student has lower ability than a White student, but
              ignore teacher feedback that suggests that a Black student has higher ability
              than a White student.

