Title       : SBIR Phase I: Investigation of Charge Trapping in Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor
               Deposition (PECVD) Dielectrics Using Electrostatically Actuated Mechanical
               Resonators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0211203

Award Number: 0211203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alissa Fitzgerald alissa.fitzgerald@sensant.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sensant
	      14470 Doolittle Dr.
	      San Leandro, CA  945775546    510/346-8166

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I project will develop a
              novel way to measure charge trapping in dielectrics. The feasibility of our
              method by applying it to the characterization of plasma enhanced chemical vapor
              deposition (PECVD) nitride and oxide will be demonstrated.  The deposition
              chemistry of these materials leaves trap sites that capture charge when
              subjected to large electric fields. Trapped charge affects the stability and
              performance of micro-electro-mechanical  (MEM) devices that employ these
              dielectrics.  A novel technique that uses a resonant, electro-statically
              actuated mechanical structure to measure charge trapped in a suspended
              dielectric layer is proposed.  The real part of the device impedance, measured
              using a network analyzer, can be correlated to changes in electric field in the
              dielectric resulting from trapped charge..

PECVD dielectrics are critical
              constituents in MEM devices that enable $3.5 Billion in annualized sales
              (optical components, RF components, and medical imaging components). Although
              the technique itself is not a commercial product, it is broadly applicable to
              the engineering of MEMs devices utilizing suspended PECVD dielectric layers,
              such as radio frequency (RF) switches and micro-mirrors.  This control of
              charge trapping in highly process sensitive PECVD dielectrics will allow us to
              realize the full commercial potential of our ultrasound devices in medical
              imaging applications.

