Title       : Quorum Sensing Mediated Regulation of Exopolymer Synthesis in Pantoea stewartii:
               A Critical Factor in Surface Attachment, Biofilm Formation, and Host Invasion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0211687

Award Number: 0211687
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susanne B. Beck von Bodman svbodman@canr.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1136,1156,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Quorum Sensing (QS) is a conserved mechanism of population density-dependent
              gene regulation. In Gram-negative bacteria, this generally involves the release
              and perception of self-produced acyl-homoserine lactone (AHL) signals. A grant
              has been awarded to study the mechanism of quorum sensing control of capsular
              polysaccharide (CPS) synthesis in the Stewart's wilt pathogen, Pantoea
              stewartii. subsp. stewartii. The critical regulatory components of quorum
              sensing in P. stewartii are the EsaI acyl-homoserine lactone synthase and the
              cognate EsaR response regulator. Disruption of the esaI gene leads to CPS
              deficiency, while the inactivation of the esaR gene leads to CPS
              overproduction, or hypermucoidy. Both conditions disrupt the normal development
              of Stewart's wilt disease in maize. EsaR, a LuxR homologue, functions by gene
              repression and AHL-dependent derepression in the control of its own expression.
              Presumably, quorum sensing by repression plays a role also in the control of
              CPS synthesis. The current model predicts that EsaR represses CPS synthesis by
              direct repression of genes encoded by the cps regulon or other biosynthetic
              functions that may contribute to the hypermucoid phenotype. Alternatively, EsaR
              may govern CPS synthesis indirectly through intermediary transcription factors.
              The first objective of this project is to define relevant transcript start
              sites upstream and within the cps gene system to identify potential EsaR
              contact sites. A consensus EsaR binding sequence will be established to aid the
              localization of such sites in absence of defined lux box-like DNA targets.
              Second, a comparative analysis of the fatty acid and exopolymer composition of
              the wild type and hypermucoid strains will be used to determine whether
              deregulated CPS synthesis is primarily a function of the cps gene system and/or
              alternate biosynthetic pathways. Third, exhaustive transposon mutagenesis of
              the hypermucoid mutant strain using a Tn5-based transposon with a promoterless
              green fluorescent protein reporter function will be used to isolate nonmucoid,
              fluorescent strains. Strains showing enhanced or depressed fluorescence after
              introduction of a functional esaR gene will be analyzed and characterized by
              reverse genetics to identify structural and/or regulatory genes critical for
              capsule synthesis and control by EsaR. Finally, two-dimensional gel
              electrophoresis will be employed to profile EsaR-controlled protein products.
              The expected results will generate a comprehensive understanding of a seemingly
              unconventional quorum sensing control mechanism and contribute to a novel
              perspective on the role of surface polymers in plant and animal
              pathogenesis.







