Title       : GOALI: Molecular Modeling of Confined Nano-Phases and Nano-Porous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  2002   
File        : a0211792

Award Number: 0211792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384419             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith E. Gubbins keg@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacek Z. Jagiello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Keith E.  Gubbins - North Carolina State University

"GOALI: Molecular
              Modeling of Confined Nano-Phases and Nano-Porous Materials"

The aim of this
              project is to use novel molecular simulation methodologies to obtain realistic
              molecular models of nanoporous materials, and to use these to derive new and
              more accurate characterization methods and to predict the behavior of adsorbed
              nano-phases. The emphasis will be on activated carbons and carbon nanotubes.
              Impact: Activated carbons are the most widely used industrial adsorbents, but
              are among the most difficult nano-structured materials to characterize
              experimentally. Carbon nanotubes have potential applications in many new
              technologies, including use as nano-reactors and for fabrication of
              nano-structured materials (nano-composites, nano-wires, one dimensional
              crystals, etc.). Broader aspects of the project include the training of two
              graduate students in modern, multi-scale molecular simulation methods, the
              inclusion of new methods and applications in an interdisciplinary graduate
              course taught at NC State University, and dissemination of the results via
              publication in scientific journals and the group web-site. The methods to be
              developed could benefit society by providing basic understanding for
              development of new nano-structured materials, nano-devices, sensors and
              nano-reactors.  

This is a GOALI project involving university-industry
              collaboration between researchers at North Carolina State University and at
              Westvaco's Charleston Technical Center. Westvaco will provide samples and
              characterization data for a series of industrial carbons prepared under
              different activation conditions and from different precursors, as well as
              advice on the direction of the research.

Studies will be in three areas:
              

1.  Molecular simulation protocols are developed for the construction of
              realistic molecular models of carbon nanotubes and of activated carbons
              prepared from a range of precursors and with a variety of activation methods. 
              For activated carbons, methods based on a hybrid Monte Carlo method that
              matches the model to experimental structural data, subject to constraints
              imposed by the multi-body intermolecular potential, will be used. 

2. 
              Existing materials characterization methods for the pore size distribution,
              surface area, and micropore volume are tested using simulated nitrogen
              adsorption and heat of adsorption in these model materials. Improved
              characterization methods that incorporate network effects (connectivity) are
              developed.

3.  Freezing and melting phenomena of host nano-phases in these
              materials are studied, with particular emphasis on the effect of confinement on
              freezing temperature, new surface- and confinement-driven phases, and the
              detailed structure of the phases. An understanding of such phenomena is central
              to the fabrication of many new nano-structured materials.  

