Title       : Ecological Rates of Change: Monitoring Recent Changes in Biospheric Activity
               Using Tree Rings and NDVI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0211216

Award Number: 0211216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nancy C. Tuchman                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosanne D. D'Arrigo   (Principal Investigator current)
              Liming Zhou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon C. Jacoby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Satellite measures indicate an overall greening of northern forest ecosystems
              between the early 1980s and the late 1990s. This greening, which indicates
              higher rates of tree growth, is consistent with rising temperatures, which may
              be caused by atmospheric increases in greenhouse gases.  To validate these
              findings, this research project will compare satellite-based estimates of
              increasing growth and greening to tree-ring records from selected sites across
              the circumpolar zone of northern forests.   Satellite data will be summarized
              using a standard measure of greenness in vegetation: the Normalized-Difference
              Vegetation Index (NDVI). The following questions will be investigated: 1. How
              are tree rings related to NDVI?  2. Can tree rings be used to validate intra
              and interannual variability in NDVI?  3. Can tree rings be used to validate
              trends in NDVI?  4. Do tree-ring and NDVI indices provide distinct information
              which, when combined, improve our understanding of biospheric activity?  5. Is
              there any evidence that increases in the atmospheric concentration of carbon
              dioxide have directly enhanced the growth of forests north of 40oN? 
This
              project will increase understanding of the complex links between global change
              and ecosystem function and process. Satellite and other observations of the
              earth system are accumulating rapidly, but the interrelations are exceedingly
              complex and it is essential that their interpretation include a ground data
              perspective. The validation of NDVI estimates of forest biomass sinks using
              ground measurements from tree rings can eventually aid nations concerned with
              meeting commitments for the Kyoto Protocol. This project will be
              multidisciplinary in that it will bring together members of the
              ecosystems/paleoclimate community, involved in ground measurement analysis of
              vegetation, and the remote sensing community, involved in the processing and
              interpretation of satellite measurements.   It is anticipated that the synergy
              of this integrated approach will significantly improve understanding of
              terrestrial biospheric activity for northern latitudes and for the globe.

