Title       : "Relisting" on the Burger Court, 1971-1985 Terms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0211617

Award Number: 0211617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold J. Spaeth Spaeth@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project extends the Expanded U.S. Supreme Court Judicial Database to
              include variables pertaining to the "relisted" cases of the Burger Court.
              During the Burger Court, any justice could have a case relisted - held over
              until the next scheduled conference, typically seven days later - to delay the
              certiorari decision. Relisting is one of the only features of the Court's
              decision-making process not included in any of the NSF databases. Closing this
              gap is important, not only for the sake of completeness, but also because it
              will shed light on the justices' employment of strategic behavior. Scholars do
              not know which of the justices engage in the practice, with what effect, in
              cases concerning what legal provisions and issues, and at what cost to the
              Court's productive process. In contrast, scholars do know a great deal about
              other stages and aspects, but without relevant and systematic information about
              relisting, we omit consideration of an aspect of agenda setting that may well
              affect not only the behavior of individual justices, but also the adequacy of
              hypotheses and theories aimed at explaining the agenda setting behavior of the
              Court as a policy-making institution. Implementation of this proposal requires
              systematic examination of all of the several thousand docket sheets of Justices
              William Brennan and Lewis Powell that identify the occurrence of relisting and
              the entry of the pertinent data into the existing Burger Court database. This
              further expanded Burger Court database, like all of the others, will be
              archived on the World Wide Web.
