Title       : The Many Foundations of Newtonian Dynami
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0211011

Award Number: 0211011
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Sklar lsklar@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 0211011
The Many Foundations of Newtonian Dynamics
Lawrence Sklar,
              University of Michigan

From its earliest days Newtonian dynamics has been
              formulated in terms of a variety of foundational principles.  The initial
              varied foundations proliferated in the 18th and 19th centuries, and this
              variety of possible foundational versions of the theory was augmented by a
              number of important additional reconstructions of the theory's first principles
              in the 20th century. Some of these alternative foundations of the theory were
              motivated by considerations of mathematical simplicity or elegance, or were
              generated primarily out of the desire to find versions of the theory
              particularly suitable for problem solving in novel ranges of applications of
              the theory.  But a number of the alternative foundations were strongly
              motivated by the desire to provide resources that would help resolve
              long-standing interpretive issues with the theory.
 
This project provides
              some discussion of the historical development of the panoply of alternative
              foundations for the theory. The primary goal of the research, however, is to
              explore a number of philosophical, methodological and interpretive issues that
              reveal how the possibility of alternative reconstructions of the theory plays
              its role in ongoing interpretive debates. The  PI focuses on a number of
              foundational structures for the theory, including contemporary axiomatizations,
              contemporary Machian versions of the theory, and versions of the theory that
              rely on using spacetime concepts from relativistic theories, to reconstruct
              Newtonian dynamics and gravitational theory, and contemporary foundations based
              on extremal principles. 

Three specific issues are to be treated.  First,
              exponents of alternative axiomatizations of Newtonian dynamics have taken
              deeply opposed attitudes toward the concept of "force" in the theory.  Is force
              an uneliminable component of the ontology required by the theory, or can its
              place be given a completely representationalist account? How do the new
              axiomatic reconstructions play into the (very old) debate?   Second, three
              separate foundational reconstructions can play important roles in the famous
              debates about the nature of space and time, debates reaching back to the
              controversy between Leibniz and Newton at the very beginnings of the theory.
              Structuralist axiomatizations provide a newly coherent approach to a
              representationalist version of the theory that can be used both by
              substantivalists and relationists to back up their claims. Third, the spacetime
              versions of the theory relying on apparatus retro-fitted to the theory from
              special and general relativity provide a new context in which the old
              ontological debate can gain new insights. Contemporary Machianism provides,
              perhaps, the version of the theory most suited to the relationist. But its
              nature and its relation to the orthodox theory opens up many interesting
              questions about what it is to iointerpretli a foundational
              theory.

Contemporary formalizations of the theory that ground it in an
              extremal principle allow us new insights into the question of the legitimacy of
              such modes of explanation as fundamental to a theory, rather than as mere
              derivatives from a causal mode of explanation. 

