Title       : Eyewitness Identification: Debiasing the Effects of Composites and Surveillance
               Images
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0211711

Award Number: 0211711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Wells glwells@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The advent of forensic DNA testing has helped establish the fact that mistaken
              eyewitness identification is the largest factor contributing to jury
              convictions of innocent people. As a result, the system-variable approach to
              eyewitness identification research, which is designed to reduce mistaken
              identifications without harming accurate identification rates, has started to
              have considerable impact in the legal system. In spite of considerable progress
              in recent years, little is known about how the "paths" through which innocent
              people become suspects in lineups can bias identifications toward the suspect
              and how to debias these situations (reduce mistaken identifications) without
              lowering the chances that the witnesses will identify the actual culprit. Two
              important "paths" through which innocent people become suspects are the use of
              composite drawings and the use of surveillance images. Both paths guarantee
              some propensity for eyewitnesses to identify an innocent suspect if that person
              became a suspect based in part on the image. It is hypothesized that the
              dominant recommendation of eyewitness researchers for selecting lineup fillers
              is not sufficient to debias lineups when either the image-similarity or the
              composite-similarity paths are operating. This research will test various
              debiasing techniques. The methodology will use films depicting a terrorist
              event (12 versions involving 12 different culprits) that will be shown to over
              2000 people individually who will then be asked to identify the terrorist from
              a lineup and state their certainty. Innocent suspects will substitute for the
              terrorist in half of the lineups. Innocent suspects will be selected based on
              verbal descriptions, composite drawings, or surveillance images. Debiasing
              techniques will include methods of selecting lineup fillers, the use of the
              sequential lineup, and the use of a new technique called the phantom lineup. In
              addition to traditional analyses, Bayesian information-gain analyses, which
              assess both the incriminating and exonerating value of a give lineup procedure,
              will be used to assess the effectiveness of the debiasing procedures. The
              results of this work will help clarify eyewitness scientists' basic
              understanding of the processes of false recognition and false certainty. In
              addition, the results will inform law enforcement about procedures that can be
              used to create unbiased and informative lineups under conditions in which
              surveillance images and composite drawings could otherwise bias those results.
