Title       : Solid State NMR Studies of Disordered Solids: Ionic Conductors and Battery
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0211353

Award Number: 0211353
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404167             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clare P. Grey cgrey@sbchem.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at the development and application of Nuclear Magnetic
              Resonance (NMR) and Molecular Dynamics simulations as tools that will permit a
              more rational design of materials with improved ionic conductivities. For
              example, NMR will be used to investigate the role that local structure plays in
              controlling the physical properties of solid state ionic conductors and battery
              materials such as calcium-doped yttrium titanium oxide.  A combination of
              fluorine-19 NMR and molecular dynamics simulations will be used to predict and
              then test experimentally the effect of different modifications and structural
              features on fluoride-ion conduction in fluorite-related phases such as lead tin
              fluoride and barium tin fluoride. Molecular dynamic simulations will be used to
              examine the effect of doping such cations as sodium,  potassium, aluminum, and
              zirconium into these structures and then test the molecular dynamics
              simulations by NMR. This project has a very strong educational component for
              underrepresented groups in that the PI participates in a number of
              university-wide efforts to encourage young women to remain in the physical
              sciences. Also, there is a  unique educational dimension due to international
              collaborative activities with groups in the United Kingdom on MD simulations
              and Estonia on the development of NMR instrumentation.

Moderate to fast
              ionic conduction is critical for a wide range of devices and applications such
              as fuel cells, sensors, and solid state electrolytes and cathode materials in
              batteries. Training students in the areas of mechanisms of conduction and the
              search for new, improved, and more environmentally friendly materials for
              energy related applications makes them very competitive in the industrial
              sector.

