Title       : Landscape Heterogeneity, Patch Connectivity, and Host-Parasitoid Population
               Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0211359

Award Number: 0211359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351558             (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Cronin jcronin@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Landscape heterogeneity, patch connectivity, and host-parasitoid population
              dynamics
NSF Ecological Studies Grant (DEB-0211359)
September 1, 2002 -
              August 31, 2005

	The fragmentation and loss of natural habitats is a dire
              world-wide problem.  Ecologists have made significant in-roads toward
              understanding the impact that increased habitat fragmentation or spatial
              patchiness might have on the long-term persistence of predator-prey
              populations.  However, most fragmentation studies have disregarded the
              vegetational cover that exists between patches (known as the matrix), generally
              assuming that the matrix is featureless and neutral to the movements and
              population fluctuations of both predator and prey species.  In reality, the
              matrix is complex and ever-changing.  Any alteration in matrix composition may
              significantly impact how predators interact with their prey. 

	This proposal
              outlines a course of study designed to address how different matrix types
              influence the movement and population fluctuations of an herbivore and its
              predator.  The planthopper, Prokelisia crocea, and the parasitoid wasp, Anagrus
              columbi, which are distributed among discrete patches of prairie cordgrass in
              the Great Plains of the United States form an ideal system for this type of
              study.  The crux of this proposal is a relatively large-scale field experiment
              that is designed to alter the ability of planthoppers and wasps to move among
              patches (i.e., patch connectivity) by embedding cordgrass patches in either of
              two dominant matrix types (mudflat or the exotic grass species brome). 
              Emigration, immigration, the pattern of spatial spread, and the within-patch
              distribution of insects will be assessed from the recapture of
              fluorescent-marked individuals.  The experiment also will be carried out over 3
              spatial scales and 6 generations to provide information on the effect of the
              matrix manipulation on parasitism and density fluctuations among patches and
              over time.  Never before has the patch structure and matrix been manipulated in
              predator-prey population studies in the field.  As a complement to this field
              experiment, trials will also be conducted to determine the behavioral basis for
              matrix-dependent movement patterns of the planthopper and wasp.  Finally, based
              on information derived in the above studies, a simulation model will be
              developed with the goal of evaluating the impact of habitat fragmentation and
              degradation (e.g., changes in the landscape matrix) on the long-term
              persistence of predator-prey interactions.

	Results from this renewal of NSF
              grant DEB-9973789 should provide critical and much needed information on the
              effects of heterogeneous landscapes on predator-prey interactions, and
              hopefully catalyze a broader approach to studies of predator-prey interactions.
               This research also has broad ramifications for conservation programs that are
              interested in the connectivity of reserves: a matrix that facilitates dispersal
              (i.e., a high-quality matrix) may serve a function identical to that of
              stepping stones or corridors.  Finally, this research may have a direct bearing
              on the success of pest management programs that employ strategies that
              purposely modify the matrix (e.g., through inter-cropping, terracing, or
              leaving some fields fallow).  Knowledge of the effect of these changes on pest
              and natural enemy movement and interactions may be critical to developing a
              successful pest-control program.

