Title       : EEP: The Teaching Challenges of Engineering Faculty: Insights from a Model
               Instructional Development Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0211774

Award Number: 0211774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374973             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer A. Turns jturns@engr.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Angela R. Linse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia J. Atman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The instructional development program of the University of Washington provides a
              rich context for learning about the challenges that faculty face in efforts to
              enhance their teaching, and how to help faculty face these challenges. This
              project will:

1. Document the unique instruction-related concerns/questions
              of engineering faculty and the types of responses that fulfill these
              concerns.
2. Document the complexities associated with designing and executing
              instructional development services in the context of engineering.
3. Document
              cultural factors important for engineering instructional development.
4. Share
              this information with others interested in supporting faculty efforts to
              enhance/modify their teaching (including campus level instructional developers,
              workshop designers, national reform groups, and even faculty themselves).

We
              propose to take advantage of these opportunities through a combination of
              research and website development activities. Specifically, we propose to
              conduct research on successful instructional development efforts through a
              combination of debriefing interviews and case study observations. The results
              of this study will be available to engineering educators and other programs
              through an innovative user-centered website -
the Engineering Teaching Source.
              The content of the website will be derived from the insights gained from the
              debriefing interviews and case study observations. The design of the website
              will emphasize multiple paths by which faculty / instructional developers can
              find information.

Our proposed research will provide insight into the needs
              of faculty as they change their teaching practices and provides the engineering
              education community with this insight through the design and publication of the
              Engineering Teaching Source. This work will benefit all who are interested in
              helping engineering faculty address teaching challenges, including
              instructional developers in campus-wide centers, those who create workshops for
              engineering faculty, those funding and running systematic reform efforts, and
              faculty
themselves. This work will complement the spectrum of efforts to
              enhance the teaching of engineering by focusing on the people most pivotal to
              the teaching - the faculty themselves.



