Title       : Electronics and Instrumentation Laboratory Development Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1992      
File        : a9251608

Award Number: 9251608
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis C. Henry   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Huber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles F. Niederriter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gustavus Adolphus College
	      
	      Saint Peter, MN  56082    507/931-8000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project equips the physics electronics laboratory with                    
              electrical measuring and test equipment at each of 8 lab                       
              stations.  The goal is to enhance the experimental component of                
              the two sequential electronics and instrumentation courses                     
              directed at physics and chemistry majors by improving the                      
              efficiency with which circuits can be analyzed, by creating                    
              instructional units on electromagnetic interference and                        
              susceptibility, and by adding a significant project component                  
              to the second course.  A total of 18 weeks of laboratory                       
              exercises are being redeveloped for the new equipment,                         
              emphasizing hypothesis testing and quantitative analysis of                    
              circuit performance.  The project relies on the students'                      
              increased sophistication in data collection and analysis as                    
              gained in the prerequisite introductory and advanced modern                    
              physics laboratory courses, all of which make extensive use of                 
              scientific equipment interfaced with personal computers.The                    
              equipment purchased included in each station a dual-trace                      
              analog/digital storage oscilloscope with attached digital                      
              plotter, a dual-display digital multimeter, a function                         
              generator with adjustable sweep, and an adjustable, regulated                  
              DC power supply.  Six oscilloscope multiplexers and two digital                
              LC meters have been acquired to supplement existing and                        
              compatible equipment.  The digital multimeters are supplied                    
              with IEEE-488 interfaces to permit their use with the                          
              department standard hardware and software for student projects.
