Title       : Programming in the Large Vs. Programming in the Lounge: Software Engineering
               Meets Portable Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1992      
File        : a9251836

Award Number: 9251836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernd Bruegge bb2b+@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan L. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              For several years, the undergraduate software engineering                      
              course at Carnegie Mellon University has revolved around the                   
              specification, design and prototyping of an ambitious real                     
              system such as an E-mail to FAX interface and an interactive                   
              city directory system including building directories, maps and                 
              bus routing information.  The process of organizing an entire                  
              class of some thirty students toward a single technical goal is                
              itself one of the object lessons of the course.  This ILI                      
              funding will assist in moving this course to a new level of                    
              excitement, by providing a notebook computer with a wireless                   
              network interface to be used by each student.  Students will                   
              use the computers to  organize their group project and work                    
              collaboratively on its implementation.  The students will also                 
              implement their system on the network, opening the door to a                   
              limitless set of projects prototyping collaborative and                        
              personal productivity tools.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Three main benefits are expected from this project.  First, the                
              students in the course will have a chance to work with                         
              technologies and applications that are at the cutting edge, but                
              will soon be widespread.  Second, for that very reason,                        
              software companies may be expected to take a keen interest in                  
              these projects, which will in effect be doing rapid prototyping                
              of new kinds of products, and will be eager to interact with                   
              the students as clients and technical advisors for the course.                 
              Third, the experiences will help to pave the way for other                     
              institutions to start similar programs, introducing their                      
              students to emerging consumer information technology, as                       
              hardware costs drop and wireless portable systems become                       
              ubiquitous.
