Title       : Computer Laboratory Classroom for Undergraduate Mathematics Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1992       
File        : a9251008

Award Number: 9251008
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34213              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joaquin Bustoz bustoz@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Kostelich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthias Kawski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dieter H. Armbruster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              A computer laboratory classroom is being used full-time and                    
              exclusively for undergraduate mathematics instruction.  Through                
              the laboratory, instruction will be enhanced, providing                        
              significantly improved versions of calculus courses that are                   
              taken primarily by undergraduate majors in mathematics,                        
              engineering, and the physical sciences. The computer equipment                 
              will be used to significantly enhance student conceptual                       
              understanding of the fundamental mathematical ideas.  By                       
              incorporating computer graphics and symbolic algebra software                  
              into the lectures, students can focus on the main ideas instead                
              of the routine algebraic manipulations that most students                      
              associate with mathematical activity.  In addition,                            
              experimental versions of undergraduate courses in multivariable                
              calculus, ordinary differential equations, and linear algebra                  
              will be developed.  During each of the fall and spring                         
              semesters, about twelve sections of first-year calculus courses                
              (totaling 480 students per semester) will meet in the                          
              laboratory at least weekly, and four sections of the more                      
              advanced courses (totaling 160 students per semester) will be                  
              taught exclusively in this laboratory.In the summer, the                       
              laboratory will provide a greatly expanded, full-time facility                 
              for the Arizona State University Minority Youth Program, the                   
              goal of which is to increase the supply of students from                       
              traditionally under represented ethnic groups majoring in                      
              mathematics and science.  During each summer 200 high school                   
              student participants will be taught in this facility.
