Title       : X Window Computer Laboratory for Communication and Control Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1992      
File        : a9251292

Award Number: 9251292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59782              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrzej Z. Manitius   (Principal Investigator current)
              Guy O. Beale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey C. Orsak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Auletta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project will foster illustration, interpretation, and                     
              integration of theoretical concepts in communication, signal                   
              processing, and control systems through the use of a modern                    
              computer laboratory.  Undergraduate students will be exposed                   
              early to a state-of-the-art networked computing system, the X-                 
              Window environment, and several high-level computational tools.                
              The hands-on laboratory experiments in an introductory lab                     
              course will develop in the sophomore students the ability to                   
              simulate waveforms, noise, simple filters, and basic linear                    
              systems.  To enhance the pivotal course in signal and system                   
              theory, the junior level students will experiment with the                     
              numerical simulation of a broad variety of signals and systems.                
              In the laboratory courses associated with the senior level                     
              courses, students will experiment with the simulation and                      
              design of realistic communication, control, and signal                         
              processing systems.  In addition, the laboratory will be an                    
              important resource for senior design projects.  This laboratory                
              will provide students with better insight into the fundamental                 
              concepts of communication and control.  At the same time, it                   
              will better prepare students for both modern industry and                      
              graduate school.  Equipment to be purchased includes:  26 X-                   
              Window terminals, additional processors, memory and disk drive                 
              for the existing Sparc-class server, and networking hardware.                  
              The ease of use of this equipment by undergraduate students                    
              will be achieved by developing an optimized X-Window graphical                 
              user interface, course materials, class projects, an electronic                
              library of problems and solutions, and by providing the                        
              students with an introduction to modern computing and                          
              simulation software within the first laboratory course.
