Title       : Introduction of Experimental Optics for Science and Non-Science Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1992      
File        : a9251337

Award Number: 9251337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22833              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Dunn Dunn@mercury.hendrix.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hendrix College
	      1600 Washington Avenue
	      Conway, AR  72032    501/329-6811

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              When the principal investigator arrived at Hendrix College                     
              three years ago, there were no advanced optics courses and no                  
              optics laboratories at any level.  Since we felt that an                       
              understanding of light and its interaction with matter is an                   
              essential part of a physics curriculum and that hands-on                       
              experiences will greatly enhance that understanding, the                       
              physics department has been making a concerted effort to remedy                
              that situation.  This project provides the laboratory equipment                
              needed to implement optics laboratories and demonstrations                     
              throughout the physics curriculum.  The non-science majors are                 
              being provided with an exposure to experimental optics through                 
              four contact hours of laboratories and demonstrations that are                 
              being integrated into their lecture sessions.  For the science                 
              majors in our introductory courses, four of the laboratory                     
              sessions in the second term are devoted to optics.  This                       
              provides 12 contact hours of experimental optics.  The modern                  
              optics course has eight laboratory sessions, which provides 24                 
              hours of contact time.  Most physics majors participate in                     
              undergraduate research while at Hendrix.  This project provides                
              the basic resources for offering student research projects in                  
              optical data processing, holography, fiber optics, and laser                   
              physics.  Since we provide for such a wide range of courses,                   
              the proposed equipment has multiple uses.   Special attention                  
              has been paid in the purchase of the equipment to insure the                   
              compatibility of components between projects.  Portions of all                 
              the apparatus is being woven into the laboratories at each                     
              level.  The emphasis at the lower levels is in geometric and                   
              physical optics.  At the upper levels, the emphasis shifts to                  
              more specific topics in contemporary optics.
