Title       : Health Physics Instrument Simulator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1992 
File        : a9251541

Award Number: 9251541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99997              (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Samuel Hurst   (Principal Investigator current)
              Harvel A. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Consultec Scientific, Inc
	      725 Pellissippi Pkwy, Suite 110
	      Knoxville, TN  379323300    615/675-4333

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9255,
Abstract    :
              Most recent labor studies predict a shortage of health                         
              physicists during the next several decades.  Failure to prevent                
              this shortage will leave the United States in a disadvantage in                
              a number of areas: nuclear power, radiological waste                           
              management, nuclear medicine, etc.  One solution to this                       
              shortage is to expand existing training programs and to create                 
              new training programs.  Another solution is to improve the                     
              effectiveness of the training programs.  A major part of health                
              physics training is devoted to learning how to use radiation                   
              detection and monitoring instruments.  This is accomplished by:                
              1) using instruments and radioactive sources in a classroom                    
              laboratory situation, and/or, 2) on-the-job training.                          
                                                                                             
              This project is developing an innovative new approach to                       
              laboratory training in health physics, i.e., the development of                
              a computer simulator that can be used in place of actual                       
              radiation sources in laboratory training.  Such a simulator                    
              will result in much lower cost of training, provide for a wider                
              variety of training situations, and eliminate the safety                       
              hazards associated with actual radiation sources.  We are                      
              building a computer system that will simulate the presence of                  
              various types of radiation sources in a variety of                             
              environments.  This system, based on the IBM PC, will have                     
              three modules, Surveyor, Radiation Physics Laboratory, and                     
              Examination.  The Surveyor will simulate an environment where                  
              radiation exposure potential exists.  This environment will                    
              include pre-defined locations (known or unknown to the trainee)                
              of radiation sources (Alpha, Beta, Gamma and Neutron) and the                  
              ability to simulate the radiation level at any given point in                  
              the radiation environment.  This module will be connected                      
              (through a digital to analog converter) to an actual instrument                
              (or facade) so that the trainee can hold the instrument in                     
              his/her hand.  The Radiation Physics Laboratory module will                    
              teach the principles of various types of radiation and the                     
              Examination module, based on the Surveyor, will test the                       
              knowledge of the trainee of the properties of various types of                 
              radiation and the ability of the trainee in the radiation                      
              environment.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              A simulator of this type will have far reaching effects on the                 
              health physics industry.  It will streamline the way health                    
              physics professionals are trained and will facilitate an                       
              increase in the number of personnel trained in the health                      
              physics discipline.  In addition, this system will be used to                  
              train personnel working in and around potential hazards, will                  
              improve their understanding of the principles of radiation                     
              physics and radiation protection and will decrease the cost of                 
              training.
