Title       : Modern Physics Laboratory Course Development Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1992       
File        : a9251211

Award Number: 9251211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7264               (Estimated)
Investigator: Majid Sawtarie   (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell Clothier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bethany College
	      
	      Bethany, WV  26032    304/829-7000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This is a project by the physics faculty of Bethany College to                 
              improve the quality of the senior- level Modern Physics                        
              Laboratory course through the acquisition of some new                          
              equipment.  This project has enabled the department to change                  
              the emphasis of the course from a repetition of classic                        
              experiments in modern physics to the carrying out of more                      
              current, topical experiments in solid-state physics and modern                 
              optics.  Students are able to gain hands-on experience                         
              investigating important microscopic physical phenomena using                   
              modern instrumentation and data acquisition equipment, which                   
              serves as a vital introduction to the world of modern physics                  
              research.  The upgrade also enables students to verify and                     
              reinforce concepts discussed theoretically in several upper-                   
              level courses.  In addition, their experiences serve as a basis                
              for independent research projects carried out in the students'                 
              senior year.  The equipment is also be used for these research                 
              projects.The lab course focusses on two active areas of physics                
              research:  solid state physics and modern optics.  Equipment                   
              consists basically of three items:  a cryogenic dewar, and an                  
              electromagnet for solid state studies, and an optical table                    
              with accessories for optical experiments.  With existing                       
              equipment and further departmental acquisitions, these will                    
              allow a range of modern experiments and techniques to be                       
              explored.
