Title       : Coupled Chemical Reactor/Distillation Column Experiment for Chemical Engineering
               Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1995  
File        : a9251715

Award Number: 9251715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey G. Stenger hgs0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Luyben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              A new experimental apparatus is being constructed in the                       
              chemical engineering unit operations laboratory at Lehigh                      
              University.  The equipment illustrates the effects of various                  
              design and operating parameters in a coupled chemical process:                 
              a reactor with a distillation column mounted on top.  While                    
              distillation and reaction processes are well established, the                  
              design and operation of the coupled units represent a novel and                
              challenging problem for chemical engineering undergraduates.                   
              When appropriate, this type of reactive distillation process                   
              has significant advantages over the decoupled system: (1)                      
              yields and conversions can be increased and reactor size                       
              reduced by removing one of the products of the reaction by                     
              distillation, and (2) energy consumption can be reduced by                     
              using the heat of reaction to generate vapor for the separation                
              in the column.  The major pieces of the apparatus are a reactor                
              and distillation column, and other equipment include condenser,                
              reflux drum, vacuum pumps, control valves, feed and reflux                     
              pumps, and tankage for feed and products.  The experiment is                   
              used in a senior laboratory for undergraduate chemical                         
              engineering students, and is the first time that these students                
              have been exposed to a complex process which combines two unit                 
              operations.  Thus, it provides a deeper understanding of the                   
              underlying principles involved in the design and operation of                  
              both chemical reactors and distillation columns, and                           
              illustrates the sometimes obvious and the sometimes subtle                     
              interactions between these two operations.
