Title       : Hands-On Telecommunications Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1992      
File        : a9251984

Award Number: 9251984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75342              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Spitzer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Chi Fai Ho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher L. Morgan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Hayward
	      25800 Carlos Bee Boulevard
	      Hayward, CA  94542    415/881-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project will complete the first (two year) phase of                       
              establishing a hands-on telecommunications laboratory,                         
              supporting undergraduate instruction in Information Systems,                   
              Computer Networks, Computer Architecture and Networking                        
              Software.  It is a joint interdisciplinary project including                   
              Computer Information Systems (CIS) in the School of Business                   
              and Computer Science (CS) in the School of Science.  Data                      
              communications laboratory courses from both disciplines are                    
              presently being offered using the equipment on hand.  The                      
              current courses are designed to teach the basics of data                       
              communications, including transmission media, LAN                              
              configurations, operation, management and diagnosis.  However,                 
              the current laboratory does not include network analysis nor                   
              fiber optic equipment.  These limitations severely restrict the                
              scope of the possible experiences.  The equipment to be                        
              purchased under this project will allow students to carry out                  
              a full complement of experiments.  The goal is to provide                      
              students with direct, hands-on experience in designing,                        
              assembling, testing, modifying and diagnosing                                  
              telecommunications networks.  Over a five year period it is                    
              planned to expand from data communications to a laboratory                     
              which will support experiments in the high speed transmission                  
              and switching of multiform information, including data, images,                
              voice and video.
