Title       : An Interactive, Discovery-Oriented Approach to Introductory Physics Using
               Microcomputer-Based Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1992      
File        : a9251586

Award Number: 9251586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14268              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Collins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wheaton College
	      26 East Main Street
	      Norton, MA  027660930    508/286-8239

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The project entails the introduction of microcomputer-based                    
              laboratories into the introductory physics curriculum.  These                  
              microcomputer-based laboratories replace existing labs in the                  
              introductory calculus-based course and in the introductory                     
              course for non-scientists.  Studies indicate that introductory                 
              courses in physics do a poor job in developing the students                    
              conceptual understanding of even the most basic physical                       
              concepts, and that an interactive and discovery-oriented                       
              approach is much more effective.  Rather than the standard                     
              labs, in which students do experiments to verify formulas                      
              discussed in lecture, it is much more effective to have                        
              students discover the formula or relationship themselves.                      
              Similar to the professional physicist, students are doing                      
              physics at the forefront of their knowledge--also similar is                   
              their level of enthusiasm. The microcomputer-based laboratories                
              and associated curricular materials provide the tools for                      
              students to become active participants in the learning process.                
              The Motion program allows the students to observe real time                    
              displays of their own motion, and that of other familiar                       
              objects, and actively engages the students in discovering the                  
              relationship between position, velocity, and acceleration.  The                
              real-time display enables students to redo experiments very                    
              quickly, allowing them to discover for themselves the                          
              experimental process, and giving then the freedom to explore                   
              new situations.  Curricular materials are currently available                  
              for Mechanics, Sound, and Heat and Temperature.  The hardware                  
              for the microcomputer-based laboratories is also being used in                 
              the Electricity and Magnetism labs in conjunction with                         
              materials recently developed at M.I.T. called ZAP: A Hands-on                  
              Introduction to Electricity and Magnetism.  All of the                         
              laboratories are highly interactive.
