Title       : CCDs and Spectroscopy for Introductory and Intermediate Students at Eight
               Liberal-Arts College Astronomy Departments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1992       
File        : a9251373

Award Number: 9251373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Priscilla J. Benson pbenson@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Lee Hawkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen P. Boughn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Balonek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. Frank Winkler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The Keck Northeast Astronomy Consortium (KNAC), consisting of                  
              the astronomy and astronomy/physics departments at Colgate                     
              University, Haverford College, Middlebury College, Swarthmore                  
              College, Vassar College, Wellesley College, Wesleyan                           
              University, and Williams College, is upgrading the laboratory                  
              experiences of its astronomy students.  The departments are                    
              bringing new CCD technology for imaging and spectroscopy to                    
              introductory and intermediate level students by purchasing                     
              spectrographs, X-terminals, computer memory, and hard disks for                
              existing CCD cameras and workstations.  They will then be able                 
              to teach image processing techniques to classes as well as                     
              introduce the important astrophysical technique of spectroscopy                
              to all levels of students.  Exercises include:  cluster H-R                    
              diagrams; supernova, stellar, and asteroid light curves;                       
              parallax of asteroids; astrometry of asteroids; using planetary                
              moons to illustrate Kepler's Laws; taking spectra and observing                
              the binary system Albireo in the B and V filters to show how                   
              the magnitude with each filter correlates with the observed                    
              color differences and spectral type; and identification of                     
              stellar spectra.
