Title       : INtegrating LABoratory Instruction and Assessment (INLAB)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1992       
File        : a9154840

Award Number: 9154840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Stewart                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $628821             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Shepardson dshep@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal provides a plan for improving the quality of                     
              laboratory instruction and assessment techniques in the middle                 
              school. More specifically, the goals of the project are: (a)                   
              to improve the quality of laboratory instruction at the middle                 
              school level; (b) to increase the use of practical assessment                  
              techniques in middle school classrooms; and (c) develop                        
              leadership teams to inservice and mentor peers. To accomplish                  
              these goals, 30 middle school teachers in the school system in                 
              West Lafayette, Indiana will be involved in content,                           
              pedagogical knowledge based on a laboratory system which                       
              sequences laboratory instruction.                                              
                                                                                             
              The project initially involves 30 teachers that will receive                   
              direct training throughout the three years of project                          
              duration. During year three, the thirty teachers will conduct                  
              staff development programs pyramiding the teacher impact of                    
              the project. The pyramiding effect has been estimated at 10                    
              new teachers impacted per original participant for 300 peer-                   
              trained teachers (30 x 10 = 300). Thus, the project will                       
              impact 30 teachers plus 300 peer-trained teachers for a total                  
              of 330 teachers over a three-year period.                                      
                                                                                             
              The ultimate goal of the proposal is to provide a laboratory                   
              instructional system, as well as the training necessary to                     
              improve laboratory instructional practices and teachers                        
              attitudes toward laboratory instruction. The system involves                   
              the teachers in three different types of laboratory                            
              activities: (1) Confirmation Laboratory Activities which deal                  
              with direct experience with materials designed to demonstrate                  
              or verify principles or concepts that have been previously                     
              discussed and are already part of the teachers experience; (2)                 
              Generalization Laboratory Activities which provide teachers                    
              with a wide range of experiences that can be used to link                      
              direct experience with abstractions - concepts, principles,                    
              and theories; and (3) Resolution Laboratory Activities which                   
              engage teachers in problem solving situations that will                        
              require them to resolve problems in the laboratory. These                      
              three different types of laboratory experiences will prepare                   
              teachers in ways to  sequence laboratory activities in their                   
              classrooms to better achieve conceptual understanding of                       
              science by their students.                                                     
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing is equivalent to 6% of the NSF award.
