Title       : Manufacturing as a Vehicle to Illustrate Principles of Science, Mathematics, and
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1992      
File        : a9154176

Award Number: 9154176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Haver                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clayton O. Ruud cor1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul H. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura B. Raiman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sanjay B. Joshi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              E. Amine Lehtihet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9268,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to stimulate and assist                       
              teachers of future scientists and engineers in their efforts as                
              instructors and advisors by introducing them to new                            
              developments and illustrating applications of their disciplines                
              to the production of consumer goods, i.e. manufacturing.                       
              Specifically, the project conducts short courses using the Penn                
              State University Manufacturing laboratories to assist large                    
              numbers of faculty (science, mathematics, and engineering) from                
              other colleges and universities to learn new ideas and                         
              techniques in their teaching discipline to add vitality to and                 
              improve their undergraduate teaching abilities.  The project is                
              designed to accommodate a large number of participants, and                    
              thus will focus both upon the two- and four-year coalition of                  
              the Penn State Commonwealth campuses and minority colleges and                 
              universities associated with Penn State.  The association                      
              between undergraduate courses and the basic principles that are                
              used in the manufacture of consumer products are used as a                     
              vehicle so as to stimulate excitement and the recognition of                   
              the relevance of the freshman and sophomore undergraduate                      
              science, mathematics and engineering subject matter.  Students                 
              in engineering, science and mathematics in the first two years                 
              of college are often taught the basic principles with the use                  
              of abstract models that have little relevance to "real world"                  
              applications.  However, manufacturing processes and systems and                
              the techniques used to evaluate quality often illustrate                       
              principles of science, mathematics and engineering.  The                       
              conduct of this undergraduate faculty enhancement project will                 
              use manufacturing as a vehicle to illustrate the relevant                      
              application of basic scientific, mathematical and engineering                  
              principles.  Illustrations are developed, simulated, and                       
              modeled to provide a firm relationship between the principle                   
              and manufacturing application.  Through this procedure the                     
              disciplinary capabilities and teaching skills of undergraduate                 
              faculty in science, mathematics and engineering will be                        
              enhanced.  Further, the use of manufacturing as a vehicle                      
              demonstrates the relevance of the understanding and application                
              of the basic principles to our country's economic vitality.
