Title       : SGER: Conceptual Development About Forces & Motion In Elementary/Middle School
               Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MDR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1991    
File        : a9154015

Award Number: 9154015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond J. Hannapel                     
	      MDR  DIV OF MATRS DEV, & INFORM SCIENCE EDUCA
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49918              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dewey I. Dykstra   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale R. Sweet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boise State University
	      1910 University Drive
	      Boise, ID  837250001    208/385-1011

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Coming to a differentiated view of motion seems to be                     
              one of the important prerequisites for coming to a Newtonian                   
              view of forces.  In this project we will attempt to induce                     
              change in student conceptions of motion and forces.  The                       
              microcomputer-based laboratory (MBL) approach has been shown                   
              to accomplish this for high school and college students.  We                   
              intend to find out to what extent the same will be true for                    
              students in the fourth, sixth, and eighth grades.  These                       
              students will use MBL equipment in a series of collaborative                   
              lessons which are designed to induce cognitive                                 
              disequilibration and then to facilitate student efforts in                     
              making sense of the surprises they uncover in the laboratory                   
              activities.  We will be looking for evidence of change in                      
              their descriptions of motion and for evidence that they can                    
              be disequilibrated over the contradiction between their                        
              beliefs about causes of motion and how forces are seen to                      
              influence to the motion of real objects.  To the extent that                   
              such evidence is found in students at a particular grade                       
              level, a case can be made for an attempt to induce change to                   
              a more Newtonian view of forces at that grade level.  The                      
              project is significant also in that it involves action                         
              research.  A classroom teacher will be a co-investigator in                    
              the research.  The findings of the project will:                               
                                                                                             
                   1.   have strong implications for curriculum design and                   
                        our notions about factors which determine student                    
                        conceptual learning and                                              
                                                                                             
                   2.   provide valuable insights into the practical                         
                        aspects of inducing conceptual change in the                         
                        classroom.
