Title       : Interactive Videodisc Technology and the Assessment of Safety Awareness of
               Science Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1991  
File        : a9154557

Award Number: 9154557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond Pecheone   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Conn St Dept of Education
	      
	      Hartford, CT  06115    /   -

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                  The Connecticut State Department of Education will                        
              carry out a project, funded through a SGER grant, which                        
              will research the feasibility and validity of using                            
              interactive video as a means of assessing new teachers'                        
              knowledge of laboratory safety.  The number of demands and                     
              requirements placed on teachers regarding safe laboratory                      
              practice has increased greatly in the last few years.  In                      
              response to these increased regulations, beginning teachers                    
              often avoid hands-on laboratory activities due to liability                    
              concerns and their lack of confidence in their ability to                      
              carry out the activities safely.  The goal of the project                      
              is to develop an instrument which can assess whether a                         
              teacher can recognize unsafe laboratory practice in a real                     
              laboratory environment and to strengthen areas in which the                    
              teacher is weak.  The project would be part of a new                           
              program of assessment of teacher competency for                                
              certification which is under development in Connecticut.                       
                                                                                             
                   The project will carry out research to determine                          
              whether this interactive mode of assessment provides more                      
              authentic, valid, and reliable data on teacher competency                      
              in lab safety than traditional pencil-and-paper                                
              instruments.  The interactive video format can capture the                     
              ambiance of a real laboratory situation with its                               
              distractions, disturbances, confusion, and multiple                            
              activities, and the interactive video will be able to                          
              measure how well the teacher can cope with this environment                    
              in real time.  The results of this assessment will indicate                    
              the areas in which a teacher needs additional work, and                        
              support will be provided so that the teacher will                              
              ultimately feel knowledgeable, competent, and confident in                     
              carrying out hands-on laboratory experiences.  A group of                      
              experienced teachers has participated in identifying the                       
              most common and significant types of safety violations                         
              which should be included in the interactive video                              
              materials.  Teachers will continue to be involved in the                       
              project in reviewing and field-testing the materials and in                    
              a mentorship program to support beginning teachers in                          
              following effective laboratory practices.                                      
                                                                                             
                   The State of Connecticut's cost-sharing is 2.7 times                      
              greater than NSF's contribution.
