Title       : Factors Related to Persistence and Nonpersistence of Women in Math, Science, and
               Technology: A Longitudinal Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9154064

Award Number: 9154064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iris C. Rotberg                         
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259071             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen S. Farmer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Peshkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Wardrop  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Glidden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7260      DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This study is related to the goal of increasing the number and            
              quality of American workers in Science and Engineering (S&E)                   
              careers, including women and minorities, inorder to increase                   
              national productivity in these areas and our ability to compete in             
              world markets.  A related issue is the underrepresentation of                  
              female and minority students in science and mathematics courses in             
              precollege education as well as the low entry and retention rates              
              of undergraduate students in S&E programs in higher education.  The            
              purpose of the study is to obtain longitudinal data that provide an            
              understanding of what has happened in the formative adolescent                 
              years and what has happened to S&E career aspirations in the                   
              intervening years leading to young adulthood.  The study has three             
              phases: (1) The first phase, funded by the National Institute of               
              Education, was carried out in 1980 when data were collected from               
              9th and 12th grade students in 2 rural, 2 suburban, and 2 inner                
              city schools.  These were randomly selected sites throughout                   
              Illinois.  (2) The second phase is the collection and                          
              interpretation of follow-up questionnaire data obtained in 1990.               
              (3) The third phase is to interview participants who expressed a               
              strong interest in an S&E career in 1980 or are currently in an S&E            
              career.  The interview will be designed to provide information                 
              about why some persisted in this interest and others did not.                  
              Working with the Illinois State Board of Education and the Illinois            
              Board of Higher Education personnel, strategies for increasing                 
              interest, participation, and performance in science and mathematics            
              career will be proposed for implementation at the high school and              
              college level based on the findings from this study.
