Title       : A National Program for Improving the Physical Science Preparation of Preservice
               Elementary Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1991    
File        : a9154024

Award Number: 9154024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Marie Smith                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $598292             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald F. Kirwan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard V. Khoury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Inst of Physics
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403842    /   -

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The American Institute of Physics will carry out a                        
              project to improve instruction in college and university                       
              physical science courses for preservice elementary school                      
              teachers.  Instructional modules for a college course in                       
              physical science will be produced based on materials                           
              developed by the Operation Physics project.  The course                        
              will emphasize the teachers' acquiring a better                                
              understanding of the physical science concepts they would                      
              be required to teach, an awareness of both their own and                       
              children's naive ideas about physical science phenomena,                       
              and a repertoire of techniques and strategies which they                       
              can use in their classroom to help children better learn                       
              and understand physical science concepts.  A group of                          
              outstanding physics and chemistry educators will contribute                    
              to the writing and field testing of the materials.  An                         
              extensive program of college faculty enhancement will be                       
              undertaken to educate faculty in the best practices of                         
              teaching physical science and how the materials should be                      
              used with prospective teachers.  Field test instructors                        
              will be solicited both through AAPT and ACS publications.                      
              The cost-sharing will be 24% of NSF's contribution.
