Title       : Elementary Teacher Preparation Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1991     
File        : a9154518

Award Number: 9154518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail S. Young   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Consort Mathe/Its Applic
	      57 Bedford Street
	      Lexington, MA  02420    781/862-7878

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Consortium for Mathematics and Its Applications, Inc.                      
              (COMAP) seeks funding for one year to conduct a study of the                   
              mathematical preparation of elementary teachers in colleges                    
              and universities in the country.  The study will be conducted                  
              in two parts.  The first part, a quantitative study, will                      
              survey a large sample of institutions of higher education to                   
              determine the number of courses required, corresponding course                 
              descriptions, and departments offering the course/s.  The                      
              second part will be a qualitative survey using a smaller                       
              sample of schools; the data collected will include detailed                    
              course descriptions, tests, texts used, and other resource                     
              materials.  Anecdotal information on the relationship and                      
              collaboration between mathematics departments and colleges of                  
              education will be obtained in order to have insights on the                    
              design and implementation of all components of elementary                      
              mathematics teacher education.  The results of the study will                  
              be disseminated to all mathematics department chairs and to                    
              preservice program directors.  It will also be publicized                      
              through various professional journals.                                         
                                                                                             
              The findings of this study will help the profession determine                  
              the present status of the mathematics preparation of                           
              elementary teachers and guide future directions and                            
              initiatives in mathematics education.  The impact of the                       
              project will be very significant to institutions with                          
              elementary mathematics preservice program departments, to                      
              professional organizations, to certification units in state                    
              departments of education, and to funding agencies.                             
                                                                                             
              The study is supported by the Mathematical Association of                      
              America (MAA) and the American Mathematical Society (AMA).                     
              Both of these organizations will supply membership lists and                   
              information on departments and individuals.  The executive                     
              directors of the  AMS and MAA will endorse the survey through                  
              cover letters sent with questionnaires.  In addition, the                      
              Exxon Foundation will support the study with an award of one-                  
              half of the costs of the project.
