Title       : A Model for the Mathematics Preparation of Elementary School Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1991    
File        : a9154045

Award Number: 9154045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $621830             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. I. Weinzweig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The University of Illinois, Chicago seeks funding for                     
              athree year program:  A Model for the Mathematics                              
              Preparation of Elementary School Teachers.  The  PI                            
              proposes to restructure the sequence of required                               
              mathematics courses for elementary school preservice                           
              teachers in order to develop mathematical thinking through                     
              problem solving situations on a variety of topics which                        
              make connections to other disciplines.  The courses will be                    
              designed to develop positive belief systems about the                          
              nature of mathematic and the process of learning and                           
              teaching mathematics.  A major component of the course are                     
              school-based experiences in multicultural settings with                        
              master teachers who have studied mathematics through                           
              inservice programs with the PI.  The schools in the project                    
              are  heavily populated with minorities, primarily Blacks                       
              and Hispanics.  Students will observe in the schools and                       
              analyze in the college classroom video recordings of school                    
              mathematics classes.  Teachers will help to develop the                        
              program, in particular the problem solving episodes, and                       
              they will serve on the project's advisory board.                               
                                                                                             
                   The project will also serve the needs of preservice                       
              teachers who have deficient mathematics backgrounds and                        
              would have to take remedial courses before entering the                        
              elementary mathematics course sequence.  Instead, these                        
              students will be allowed to take the new courses and will                      
              be given additional help which will enhance their                              
              mathematical skills and attitudes.  Since at least 50% of                      
              the preservice students in the remedial track are minority                     
              students, the program will address the issue of equal                          
              access for all.  The project staff will also work with the                     
              new teachers throughout their first year of teaching, with                     
              weekly support meetings in which they will receive                             
              additional preparation.  The materials developed                               
              for the project will be three distinct sets:  a problem set                    
              with discussions and explanations for the preservice                           
              teachers;  a similar set for the inservice teacher with                        
              additional pedagogical insights and assessments components                     
              as well as problems for children; and a complete set of                        
              materials for college instructors with references to                           
              mathematics education research.  Initially, the materials                      
              will be disseminated at cost through NCTM and the                              
              University. Eventually, a publisher will make materials                        
              available commercially.                                                        
                                                                                             
                   The University of Illinois, Chicago is providing a                        
              cost-share amount which is equal to 25% of the NSF cost.                       
              Argonne Laboratories are providing computer equipment.
