Title       : Quality Engineering Workshop: Methodologies for Achieving Quality in Integrated
               Design/Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1992   
File        : a9154194

Award Number: 9154194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Haver                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83358              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Ramberg ramberg@sie.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9268,
Abstract    :
              New quality engineering technologies, that include                             
              methodologies for robust system/product/process design and the                 
              incorporation of quality considerations in the modern                          
              integrated engineering design/manufacturing system, are in a                   
              rapid state of development.  These methodologies employ                        
              engineering/statistical experiment design, loss functions,                     
              quality function deployment and elements of the controversial                  
              Taguchi parameter and tolerance design methods.  Based on                      
              modern quality/reliability philosophies and technical                          
              communication tools, they enhance the role of quality                          
              engineering to include planning and improvement, in addition to                
              quality control.  They also extend the concept to include the                  
              total life cycle of the system or product.  Engineering                        
              Colleges lag industry in both the teaching and researching of                  
              these technologies, and most engineering undergraduate                         
              education is essentially limited to the traditional concepts of                
              quality control.  The objective of the Quality Engineering                     
              Workshop is to present these new quality engineering                           
              technologies, to provide successful examples of their                          
              application, to illustrate these concepts through laboratory                   
              experiments and computer simulations, and to demonstrate and                   
              compare associated computer software.  The workshop should                     
              assist faculty to play key roles in the development of quality                 
              engineering courses at their own schools by convincing them of                 
              the importance of expanding traditional quality control courses                
              to quality engineering, and providing them with materials and                  
              strategies for playing a significant role in the total quality                 
              management movement in their institution.
