Title       : Clark Atlanta University Center for Theoretical Studies of Physical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1997  
File        : a9154077

Award Number: 9154077
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4751658            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred Z. Msezane amsezane@ctsps.cau.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Carlos R. Handy  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Beatriz H. Cardelino  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Clark Atlanta University
	      223 James P. Brawley Dr. S.W.
	      Atlanta, GA  303144358    404/880-8000

NSF Program : 9131      CENTERS FOR RSCH EXCELL IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9131,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This Minority Research Center of Excellence (MRCE) project at                  
              Clark Atlanta University represents the establishment of a                     
              Center for Theoretical Studies of Physical Systems (CTSPS).                    
              The Center will consolidate and expand existing research                       
              capabilities in physics through the development of                             
              interdisciplinary research clusters in:  (1) atomic and                        
              molecular theory; (2) quantum few/many body problems; and (3)                  
              mathematical physics and applied mathematics.  The clusters                    
              will strengthen ties with several national and international                   
              scientific institutions.  This MRCE is located within an area                  
              that has the largest consortium of private minority                            
              institutions in this nation.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The CTSPS will play a major role in increasing the                             
              participation of underrepresented minorities in science and                    
              engineering.  The Center will mount a comprehensive mentoring                  
              and tutoring program to encourage more precollege and                          
              undergraduate students to pursue doctoral degrees in the                       
              physical sciences.  Researchers at the Center will:  (1)                       
              conduct a science academy in mathematics; (2) involve capable                  
              high school students in research; and (3) work with                            
              precollege physics teachers through workshops, seminars, and                   
              visually appealing scientific demonstrations.  The CTSPS                       
              faculty members are well respected in the scientific                           
              community because of their publications in refereed journals                   
              and their participation in national and international                          
              professional conferences.  Because of this record, the Center                  
              will conduct a feasibility study for a Ph.D. program in                        
              physics during the fourth year of existence.  Collaborations                   
              will be strengthened with the physics departments of MIT,                      
              Georgia Tech, Stanford, and the University of Wisconsin.  In                   
              addition, ties will be maintained with the Center for                          
              Theoretical Physics in Trieste, Italy.
