Title       : Integrating Science and Mathematics Teaching for the Middle School
               Underrepresented Student
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1992       
File        : a9154824

Award Number: 9154824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Spresser                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $555571             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Price   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Burke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly Pomona Fdn, Inc
	      
	      Pomona, CA  91768    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Cal State Poly Pomona will conduct a three-year project                        
              "Integrating Science and Mathematics Teaching for the Middle                   
              School Underrepresented Student" for two-member teams, one                     
              mathematics and one science teacher, from each of 18                           
              middle/junior high schools in Eastern Los Angeles (CA)                         
              County having high minority populations.  "Hands-on",                          
              integrated, real-life instructional activities will be                         
              centered around a four-week summer workshop with each year                     
              having a specific theme integrating topics in the physical,                    
              life, and earth sciences as well as mathematics.  The themes                   
              for the first, second and third years are THE ENVIRONMENT,                     
              CONSUMER DECISION-MAKING, and SPACESHIP EARTH, respectively.                   
              During the workshop the teachers will as students experience                   
              active, learner-centered involvement in their own learning.                    
              Project staff includes district middle school teachers and                     
              supervisors as well as university science, mathematics, and                    
              engineering faculty experienced in school inservice content                    
              and pedagogy activities.   The summer experience will then                     
              serve as a model of instructional strategies and content for                   
              the teachers to use in their own classes during the ensuing                    
              year, with monthly classroom visits and phone consultation                     
              between the participants and institute staff providing                         
              reinforcement and support for developing classrooms where a                    
              positive attitude toward science and mathematics will result                   
              in proportionately higher enrollment in those advanced                         
              courses after middle school.  Year-round evaluation                            
              activities will include measuring this effect, with three                      
              one-day conferences of all participants being held each of                     
              the three school years and all science and mathematics                         
              teachers participating in the last two conferences.                            
                                                                                             
              Cal Poly Pomona and participating school districts cost                        
              sharing accounts for 25.7% of the NSF budget contribution.
