Title       : Logistical Support Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1993     
File        : a9154082

Award Number: 9154082
Award Instr.: Contract                                     
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2984280            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynette Dennis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Walcoff & Associates
	      
	      Alexandria, VA  22314    /   -

NSF Program : 7260      DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The National Science Foundation Act of 1950, as amended (42               
              U.S.C. 1862, Secs. 3.a.5, 3.a.6.), directs the Foundation                      
                                                                                             
                   ...to evaluate the status and needs of the various sciences               
              and fields of engineering as evidenced by programs, projects, and              
              studies...and to take into consideration the results of such                   
              evaluations in correlating the research and educational programs               
              undertaken or supported by the Foundation...                                   
                                                                                             
                   ...to provide a central clearinghouse for the collection,                 
              interpretation, and analysis of, and the current and projected need            
              for, scientific and technical resources in the United States, and              
              to provide a source of information for policy formulation by other             
              agencies of the Federal Government....                                         
                                                                                             
                   In support of this mandate, the Office of Studies, Evaluation,            
              and Dissemination (OSED) of the National Science Foundation's                  
              Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR), serves as a               
              major source of research, policy information, and appraisals for               
              strengthening science, mathematics, and engineering education in               
              the United States; and, to provide evaluative, analytical, and                 
              policy support for the leadership efforts of the Foundation in                 
              these critical areas.  OSED is charged with the responsibility of              
              evaluating education programs conducted by the National Science                
              Foundation, coordinating evaluation of all federal mathematics and             
              science programs, and with reporting to the Congress and to the                
              Nation on the condition of science and mathematics education in the            
              United States.                                                                 
                   OSED conducts evaluations and prepares reports, summaries, and            
              analyses on science and mathematics education in elementary,                   
              secondary, and postsecondary schools through the analysis of                   
              domestic and international sample surveys of education which have              
              been supported wholly or in part by NSF or by other federal                    
              agencies.  It prepares statistical charts, graphs, tables, and text            
              for publication as requested and for official NSF publications.                
                   OSED requires assistance in conducting evaluation studies of              
              NSF programs and in preparing statistical reports on the condition             
              of mathematics and science education.  These projects require                  
              specialists in designing surveys of program participants, research             
              assistants to conduct data entry and data analysis using computer              
              statistical programs (such as SAS, SPSS, Systat, Minitab, LOTUS                
              123, and EXCEL) for evaluation projects, advice from consultants               
              who are specialists in conducting analysis of large data bases, and            
              assistance from research assistants for data entry for development             
              of questionnaires and statistical data.  Also, OSED requires                   
              assistance in holding large conferences to design studies of                   
              mathematics and science education or to discuss the implications of            
              major national studies that are underway.  The contractor would                
              assist OSED in preparing the plans and agenda for the meeting and              
              in arranging travel of participants.  Also, the contractor would               
              help OSED exhibit the programs and products of NSF at about 10                 
              conferences throughout the United States.//
