Title       : The Rivers Project Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1994     
File        : a9154383

Award Number: 9154383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: M.Patricia Morse                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1107106            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Edwardsvill
	      Campus Box 20
	      Edwardsville, IL  620250020    618/692-2000

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Rivers Project curriculum seeks to offer students and                      
              teachers the opportunity to engage in an activity based                        
              program with real world implications for the environment.                      
              Its goal is to develop a national rivers curriculum that can                   
              cross the boundaries of traditional curricular areas to                        
              unite science, social science and English.  The curriculum                     
              will propel a student force of "River Watchers" who will                       
              research and monitor rivers in their respective communities.                   
              A set of teaching materials will be developed that will:  be                   
              applicable to any river; include chemistry, biology, and                       
              geology/geography units; be interdisciplinary and                              
              incorporate English and social science elements into each                      
              set of materials; focus on teaching data collection and                        
              interpretation; and use a computer telecommunication network                   
              to transmit and evaluate river data and writings.  This                        
              curriculum development project will be a cooperative venture                   
              with state and national agencies, as well as business and                      
              industry.  The data that will be collected can be used to                      
              solve problems and can contribute to scientific, historical,                   
              and data bases.  When a Rivers Project school collects data,                   
              local state, and federal agencies will be able to access and                   
              assess the information.  Teachers and students will, in                        
              turn, devise and conduct workshops for fellow River Watcher                    
              interns, creating a network of interested, involved and                        
              learning educators and young scientists whose ultimate goal                    
              will be to work for safe, clean rivers.  Although the                          
              outcomes of the program target improved student                                
              understandings of river-related science concepts and facts,                    
              the major thrust will be to communicate a clearer view of                      
              the nature and processes of science and to actively involve                    
              students in the development of environmentally responsible                     
              behaviors.
