Title       : Science Club Network...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1994     
File        : a9154856

Award Number: 9154856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara H. Butler                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $791641             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Wagner  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger D. Mitchell  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sheridan Turner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Museum of Sci & Ind
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60601    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9180,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Museum of Science and Industry seeks to facilitate the                     
              establishment of a network of Independent science clubs.                       
              Located in Chicago's south side, the Museum operates an in-house               
              science club which has over many years developed a large                       
              investory of activities.  The members themselves, drawn from a                 
              broad socio-economic base, have contributed much of the content                
              and character of this hands-on program.  Now, in response to                   
              chicago's pressing local need for strong equity programming in                 
              science and technology education, the Museum proposes to                       
              "package" this club such that local chapters can readily be sent               
              up throughout the city land region, especially in community                    
              centers, churches and Park District recreation centers.                        
                                                                                             
              The club "package" will include:  Modules of learning activities               
              for various ages with supporting materials and equipment;                      
              Museum-coordinated trips to research and industrial sites;                     
              gatherings at the Museum; training of club facilitators; and                   
              adaptable organization format with an accounting system;                       
              recruitment of volunteers as helpers and role models;                          
              substantial help with fund-raising.  NSF support is sought for                 
              the establishment of the modules and system, and the Museum                    
              commits itself to on-going maintenance and coordination of the                 
              network.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The Science Club Network will draw extensively on existing                     
              programs, community networks and support systems.  The Museum                  
              has already elicited many commitments of financial and other                   
              support for local chapters.
