Title       : The Initial Academy Curriculum and The First Year Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1991    
File        : a9154387

Award Number: 9154387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Stewart                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1268400            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon R. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Teachers Acad for Math Sci
	      10 West 35th Street
	      Chicago, IL  606163703    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Academy for Math and Science Teachers in Chicago is                        
              part of a school reform movement which has given parents                       
              and community members more power and a greater stake in                        
              their schools.  The Academy provides the resources in math                     
              and science teaching, bringing new knowledge, expertise,                       
              teaching methodologies, a collegial environment and even                       
              prestige to teachers participating in the academy programs.                    
              This first year of a long range project involves 12                            
              participating elementary schools, 12 teachers per school                       
              for a total of 144 teachers, half of whom will come from                       
              K-3 grade levels and the rest from grades 4-8. The vision                      
              of the Academy founders is that it eventually provide                          
              inservice for all teachers in the city of Chicago.                             
                                                                                             
              For this first year, the teachers will be involved in                          
              Academy courses during the school year on a schedule of two                    
              days every other week for a period of 16 weeks for a total                     
              of 120 contact hours.  Academy trained teachers will                           
              substitute for the participating classroom teachers on an                      
              ongoing and regular basis.  These Academy teachers will                        
              also act as liaisons between the Academy and the schools                       
              for purposes of providing resources and expertise to the                       
              schools and for implementing a network among the teachers                      
              and schools.  Two week summer sessions, held both at the                       
              Academy and at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory                       
              (Fermilab), will further involve the teachers in the                           
              curriculum improvement and instructional methodology                           
              necessary for implementation of a more comprehensive                           
              science and mathematics program in the schools.  Curricula                     
              materials used both in the school year courses and the                         
              summer sessions include mathematics and science programs                       
              previously funded by NSF, such as MathTools, TIMS, CEPUP                       
              and other material.                                                            
                                                                                             
              An extensive follow-up segment as well as an assessment and                    
              evaluation of the program is planned.  The evaluation will                     
              contain two components: a) a program evaluation of the                         
              follow-up segment and b) an overall formative report on the                    
              effectiveness of the total Academy program in meeting its                      
              mission and goals.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Excellent cost-sharing is provided through grants from the                     
              Department of Energy, the Department of Education, the                         
              Amoco Foundation, the City of Chicago, the State of                            
              Illinois, other private foundations and federal agencies.
