Title       : New Directions in the Mathematics Preparation of Preservice Elementary/Middle
               School Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1992       
File        : a9154022

Award Number: 9154022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Haver                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129146             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wanda Weidemann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Kentucky Univ
	      Sponsored Programs, 106FB
	      Bowling Green, KY  421013576    270/745-4652

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Western Kentucky University seeks funding for a                           
              two-year program: New Directions in the Mathematics                            
              Preparation of Preservice Elementary/Middle School                             
              Teachers.  The purpose of the project is to assist and                         
              prepare college mathematics faculty members throughout                         
              Kentucky to teach elementary and middle grades preservice                      
              teachers.  The professional development program will take                      
              place over a period of two summers and the included                            
              academic year.  For one week each summer, the participants                     
              will be in workshops working with national consultants,                        
              with experienced mathematics educators from the state, and                     
              with classroom teachers including Presidential Award                           
              Winners in Mathematics.  The focus will be the                                 
              implementation of the National Council of Teachers of                          
              Mathematics Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for School                     
              Mathematics and the Professional Teaching Standards, as                        
              well as the Call For Change from the Mathematics                               
              Association of America. Throughout the year, the group will                    
              meet at least two additional times with funding for the                        
              additional meetings from the Exxon Foundation and support                      
              from two state organizations, The Kentucky Council of                          
              Teachers of Mathematics and the Kentucky Chapter of the                        
              Mathematics Association of America.  A new state                               
              organization, The Kentucky Mathematics Association of                          
              Teachers of Teachers was organized during the process of                       
              formulating the proposal and the group will work with the                      
              PI throughout the project and after funding ends to                            
              continue the faculty development and network.  A newsletter                    
              will also be published to connect participants to each                         
              other and to give information on state and national issues,                    
              resources and materials, and professional meetings.                            
                                                                                             
                   This project has the potential of being an exemplary                      
              model for mathematics faculty development in a state or                        
              region.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                   Participants will be selected from public and                             
              private institutions, including two-year colleges, in                          
              Kentucky and funding for their travel will be assumed by                       
              their individual institutions.                                                 
                                                                                             
                   Cost-sharing by Western Kentucky University, by the                       
              Exxon Foundation, and by other institutions of higher                          
              education in Kentucky is 51%  of the total cost requested                      
              from NSF.
