Title       : The "Playing to Win" Network Expansion Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9552567

Award Number: 9552567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valentine H. Kass                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1989434            (Estimated)
Investigator: Holly Carter hcarter@edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Elbot  (Principal Investigator former)
              Vivian Guilfoy  (Principal Investigator former)
              Antonia Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel Street
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/969-7100

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              95-52567  Gordon    ABSTRACT:  The Education Development Center (EDC) is
              implementing the national expansion and institutionalization of the Playing to
              Win (PTW) Network.  With the goal of working toward universal technology
              enfranchisement and prior support from the NSF Informal Science Education
              Program, the PTW Network currently links close to fifty agencies in a mutually
              supportive community of neighborhood technology learning centers serving people
              living in low-income areas who otherwise would have little or no access to
              computer-based technologies.  The purposes of this phase of the project are:   
                - to increase the number of affiliates nationally  - to provide effective
              support for their technology programs and to do so in a planned and thoughtful
              manner which also is flexible and responsive to the flows, demands, and
              unforeseen opportunities fro community technology center development  -- to
              move the affiliate membership toward independence and self-governance.     Each
              year of the project, PTW will work in collaboration with the United
              Neighborhood Centers of America, the Alliance fro Community Media, NTIA-funded
              programs, FreeNets, and others in three to four target areas of the US to
              recruitment additional primary affiliates.  The goal is to add 20 additional
              affiliates annually who will be supported by local coordinators and another 30
              with subsidized telecommunications support.       PTW plans to enrich
              programmatic content at the centers with special emphasis on math and science. 
              The network will support an on-line math and science program consultant and 
              continue to recruit and support affiliates with a math/science program
              emphasis.     The Co-Principal Investigators for the project will be Myles
              Gordon, Director of EDC's Center for Learning, Teaching and Technology, and
              Antonia Stone, Founder of PTW and PI for the previous phases of the project.
