Title       : PPD/SP-Conference: Invitational Conference on Learning Disabilities and the
               Teaching of Science and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9552586

Award Number: 9552586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73298              (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia W. Stern vstern@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              79        Psychology Sciences NEC                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)  will convene a
              conference to set an agenda for research and  future activities for teaching
              science and mathematics to K-12  students with learning disabilities (LD). 
              Conference  participants will be invited from three groups of experts:  
              teachers who have successfully taught science and mathematics to  precollege
              and post-secondary students with LD; neuroscientists;  and cognitive
              scientists.    Neuroscientists will explain the physical workings of the human 
              brain in the context of learning and conscious knowing, how the  brain bypasses
              dysfunctional pathways, and new technologies  that help us understand the
              brain.  Cognitive scientists will  explain how people generally learn and how
              people with LD learn  differently.  Teachers will discuss the tests that
              measure  various learning limitations and the successful strategies they  use
              in teaching science and mathematics to K-12 students with  those limitations. 
              Participants will be directed to develop the  agenda for the future.    The
              primary goals of the conference are:  1) identification of  barriers that
              prevent K-12 students with learning disabilities  from fully participating in
              science, mathematics, engineering and  technology (SMET) educational
              opportunities; 2) the development  of an agenda for research and future
              activities to remove the  barriers;  3) the dissemination of the collective
              expertise of  conference participants to interested staff at NSF and AAAS, to 
              each other, and to other leaders in the LD education community.    Secondary
              goals include:  1) a contribution to efforts to assure  equal access to science
              and mathematics learning for students  with learning disabilities by fostering
              a cross-disciplinary  approach to the underlying problems; 2)  creation of a
              core group  of experts to address the educational needs of students with LD 
              over a long period of time in the future.
