Title       : A Total Science Experience Laboratory for Biology Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1995      
File        : a9552196

Award Number: 9552196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37846              (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. McGraw   (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith Garbutt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                James B. McGraw                                                            DUE
              9552196  WV Univ Research Corp                                                 
                  FY1995 $ 37,846  Morgantown, WV  26506                                     
                              ILI - Instrumentation                                          
                                                 Project:                                    
                                                       Life Sciences    Title: A Total
              Science Experience Laboratory for Biology Majors      The Biology major at West
              Virginia University completes a rigorous  program of study, including
              chemistry, physics, mathematics,  statistics, and a linked set of core biology
              courses followed by at  least five electives. Missing from this curriculum (and
              most  science curricula) is the opportunity for every undergraduate major  to
              experience the complete process of being a scientist. This  proposal requests
              equipment to make such immersion in the process  of science possible with the
              development of a Total Science  Experience laboratory in the final required
              Biology course for  majors; Ecology and Evolution. The Total Science Experience
               laboratory is a fifteen week laboratory unit focused on response of  organisms
              to global and regional environmental change. In this  unit, students: (1) write
              a pre-proposal and grant proposal (in  response to a Request for Proposals),
              thereby learning (a) how to  conduct a computer-assisted literature review, (b)
              how to formulate  hypotheses and objectives, (c) how to design a meaningful 
              experiment to test these hypotheses, and (d) how to formulate a  convincing
              project plan, (2) write proposal reviews of other  students' proposals and
              receive mock panel reviews of grant  proposals, with 'funding' of some projects
              and others being  declined (with invited resubmission), (3) execute their 
              experiments, with full responsibility for carrying each experiment  through to
              completion, (4) analyze experimental data, with training  on use of advanced s
              tatistical software, (S) present results in a  special student symposium
              (posters and oral presentations)  including training on advanced graphics
              software, and (6) submit a  full-length manuscript to a 'journal,' followed by
              editorial review  and resubmission. A trial of this laboratory format in Spring
               semester, 1993 was extremely encouraging, as students experienced  both the
              excitement and frustrations of performing original  research. Obstacles to
              implementing this laboratory for the entire  class include insufficient
              computational power for the statistics  and graphics, and lack of controlled
              environment conditions to  offer students for their experiments. This project
              will remove  these obstacles and allow full implementation of the Total Science
               Experience laboratory.
