Title       : 'Bill Nye, the Science Guy' (Television Series)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9552587

Award Number: 9552587
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2297157            (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Brock   (Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Nye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. McKenna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Erren Gottlieb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : KCTS Television
	      401 Mercer Street
	      Seattle, WA  981094640    206/443-6717

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9552587  Brock    ABSTRACT:  KCTS Television is producing 20 new programs for
              the third season of "Bill Nye the Science Guy."  The series, which has received
              an enthusiastic public response, will continue to be on PBS stations during the
              week and syndicated to commercial stations on weekends.  The twenty topics for
              Season range from earth science, to physical science, to life science, to
              technology and include programs on such diverse subjects as spiders, time, life
              cycles, inventions, flowers, architecture, computers, probability,
              invertebrates, and forensics.      Outreach activities for the third season are
              designed an emphasis on reaching out to new audiences, especially girls and
              children of color.  The Season III outreach components consist of:    o "The
              Big News of Science" - a newsletter distributed through youth serving
              organizations as well as being mailed directly to viewers at home    o An
              at-home science kit - an easy to use kit that enables children and their
              families to perform science experiments together at home.  Two-thirds of the
              kits to be distributed directly to youth and one-third will be distributed to
              children participating in afterschool and community programs.    o Teacher's
              Kit - to be distributed to fourth grade teachers nationwide.      o Special
              appearances - As Bill Nye's schedule permits, he will present a live, traveling
              science demonstration show in selected urban communities.  The programs will be
              based at science museums, community centers, or similar venues and will include
              an explanation about the science content of the series, and demonstrations of
              science experiments where children are invited to participate.    o A PBS
              station outreach kit - This material will provide PBS outreach and education
              staff with programs, tips for developing local science outreach projects, and a
              list of informal science resources.      The staffing for Season III will
              remain basically the same as it has been for Seasons I and II.  Bill Nye will
              remain as Chief Writer and Host,  Elizabeth Brock will continue as Executive
              Producer, and James McKenna and Erren Gottlieb will remain the series
              producers.
