Title       : Policy Study on Rural Access
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1995     
File        : a9552499

Award Number: 9552499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99568              (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Wright Wwright@LL.pbs.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles F. Haughey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Int Telecomputing Cnsrtium
	      1250 24th Street
	      Washington, DC  200371124    202/466-0533

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9552499  Wright    Two consortia, the International Telecomputing Consortium
              (ITC) and  Organizations Concerned about Rural Education (OCRE), propose to 
              join forces to:  *    Stimulate and assist policy makers and leaders of rural
              school  communities to consider and resolve problems involved in providing 
              their communities with practical, active, and productive access to  the
              National Information Infrastructure (NII); and   *    Present those policy
              makers with direct familiarity wit  effective models of rural community access
              to the NII and with  comprehensive information about the operation and
              effectiveness of  such models, particularly those developed or applied in
              projects  supported by the Networking Infrastructure for Education (NIE) and 
              the Rural Systemic Initiative (RSI) programs of the National  Science
              Foundation (NSF);   *    Provide telecommunications access and support to a
              user  community open to inclusion of NSF/NIE grantees, others nominated  by
              NSF/NIE and OCRE/ITC constituents.  In this common endeavor, OCRE and ITC will
              review proposals and  accomplishments of projects sponsored by NSF that offer
              improved  access to telecommunications resources for policy makers, 
              administrators, teachers and leaders of rural school communities.  In addition
              to conference discussions, telecommunications access to  this project's file
              server will inform local leaders about what has  been tried and what has been
              accomplished by NSF projects. They  will benefit from experience-based
              knowledge of working strategies  for accessing the NII and using
              telecommunications technologies in  rural communities.       The two
              organizations will work to advance NII access for  rural schools in four ways: 
              1.   In consultation with NSF/NIE program managers, they will  examine NSF
              proposals and reports from active projects to describe  a range of concepts
              about rural infrastructure that hold  promise  for rural school communities. 
              For example, they will look at  alternative methods of access (e.g. via power 
              companies, microwave)  and community cost-share.   2.   They will conduct panel
              reviews and discussions focused on  project experiences to learn about
              strategies used to build a  sustainable infrastructure for NII access.  A
              national panel of  OCRE members will a) participate in review of selected
              NSF\NIE and  RSI proposals and reports and b) develop agenda for (and 
              participate in) rural focus groups convened at national meetings of  the Rural
              education association, other OCRE member groups (e.g.  the National School
              Board Association, school administrators  associations, the Triangle Coalition)
              and the technology conference  of the National Education Association.          
                 3.   With OCRE collaboration, ITC will develop and operate a 
              telecommunications file server to provide project participants  (e.g. rural
              leaders, NSF/NIE and RSI grantees) with:  *    Internet mailing lists on
              priority topics (e.g. rural access  to the NII);  *    Gopher and WOrld-Wide
              Web access to reports  on rural  education policy issues;   *    Interactive
              referral to relevant information databases (e.g.  the Rural Datafication
              project of CICNet, Web sites that provide  PUC rulings or universal service
              options).  4.   A summary project report will help rural communities and 
              boards of education make policy decisions about local access to the  NII and
              other telecommunications.  This report will, itself, be  designed for
              telecommunications applications.  ***
