Title       : An Undergraduate Systems Development Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9552133

Award Number: 9552133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald R. Chand DChand@Bentley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bentley College
	      c/o Sponsored Programs,MOR 324
	      Waltham, MA  024524705    781/891-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project provides computer majors a hands-on systems  development
              environment for learning how quality application  systems are developed
              rapidly.   Through this project, a systems  development laboratory, equipped
              with computer-aided software  engineering (CASE) tools, object tools, project
              management and  estimation tools, and a Lotus Notes groupware environment on 
              sixteen networked workstations, is being established.   The  workstations are
              configured with these systems development tools  that information systems
              professionals use for the construction and  maintenance of application systems.
               Two systems courses, titled  Systems Analysis and Design I and II, use the new
              laboratory.    Also, this lab is becoming an integral part of the database 
              management course and a course on object technology that is  expected to be
              added to the CIS curriculum.   In the first systems  course, students learn an
              integrated CASE tool that supports  process modeling, data modeling, and event
              modeling.   In the  second course, the focus is on building an application from
              start  to finish using James Martin's RAD (Rapid Applications Development) 
              methodology.   RAD requires a computer-supported room to conduct  JRP (Joint
              Requirements Planning) and JAD (Joint Application  Design) sessions, an
              integrated CASE tool that automatically  generates code from design
              specifications, and a networked  environment that facilitates teamwork.  
              Through these realistic  development experiences, students gain the skills and
              knowledge  that is usually acquired through working in a matured software 
              development environment.
