Title       : Development of a Laboratory in Electronics Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1995      
File        : a9552137

Award Number: 9552137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28292              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory L. Tonkay glto@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Electronics manufacturing will have a major impact on future  products.   Almost
              all automobiles, appliances, computers, and  telephones contain printed circuit
              boards, chips, or electronic  modules.   In the future, significantly more
              electronic  components and modules will be required.   Many of these 
              assemblies will be designed in the United States.   However, if  past trends
              continue, a large portion of these electronics  assemblies will be produced
              overseas.   There are many reasons  for this, one of which is that most
              undergraduate engineers never  learn about the processes required to produce
              electronic  assemblies.   They do not understand the processes and are 
              therefore less likely to fight to keep them local.   This project  is
              continuing to develop an existing Electronics Manufacturing  Laboratory by
              developing laboratory exercises and acquiring  equipment to allow engineers in
              all disciplines to study  electronics manufacturing processes.  All industrial
              engineering  students and a portion of the other engineering undergraduates 
              benefit from this project.   Two introductory experiments have  been introduced
              in IE 115/116, a required junior-level course in  the major.   A new senior
              level course with five laboratory  experiments has been developed and is open
              to all engineering  students.   Specifically, the equipment provides students
              with  the opportunity to perform experiments such as thick-film hybrid 
              production, printed circuit board production, printed circuit  board assembly
              using surface mount technology and through hole  technology, and inspection and
              testing.   Students familiar with  these processes are to enter the workforce
              and persuade their  employers that more electronics manufacturing should be
              performed  in the United States.
