Title       : An Optoelectronics Laboratory for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1995      
File        : a9552260

Award Number: 9552260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Lord   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project introduces students to optoelectronics, a key  technology for the
              future.   The new equipment is enhancing an  optoelectronics laboratory,
              allowing students to gain hands-on  experience with modern equipment in this
              interdisciplinary field.   Learning to integrate knowledge from a variety of
              fields is  essential for effective participation in the present and future 
              engineering community.   The equipment is being incorporated into  a
              junior-level Electronics class for Electrical Engineers, an  elective
              Electrical Engineering course, Optoelectronic Materials  and Devices, and
              Exploring Engineering for first-year engineering  and interested
              non-engineering-students.   The equipment  contributes a vital laboratory
              component to enhance student  learning.  Students perform experiments with
              optoelectronic  materials, devices, and systems.   Having students create their
               own optical measurement setups using available components  provides them with
              valuable experience in developing tools to  solve problems.  Students explore
              the effects of different  materials and temperature on device performance.  
              The Exploring  Engineering students compare laser diodes and light-emitting 
              diodes (LEDs) in the visible and infrared regimes.   The  Electronics students
              perform a more detailed characterization of  these devices.   The students in
              the elective perform several  experiments including materials characterization
              and  characterization of optical sources (gas lasers, laser diodes,  and LEDs),
              detectors, and modulators.   A system-level experiment  culminates the
              laboratory experience.   Since fiber optic  communication is one of the most
              important applications of  optoelectronics, system laboratories involve fiber
              optics.    Coupling an optoelectronic device into an optical fiber  introduces
              the students to the complexity of integrating the  devices they have studied
              into actual systems.  State-of-the-art  data acquisition software, LabView, is
              being integrated into the  experiments.
