Title       : Policy to Practice: Telecommunication Implementation at the School Level - A
               Regional Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1995      
File        : a9552497

Award Number: 9552497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97581              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis G. Tornatzky   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary L. Casson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Tech Council
	      P.O. Box 12293
	      Research Triangle Park, NC  27709    919/941-5145

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9552497  Tornatzky    A key premise of this proposal is that telecommunication
              and allied  information technologies have the potential to significantly 
              improve the performance and enhance the restructuring of K-12  schools, as well
              as to impact national and regional issues of  educational equity.  However, we
              also feel that the potential of  these technologies is blunted or frustrated at
              the school level by  ineffective implementation, particularly related to issues
              of  planning, strategy, training, technical support, logistics,  acceptance,
              and administrative or community support.  Simply  stated, teachers and school
              leaders lack proven and practical  strategies, tactic, and practices to affect
              the process of  technological and organizational change.    At the same time,
              implementation in schools is enacted in a multi-  level policy context.  That
              is, teachers and administrators charged  with the responsibility of technology
              implementation are confronted  with a confusing array of district, state, and
              federal policies and  programs, all presumably designed to enhance the
              transition to a  technology-enriched classroom.  These include various 
              administrative directives, funding programs, goals and standards, 
              demonstration programs are designed and launched with no empirical  evidence on
              their impacts on actual technology implementation at  the building level.    To
              rectify this problem, we propose a policy research project which  will
              systematically gather data from teachers, principals, school  districts, and
              state administrators on their practical experiences  and advice in implementing
              educational technologies and the  facilitating and /or inhibiting role that
              policy has played  therein.    Results of the project will be packaged in a
              form that will be  readily usable by practitioners and policy makers alike.  A 
              regional dissemination effort, consisting of report distribution  and
              briefings, and the launching of a regional telecommunications  network of
              exemplary implementation practioners  are proposed.  ***
