Title       : A Laboratory Classroom to Support an Alternative Technology-Based Mathematics
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1995      
File        : a9552147

Award Number: 9552147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42993              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Waller waller@dt.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elias Y. Deeba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Becerra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ananda D. Gunawardena  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ongard Sirisaengtaksin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston Downtown
	      Number One Main Street
	      Houston, TX  770023313    713/221-8000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to equip a laboratory classroom  with PCs and
              upgrade a previously existing classroom of PCs so as  to support an alternative
              technology-based mathematics curriculum  that any technical major could pursue.
                The courses affected by  this project include three standard lower-division
              sequences:  College Algebra and Applied Calculus for business majors; 
              Precalculus, Calculus I and II for physical science majors; and  Linear Algebra
              and Discrete Math for math and computer science  majors.   These sequences form
              the three branches of a  "technology track."  Courses in each branch are
              coordinated to  ensure continuity of instructional delivery, classroom 
              activities, testing, and software.  The design framework being  used to create
              the courseware is shaped by current mathematics  education reform efforts and
              includes laboratory experiences,  lean and cohesive syllabi, an emphasis on
              realistic and  meaningful applications, and a fundamental reliance on modern 
              software technology's capabilities for interaction and  visualization to
              illustrate, interpret, and explore diverse  dimensions of mathematical concepts
              and techniques in ways not  possible by other means.   Mathematica and Maple
              serve as the  computational platforms for this project.  The goal of the 
              project is to measure the true long-term impact of technology and  lab
              experiences on mathematical literacy and retention at urban  commuter schools.
