Title       : Environmental Biology: Conservation of Biodiversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a9552836

Award Number: 9552836
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Rex michael.rex@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9552836  Rex  NSF support is requested to develop  a graduate training
              program in  Conservation of Biodiversity as  part of our recently established 
              doctoral program in Environmental  Biology. The proposed program has a 
              required core curriculum in  advanced ecology, conservation  biology,
              statistics and public  policy. An innovative feature of  the program is that it
              focuses on  integrating genetic and ecological  approaches and interactions
              across  population, community and landscape  levels. Furthermore, the program 
              stresses the importance of  variation in temporal and spatial  scales in
              approaches to solving  environmental problems. Students  will acquire
              first-hand practical  experience by doing two semester-  long rotations in
              faculty  laboratories that conduct research  on levels of organization outside 
              their dissertation topic. These  laboratory internships will be  augmented by
              trips to study sites  where students will learn about  sampling techniques and
              the  challenges of field biology. The  program encompasses extensive  training
              in other important skills  including the use of modern  population genetic
              techniques, and  of geographic information systems,  to quantify and analyze
              spatial  relationships in ecosystems.  Students will have the opportunity  to
              learn a variety of analytical  methods including population  modeling and
              ecosystem simulation.  Team-taught case-study seminars,  focusing on such
              topics as the  recent collapse of the New England  fisheries, will give
              students an  historical perspective on  environmental management. Together, 
              these components will provide  students with (1) a conceptual  framework to
              understand the  mechanisms responsible for the  evolution and maintenance of 
              biodiversity, (2) field experience  in both terrestrial and marine  ecosystems
              at temperate and  tropical latitudes, (3) a mastery  of practical skills for
              filed  sampling, statistical analysis,  genetic determination of population 
              structure, and spatial mapping and  (4) an apprecia tion of the  different
              roles played by  scientists, managers, politicians  and the public in the
              development  and implementation of environmental  policy.    The proposal
              outlines the research  activities of nineteen  participating faculty in the 
              following areas of Environmental  Biology: Spatiotemporal patterns in 
              biodiversity; Population dynamics,  metapopulations and community  structure;
              Biogeochemical cycles  and community structure; Measuring  genetic variation;
              Breeding systems  and fertility; Germplasm resources  in wild, captive and
              domesticated  species; and Systematic. Faculty  members involved in the
              training  program have extensive funding for  research from a variety of
              external  sources. Their research transcends  traditional boundaries of several
               subdisciplines within conservation  biology, integrates findings  emerging
              from various levels of  biological organization and deals  with a range of
              spatial scales from  local to global. The collaborative  organization of the
              traineeship  program encourages students to work  with professors in the
              Biology,  Environmental Science and Geography  departments, as well as with 
              scientists at the New England  Aquarium and the Franklin Park Zoo.  We have an
              unusual opportunity to  translate this broad expertise into  a coherent
              training program.    The University of Massachusetts  Boston is an urban
              university with  a diverse student body and a strong  commitment to recruiting 
              underrepresented minorities and to  academic excellence. The Biology 
              Department has extensive experience  fostering the development of  minority and
              women undergraduate  scientists through our McNair  Achievement program in the
              Science  and our summer Research Experience  for Undergraduates (REU) in
              Ecology  and Conservation Biology. These  programs, along with our contacts  at
              the New England Board of Higher  Education and several science  minority
              programs at other  universities, will greatly  facilitate our recruiting
              efforts.  At least two of the five  traineesh ips requested in this  proposal
              will be awarded to  underrepresented minorities.    The University has devoted
              major  resources to the development of  graduate level environmental  programs.
              The Boston campus  Administration has agreed to  provide additional funds for 
              special seminar series, workshops,  and visiting appointments. These 
              activities will complement the  traineeship program, and make the  education
              benefits available to the  community and the public at large.
