Title       : Scanning Electron Microscopy in the Undergraduate Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1995     
File        : a9552235

Award Number: 9552235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Perreault william.j.perreault@lawrence.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susanne M. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George L. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bart T. DeStasio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George N. Glavee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lawrence University
	      Box 599
	      Appleton, WI  549120599    414/739-3681

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through this project, assistance in the purchase of a scanning  electron
              microscope equipped with energy dispersive x-ray  spectroscopy capability and
              featuring optional low vacuum  (environmental) operation mode is funded.   This
              instrument forms  the centerpiece in a multidepartmental Microscopy Facility 
              servicing students in all the natural sciences.   Undergraduates  are
              introduced to SEM-EDS technology through specific experiments  that are
              embedded into the curriculum in a variety of revised and  new course offerings.
                For some, specific courses featuring  applied instrumentation and tutorial
              instruction can lead to  year-long independent studies projects and roles as
              laboratory  teaching assistants, under the supervision of both faculty  mentors
              and the project director.   Careful scheduling and  supervision of instrument
              use enable students majoring in any of  the natural sciences to interact with
              others from different  disciplines and increase the sense of community that the
               university seeks to foster.   New, planned, and currently  unforeseeable
              avenues of collegial student-faculty research can  develop from the remarkable
              experimental flexibility permitted by  operating in variable vacuum modes, thus
              making possible both  real-time observation of chemical reactions and
              comparison of  fixed and unfixed biological specimens and SEM observation of 
              living tissues.
