Title       : Enhancing Physical Science Curricula Through Computer-Assisted Instruction and
               Data Image Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1995       
File        : a9552234

Award Number: 9552234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20327              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustavo Morales   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Hardesty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Valencia Community Coll
	      P O BOX 3028
	      Orlando, FL  328023028    305/299-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  Gustavo Morales                                    DUE 9552234  Valencia
              Community Coll                            FY1995 $ 20,327  Orlando, FL 
              328023028                             ILI - Instrumentation                    
                                               Project:                                      
                             Interdisciplinary    Title: Enhancing Physical Science Curricula
              Through                 Computer-Assisted Instruction and Data Image  
              Processing         Valencia Community College has a long history of providing a
               wide selection of comprehensive and high-quality academic programs  designed
              to prepare students to meet changing work force  requirements.  The College
              currently faces the challenge of  continuing to fulfill this mission by
              incorporating appropriate  technology into education and training programs for
              a student body  that has become increasingly diverse.  This challenge is
              perhaps  greatest in the sciences.  Through the project proposed in this 
              request to NSF, Valencia will target six courses in the physical  sciences by
              infusing computer-assisted learning experiences and  data image processing into
              the curricula.           In planning this project, faculty examined several 
              possibilities for incorporating the use of computers into the  laboratory
              setting for the following courses: Earth Sciences,  Physical Geology,
              Historical Geology, Meteorology, Astronomy, and  Oceanography.  The decision
              was made to carry out a project based  on the successful curricula developed by
              the Center for Image  Processing in Education in association with the
              University of  Arizona.  Image processing provides a powerful medium to excite 
              students about science, especially students from minority groups  and others
              whose needs have not been met by traditional ways of  teaching these subjects. 
              Using professional-quality software on  microcomputers, students will explore a
              variety of scientific data  sets, including earth remote sensing and
              meteorology data and  planetary exploration im ages.           While these
              courses will develop inquiry and research skills  for all students, the project
              will also encourage more students to  pursue professional science careers and
              provide them with the  appropriate training in subject matter and the use of
              up-to-date  technology for the respective fields.  Valencia requests the NSF's 
              support for the purchase of microcomputers, software, and databases  to
              incorporate new curricula and pedagogy into the targeted  courses.
