Title       : Making Sense of Complex Phenomena Through Building Computational Models.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1995 
File        : a9552950

Award Number: 9552950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49371              (Estimated)
Investigator: Uri Wilensky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9552950  Wilensky    This proposal is to develop two plans: research and
              education plans  geared to providing Connected Mathematics experiences for
              students  from middle school through graduate school.    The content area of
              the research plan is learning about  "complexity". Complexity is the study of
              systems in which phenomena  or global behaviors arise from the interactions of
              simpler parts.  Many everyday phenomena exhibit complex behavior: the growth of
              a  snowflake crystal, the perimeter pattern of a maple leaf, the  advent of a
              summer squall, the dynamics of the Dow Jones or of a  fourth grade classroom.
              These are all systems which can be modeled  as composed of many distributed but
              interacting parts. They all  exhibit non-linear or emergent qualities which
              place them well  beyond the scope of current K-12 mathematics curricula.    The
              research goals of this plan are 1) To understand how learners  make sense of
              complex phenomena; and 2) To design tools and  activities that foster the
              building of intuitive conceptions of  complexity.    The research hypothesis is
              that: learners, through building their  own computational models using modeling
              environments, can build  intuitions about complexity and make sense of complex
              phenomena.  Even learners not usually considered good at mathematics and 
              science can build models that demonstrate a qualitatively greater  level of
              mathematical achievement than is usually found in  mathematics classrooms. In
              contrast to the prevailing view,  probability and statistics is an example of a
              complex domain in  which learners can develop intuitions.    The target
              population for this research is primarily high school  students, though some
              research will be conducted with younger and  older students and pre-service
              teachers as well. Several content  domains will be used as the source of
              phenomena to be modeled in  the proposed research. A particular focus will be
              using probability  and statistics as tools to understand complex phenomena, and
              in so  doing Building  intuitive conceptions of both the probabilistic  tools
              and the complex phenomena.  ***
