Title       : Workstation Infrastructure for Teaching Engineering Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9552294

Award Number: 9552294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey F. Silverman hfs@lems.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet A. Blume  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arto V. Nurmikko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lambert B. Freund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore F. Morse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer workstations perform calculations and display graphics  fast enough to
              make real qualitative improvements in teaching  engineering.   This project is
              using 18 SUN SPARC 20 Model 61  Workstations to bring computer-aided design and
              scientific  simulation into our core courses.   Freshmen and sophomores in  all
              six engineering programs take a common core, lasting through  part of the third
              year, that gives a broad background in physics  and engineering science.   The
              new machines make possible three  things: first, students will have four years'
              exposure to a  uniform set of UNIX tools, allowing expertise to develop;
              second,  computer-aided design will begin in the earliest courses as a  better
              basis for later study; finally, engineers will develop  improved insight into
              the engineering sciences by simulation of  fundamental exemplary problems.  
              Traditionally, simple examples  that can be solved by hand are the main tool
              for teaching  introductory science.   Many suitable problems that could extend 
              one's physical intuition are neglected because they are hard to  compute or
              draw, a difficulty that workstations can overcome.    For example, one such
              problem in electricity and magnetism is the  electrostatic focusing of a beam
              of electrons in a CRT.   The  actual lens is just three concentric tubes set
              end to end at  different potentials.   Its analysis shows potential theory, 
              electric field visualization, and particle dynamics in an  economically
              important context.   This project is developing  software with simple
              interfaces for a suite of such examples as a  new teaching tool.
