Title       : A Partnership for Curriculum Integration of Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1995 
File        : a9552492

Award Number: 9552492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Funk                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599633             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan H. Feldman Alan_Feldman@TERC.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Kaufman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Spitzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9552492  Feldman                                    The recent national reports
              establishing Standards in mathematics  and science education.  Current
              technology hold the promise of  helping us to achieve this long-sought goal,
              which has eluded  earlier generations of school reformers.  Students and
              teachers now  can have access to tools that communicate, work with data, model,
               visualize data, and retrieve information; to multimedia composition  tools
              that enable them to express themselves creatively; and to  intelligent tutors
              and content-focused software that assist them in  efficiently mastering certain
              skills and information.     Telecommunications networks have the potential to
              break down the  traditional classroom limits and provide access to peers,
              experts,  and information locally and globally.    The potential for the
              technology to impact on the process of  teaching and learning is immense, and
              the DoDDS proposal offers a  well-designed situation to demonstrate this
              potential.  The  barriers to effective implementation of technology will be 
              systemically addressed; access, technical support, and  institutional
              commitment are part of the environment that DoDDS and  the NSF are
              establishing.  TERC proposes to address the issues of  technology selection and
              professional development by mobilizing a  partnership of TERC and national
              experts-leaders who have  successfully introduced technology in schools similar
              to the DoDD  schools-with DoDDS district staff and school staff.  We will 
              address technology selection through tapping the experience of this 
              partnership to select the most appropriate technologies and  specific
              applications.  We will address professional development by  designing and
              implementing a program that focuses on teachers  learning new models to
              organize teaching and learning using  technology.    The goal of the project is
              to implement a range of technologies and  pedagogies towards the goal of high
              student achievement in  mathematics and science.  To reach this goal ove r the
              three years,  we will:       *    Mobilize a partnership of TERC, national
              experts and            leaders in the field, and DoDDS       *    Develop
              effective Implementation Teams at each school       *    Select technology to
              support inquiry-based learning       *    Create and implement a plan of
              professional development            for each school, coordinated across schools
                    *    Measure and monitor progress towards the goal of using           
              technology to improve mathematics and science education  The outcome of our
              work will be innovative models for excellence in  mathematics and science
              education and effective strategies for the  use of technology to implement
              these models.  The example of the  three Demonstration schools in developing
              and demonstrating these  models will give us the research basis to understand
              better the  role of technology in school reform, and options for DoDDS in 
              scaling these changes to the full DoDDS system.  ***
