Title       : Restructuring the Physics Lab: A Remote Interactive Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1995     
File        : a9552374

Award Number: 9552374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19388              (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. Sturrus fr199101@ysub.ysu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Hanzely  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Youngstown St University
	      One University Plaza
	      Youngstown, OH  445550001    330/742-2377

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                William G. Sturrus                                 DUE 9552374  Youngstown St
              University                           FY1995 $ 19,388  Youngstown, OH  44555    
                                       ILI - Instrumentation                                 
                                  Project:                                                   
                Physics         Title: Restructuring the Physics Lab: A Remote Interactive   
                    Approach           Traditional introductory physics laboratories require
              the  student to take specified data and perform specified calculations.  While
              this is an efficient method for introducing large numbers of  students to
              science in the brief time allotted to laboratory study  each week, it omits
              important aspects of scientific research,  including preliminary analysis of a
              problem, design of methods for  probing the problem, group interaction and
              discipline, and  discovery by the student.  It is planned to restructure the 
              mechanics laboratory, the first in a three-course laboratory  sequence for
              beginning students.  The current nine traditional  experiments will be replaced
              by three, each focusing on one of the  three fundamental approaches to
              mechanics: force and motion,  energy, and momentum.  Each experiment will
              continue over a period  of three weeks, during which students will target their
              own  conceptions of the topic through an initial computer-assisted  assessment,
              will then decide how best to test their conceptions  using portable data
              collection hardware outside of the idealized  classroom setting, will perform
              their tests using subjects and  environments familiar from everyday experience,
              and report back to  the laboratory to analyze results and repeat the assessment
              of  their conceptions, comparing initial conceptions with final  conclusions. 
              Such student-initiated comparisons, coupled with  evaluations of corresponding
              performance in lecture courses, will  provide a basis for examining the
              effectiveness of the approach.   While students will work in groups of three,
              interaction  among  groups will be facilitated using data from one group to
              challenge  the others to provide interpretations.  This new remote-interactive 
              approach to the beginning laboratory is designed to produce  meaningful thought
              by the student rather than learning by rote, and  is expected to increase
              student understanding of basic physics as  well as produce in the student a
              better appreciation both of  physics in particular and the scientific approach
              in general.
