Title       : Enhancement of a Research-Based Curriculum Through Microscopy and Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1995        
File        : a9552222

Award Number: 9552222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19364              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl R. Wirth wirth@macalstr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Recent progress toward a research-based curriculum in geology  emphasizes the
              use of optical microscopy and the interaction of  electromagnetic radiation
              with matter in the study of geological  problems.   This project enhances these
              curricular changes with  the implementation of a research-grade petrographic
              microscope  that includes 35-mm photography and video capabilities.   
              Improvements resulting from this project include enhanced  demonstration
              capabilities throughout the course curriculum;  greater comprehension of
              scientific methods and principles by  non-science-majors and potential science
              majors in introductory  courses; the exposure of undergraduate majors to modern
               petrographic techniques that previously were not possible; and  the
              enhancement of independent research projects.  The microscope  and
              video/photographic system makes the study of rocks and  minerals more appealing
              to non-science-majors and facilitates the  application of rock and mineral
              studies as a means to  understanding the composition and evolution of the
              Earth,  environmental problems, and the origin and evolution of life in 
              introductory courses.   Use of the imaging capabilities to  demonstrate optical
              techniques to students in Mineralogy enhances  the comprehension of optics
              theory and techniques resulting in  increased student use of optical methods as
              investigative tools  later in the course and in other upper-level courses.  
              The  microscope/imaging system is also being used to involve students  in
              interactive laboratory projects in courses in mineralogy,  petrology,
              structural geology, economic geology, sedimentology,  and paleontology.  
              Finally, the research-grade petrographic  microscope with modern imaging
              capabilities enhances the quality  of undergraduate research publications,
              presentations, and  reports resulting from independent projects, honors
              projects, and  senior capstone projects that are now required for graduation.
