Title       : Expanding the Presence of Geographic Techniques in the Geography Undergraduate
               Curriculum at Illinois State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1995       
File        : a9552050

Award Number: 9552050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Carter jrcarter@ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Hammel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Lindquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The tools of doing geography are changing dramatically, but the  need for good,
              rigorous geographical thinking is a constant.    Varying levels of preparation
              among students and the gaps  revealed by the geographic diagnostic exam are the
              motivation for  changing the techniques courses.   Geographic Techniques, the
              new  foundations course, is the focus of this new approach.   The  objective is
              to introduce basic concepts and skills as students  move through the program.  
              This goal is not to see how many  techniques can be taught to students but to
              build a functional  base.   The new computer-based laboratory is a major
              instrument  in achieving the goals of the new introductory course as well as 
              an important instrument in the following techniques courses.   Sophomores and
              juniors intending to major in geography are  directed to Geographic Techniques
              after having completed a  minimum of three introductory geography courses.  
              This course is  the prerequisite for all of the traditional techniques courses
              in  the department.   As students complete this course they should be 
              comfortable working in the computer lab; able to use e-mail and  move about the
              Internet; have the beginnings of the vocabulary of  geographic techniques; have
              an integrated exposure to content of  the various techniques used in 
              geography; be aware of the nature  of geographic data and how to get such data
              for local questions  or global questions; and have some experience in using a
              word  processor, spreadsheet, and the Idrisi GIS package.   The impact  of
              building this foundation can be realized in all subsequent  techniques courses
              as well as in the preparation of the students  as they move into their
              internship and ultimately into the work  place or on to graduate school.
