Title       : Development of a Bioremediation Engineering Laboratory at Montana Tech
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1995        
File        : a9552263

Award Number: 9552263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20223              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Drury Bdrury@mtvms2.mtech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MT Col Mineral Sci & Tech
	      
	      Butte, MT  59701    406/496-4101

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The field of environmental engineering is faced with the  remediation of soil
              and groundwater that have been contaminated  with toxic organic compounds.  
              Remediation methods would  prioritize techniques that destroy the compounds
              instead of  merely shifting them to another medium.   Bioremediation, the 
              degradation of such compounds by micro-organisms, is a method  that is being
              chosen for soil and groundwater remediation with  increasing frequency.  
              Bioremediation is an interdisciplinary  field, requiring individuals who have
              received training in both  microbial physiology and ecology, as well as in
              engineering.    This project is directed at preparing students to be able to 
              design engineered systems that provide micro-organisms with  engineered
              conditions that are conducive to the biodegradation of  toxic organic
              compounds.    The emphasis in the class on  Bioremediation Engineering is on
              the analysis of microbial  kinetics and application of laboratory kinetic
              studies to full-  scale design.   Biodegradation rates in aerobic environments
              are  measured with a respirometer because of simplicity of operation  and
              automatic data collection capability of the respirometer.    Biodegradation
              rates in anaerobic environments are also  investigated.   A microscope is
              employed to demonstrate microbial  morphology.   The impact of the project is
              the training of a  large number of individuals with a bachelor of science in 
              Environmental Engineering in bioremediation techniques.
