Title       : University Versatile Eclectic Introductory Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1999    
File        : a9552156

Award Number: 9552156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore W. Hodapp                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53785              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Coan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kendra L. Wallis  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This course is designed to unveil physics to students in  introductory physics
              laboratory by teaching them to discover it  on their own.   The University
              Versatile Eclectic Introductory  Laboratory (UNVEIL) course combines several of
              the most effective  current laboratory teaching methods into one course
              designed to   (1) meet the needs of both premedical students and 
              science/engineering students who are mixed together in sections  of lab; (2)
              use technology both to teach physics and to introduce  students to
              professional-level equipment; (3) employ successful  pedagogy to maximize
              physics understanding.   Computers and  self-discovery pedagogy allow for a
              versatile laboratory where  students in the same room can perform different
              experiments.    UNVEIL combines Socratic guidance, self-discovery, computer 
              technology, and modeling methods to create a more effective lab  environment.  
               Equipment and software have been selected that  can largely be used by both
              groups of students, with each group  performing some specifically tailored
              experiments.   Newly  developed, versatile physics laboratory equipment, along
              with  Power Macs, LabVIEW data acquisition software, Mathematica, and  other
              software are used.  The laboratory course is one in which  students, armed with
              the laboratory manual, can select  appropriate equipment and design an
              experiment (with Socratic  guidance from the instructor and TAs) to examine the
              subject.    With the computer, students acquire data or enter data acquired 
              manually, plot graphs, and look at computer modeling of physical  phenomena.
