Title       : Classroom Computer Laboratory and Student Demonstration Stations for Active
               Learning in Introductory Mathematics and Computer Science Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1995     
File        : a9552321

Award Number: 9552321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56886              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvia Sorkin ssorkin@ccbc.cc.md.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Mento  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janice M. Dykacz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Steger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gretchen Willging  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Comm Coll of Baltimore Cnt
	      7201 Roseville Boulevard
	      Essex, MD  212373855    410/682-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Essex Community College is implementing new curricula and  pedagogical
              methods in several mathematics and computer science  courses with the objective
              of having students adopt a more active  role in the learning process.  A
              classroom laboratory of Macintosh  computers and additional student
              demonstration stations with  projection devices for regular classroom use will
              be used to  replace the lecture method by classroom and/or laboratory 
              activities, for problem-driven experimentation and discovery in a  wide variety
              of mathematics and computer science courses.  Learning  styles beneficial for
              female students will be emphasized, including  use of cooperative learning
              groups, as 60% of ECC students are  female.       The department has prepared
              to adopt the Harvard Consortium  calculus curriculum in all sections as they
              are offered, beginning  with Calculus I.  The NSF-funded Math
              Modeling/Precalculus Reform  Project will be adopted in experimental sections,
              while control  sections will continue to use a traditional precalculus
              curriculum.  Use of a CAS will enable exploration of realistic problems, reduce
               emphasis on hand manipulations, and provide a visualization tool.   NSF-funded
              Project Chance materials will be incorporated into  statistics and mathematics
              for liberal arts courses.  Students in  mathematics for elementary education
              majors will explore NCTM  standards-based materials, including technology
              appropriate for  middle school algebra.  Two new introductory computer science 
              courses, in multimedia technology and Internet resources, will be  offered. 
              These and several existing computer science courses will  be taught in a
              stimulating multimedia environment to increase  student motivation, and also
              encourage use of, and develop  familiarity with, computer technologies among
              students who depend  upon the college for their computing experiences.
