Title       : Strengthening the CS/IS Curriculum with a Client/Server Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9552312

Award Number: 9552312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86489              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Slack slack@mankato.msus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Haglin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cyrus Azarbod  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Christenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minn State Univ, Mankato
	      Research and Sponsored Programs
	      Mankato, MN  56001    507/389-5275

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The single largest obstacle to the development of client/server  networks and
              applications is the lack of qualified personnel.    This project constructs a
              client/server laboratory for the use of  computer science and information
              science students.   The project  has two major objectives.   The first
              objective is to ensure that  each student has a firm grasp of the fundamentals
              of client/server  technology and associated software development.   The second 
              objective is to give each student a substantial amount of hands-on  experience
              working with a client/server network.      Courses in  four interrelated
              subject areas--networking, databases, software  engineering, and client/server
              applications--are being redesigned.    Each course provides additional coverage
              of client/server  concepts, along with laboratory exercises and experiments to 
              reinforce these concepts.   Networking courses emphasize design,  construction,
              and testing of client/server networks.   Database,  software engineering, and
              client/server applications courses stress  the software side of heterogeneous
              client/server development and  its associated tools.   The project is enriching
              the education of  many undergraduate students with client/server experience and
               instruction.   These students can then provide technological  leadership to
              industry.
