Title       : Hispanic Role Model and Science Education Outreach Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9552562

Award Number: 9552562
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. James                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2176899            (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto Salazar   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gilbert Sanchez  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Self Reliance Foundation
	      529 14th St., NW
	      Washington, DC  200025810    202/661-8080

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
                95-52562  Salazar    ABSTRACT:  The Self Reliance Foundation in association
              with the Hispanic Radio Network over a five year period will produce and
              distribute a variety of daily Spanish-language radio programs on science
              education topics and follow-up outreach services to network listeners on
              science education and career opportunities.      The applicants will add two
              science related episodes each week to Buscando La Belleza, the four-minute
              daily radio series for families that focuses on social issues, work issues,
              women's rights, and educational and career opportunities.  It is carried on 100
              stations with a weekly cumulative audience of 2,567,000 listeners.  The new
              episodes will include: 52 role model interviews with Hispanic men and women who
              have careers in science, mathematics, and technology from technical positions
              not requiring a college degree to Ph.D.'s engaged in cutting edge research; 26
              family involvement episodes with suggestions for parents to build their
              confidence in helping their children with homework, doing simple science
              activities with their children at home, encouraging their older children in
              their studies, and working with schools and community organizations; and 26
              academic and career resource/success stories highlighting Hispanic students who
              have been successful in their pursuit of careers in science, mathematics, and
              technology.    The second series included under the grant is Salvemos Nuestro
              Planeta, a two-and-a-half minute series that focuses on environmental issues. 
              It currently is carried on 89 radio stations twice a week with a total weekly
              cumulative audience of 2,494,300.  The producers will expand the series to
              seven original episodes per week with five episodes focusing on science,
              mathematics, and technology themes:  general science literacy, environmental
              management and technology, computers and information technology, environmental
              activities for youth, and SMET career opportunities.    Outreach will consist
              of a national Spanish language toll free  phone number that will refer
              listeners to resources related to opportunities for scholarships in science and
              engineering, activities and resources for parents and children in science
              education, etc., and in some cases, connect callers to the subject of that days
              interview.    The PI will be Roberto Salazar who has been chief assistant to
              Vicente Llamas at the Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities.  He has
              been involved in numerous science education project for Hispanics and has a
              background in radio.  The Executive Producer will be Jeff Kline.  Major science
              consultants will be Vicente Llamas, Director of the Comprehensive Regional
              Center for Minorities, and Estrella Triana, Hispanic Science Education Director
              for the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
