Title       : GC-MS in Undergraduate Organic and Analytical Teaching Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1995     
File        : a9552132

Award Number: 9552132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39242              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Haines dhaines@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret V. Merritt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean A. Fuller-Stanley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Creativity in the design of laboratory experiments requires  access to
              appropriate techniques for the analysis of the results.    When students are
              given responsibility for the design of  experiments to explain phenomena, the
              need for advanced  instrumentation is even greater.   This project incorporates
              a  GC-MS into the organic teaching laboratories.   This instrument  enhances
              the instrumental analytical capabilities for use in the  Analytical Chemistry
              courses.   A GC/MS, and a GC with a  capillary column and an FID detector for
              method development,  allows Organic Chemistry students greater creativity in
              their  experimental design as they investigate competitive reactions and 
              equilibrium environments.   Analytical Chemistry students can  gain a strong
              working knowledge of this essential  instrumentation.   The instrumentation can
              also be used for  undergraduate student research.   This project serves to
              enhance  the education of women scientists and encourage them to pursue 
              further scientific studies.   If student participation is  encouraged in the
              design of their experiments, a greater  intellectual involvement and a greater
              willingness to adopt  experimental methodologies to solve problems are
              promoted.   The  enthusiasm and intellectual growth engendered by these
              processes  results in the production of better students and positively 
              influences their decisions to pursue graduate study and  scientific careers.
