Title       : SET CAREERS: Science, Engineering, and Technology Careers Exhibits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1995    
File        : a9552526

Award Number: 9552526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1168421            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen L. Rabin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Educational Film Center
	      5101-F Backlick Road
	      Annandale, VA  220036055    703/750-0560

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9552526  Rabin    ABSTRACT:  The Educational Film Center will complete
              production of a science, engineering, and technology careers exhibit and
              informal science education project for use in science museums, libraries,
              schools, and community locations.  The twelve additional interactive and linear
              career profiles to be produced under this grant will bring the total number of
              careers available in a fully interactive mode to thirty-two.  Users will be
              able to explore each of these careers with first person video profiles of
              people in science and engineering and animated/reality video simulations of
              work experiences in these fields.  The exhibit also with provide guidance to
              help users make decisions about education and career choices and will include a
              database of information about approximately 200 additional science and
              math-based professions.       The project also will undertake the development
              and testing of eight permanent model Family Outreach Science Career Education
              Centers in eight cities.  These centers will be based on and will expand upon
              the experience the project had in their earlier model Parent Outreach Science
              Career Program.  Utilization support will be provided through special target
              leader guides, presentations and workshops at national and regional meetings of
              user organizations and groups, and a SETQuest bulletin board and e-mail network
              for the exchange of user science career programming.     This project is a
              collaborative effort among four organizations:  The Educational Film Center
              (EFC) is responsible for management of the project and for the development of
              production of the software and the documentary video profiles;  COMAP is
              responsible for selecting and hiring content consultants, for formative and
              summative evaluation, and will jointly market and distribute the material with
              EFC; The New York Hall of Science is responsible for the exhibit kiosk and
              graphics, the design and development of the workbook and museum installation
              print components of the project, and will  serve as principal test site for the
              exhibit; and the AAAS is coordinating the design, implementation, and testing
              of parent outreach program.  All of the organizations will be involved in
              presentations and dissemination of project information to the informal and
              formal education communities.
