Title       : The Magic School Bus: A Children's Science Television Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1996      
File        : a9552558

Award Number: 9552558
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2304421            (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl Gotthelf   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Startz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Scholastic Productions Inc
	      
	      New York, NY  10003    212/228-7546

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9552558  Blank    ABSTRACT:   Scholastic Productions is producing thirteen
              additional episodes for the third season of the fully animated, half-hour
              television series, "The Magic School Bus."  The series, which is targeted at
              6-9 year olds, is designed to motivate children's interest in science, to
              introduce science concepts and ideas, and to inspire positive attitudes towards
              science and education in students and teachers.  The series is unique to
              science educational television because it breaks the science gender barrier,
              showcases both education and science, and, through the use of animation which
              enables the series to transport children to places they literally could not go,
              presents content in a unique way.  Season III topics include:  spiders, the
              Arctic, light, color, the moon, structures, and sound.  Outreach activities
              will include and expand upon those offered for Seasons I and II.  During Season
              III, special emphasis will be placed on reaching families.  The project also
              will use America On-line to promote the series and to communicate the value in
              and the methods for encouraging children's interest in science.     The same
              basic administrative, content, and production staff will continue with the
              project.  Management and editorial control will be the responsibility of Jane
              Startz, Executive Vice President of Scholastic Productions.  Cheryl Gotthelf,
              Executive Director of Special Projects for Scholastic Productions will oversee
              series distribution and utilization, print, research, public relations,
              promotion, and community and museum outreach.  Science content will continue to
              be supervised by Michael Templeton with the assistance of an Associate Science
              Content Director, Fran Nankin.  Kristin Martin will remain in charge of series
              production.
