Title       : Microcomputer Based Measurement and Simulation for Introductory Acoustics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1995      
File        : a9552206

Award Number: 9552206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17471              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Smedley jsmedley@abacus.bates.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bates College
	      
	      Lewiston, ME  04240    207/786-6093

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This program utilizes microcomputers to measure and record time-  resolved
              acoustical signals and to model standing and propagating  acoustic waves in
              real physical systems.   New laboratory  experiments and simulations are being
              developed for two acoustics  courses open to non-science-majors, entitled
              Musical Acoustics  and Physics of Electronic Sound.   The new equipment
              includes six  microcomputers with sound cards, a networked laser printer, and 
              six computer-interfaced, digitally synthesized function  generators.   In
              laboratory experiments, steady-state and  transient sound signals are recorded
              and analyzed with  microcomputers.   Software is being developed to calculate
              and  display wave oscillations in simulations of real physical  significance,
              such as standing waves inside wind instruments and  mechanical vibrations of
              strings and membranes.   Sophisticated  function generators are interfaced to
              microcomputers to  facilitate frequency-dependence measurements, such as tests
              of  loudspeakers and amplifier response.   The program extends a  highly
              successful introductory acoustics laboratory that  incorporated fast Fourier
              transform spectrum analyzers to  frequency analyze musical sounds.   Students
              can benefit from the  ability to study with equal precision and accuracy
              important  acoustical phenomena from the complementary perspectives of time 
              and frequency.
