Title       : Laser Based Experiments in Chemistry and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1995       
File        : a9552337

Award Number: 9552337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24735              (Estimated)
Investigator: David V. Guerra   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian D. Wladkowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Maryland College
	      
	      Westminster, MD  21157    301/848-7000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  David V. Guerra                                    DUE 9552337  Western
              Maryland College                           FY1995 $24,735  Westminster, MD 
              21157                             ILI - Instrumentation                        
                                           Project:                                          
                         Chemistry       Title: Laser Based Experiments in Chemistry and
              Physics             Western Maryland College will add the significant component
              of  laser physics and laser spectroscopy to its Physical Chemistry, 
              Instrumental Techniques, and Optics Laboratories.  In addition,  three
              introductory courses, two of them for non-science majors,  will be enhanced by
              an experience with lasers.  Although lasers  have become ubiquitous in
              post-graduate research, a lack of  adequate instrumentation currently prevents
              any meaningful  "hands-on" experience for our students.  Through the addition
              of  several assorted laser systems and peripheral equipment such as a 
              monochromator and digital oscilloscope, we plan to introduce  students to the
              physical basis of modern optics and to advanced  spectroscopic principles.  In
              Physical Chemistry and Instrumental  Techniques, many important spectroscopic
              techniques, such as Raman,  pulse-probe, and luminescence decay, will become
              integral parts of  our modern laboratories.  Those topics are currently limited
              to an  inappropriately small role in our classroom discussion.  The  proposed
              equipment is especially relevant in Instrumental  Techniques where students
              will assemble their own  spectrophotometers from the individual components,
              i.e., light  source, sample, monochromator, and detector.  In Optics, students 
              will construct lasers from individual components (i.e., gain media, 
              end-mirror, output-coupler, and tuning element) and examine the  role of each
              component in the overall operation of the system.   That exercise will
              complement theoretical discussions of  longitudinal and transverse modes and
              optical gain and losses.  In  General Physics, a mong other laser experiments,
              students will use  a pulsed nitrogen laser and a digital oscilloscope to
              determine the  speed-of-light.  The background of our Chemistry and Physics 
              students, most of whom go on to graduate or professional schools,  will be
              greatly enhanced by the curricular modernization supported  by this project.
