Title       : Mesa Systemic Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9552847

Award Number: 9552847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joyce B. Evans                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5999991            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Box   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Sprague  (Principal Investigator former)
              Debra Duvall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Wyckoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas Barnard  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Mesa Unified Sch Dist #4
	      549 North Stapley Dr
	      Mesa, AZ  852037203    602/898-7876

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              90        Other Sciences                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9552847  Sprague    This project is for five years with the overall goal for the
              improvement of instruction for all K-8 students in science and mathematics. 
              There are over 2,000 teachers at 46 elementary and 12 junior high schools. 
              Building upon over twenty years of experience in hands-on curriculum, this
              project is designed to move Mesa teachers into the next level of professional
              growth.  The plan to accomplish this is to combine individual master teachers,
              school-level leadership and cross-district support to create site-based
              learning communities.  All elementary and junior high mathematics and science
              teachers will participate in extensive professional development which will
              include a range of staff development components.  There will be an emphasis on
              new teachers to help them teach in the overall program.  There will be a design
              for a program which will move teachers in their understanding of teaching to a
              higher plane.  The intent is to include high level rigorous courses/study
              groups for the teachers who are ready for intellectual growth.    This teacher
              enhancement model recognizes that teachers at different levels of professional
              development require different methods and tools.  In collaboration with Arizona
              State university, multiple strategies for teacher growth will be provided
              through both site-based and cross-district support systems.  Special emphasis
              will be placed upon four critical need areas: 1.) new teacher support, 2.)
              cross-district leadership development, 3.) moving beyond mechanical use of
              curriculum, and 4.) supporting diversity and equity in special populations.   
              This project further extends Mesa Public School's history as a model for other
              districts which are planning to develop an elementary hands-on/minds-on science
              and mathematics program.  The Mesa Public School's elementary science program
              has provided written materials, a place to see a comprehensive program that is
              working and a model for other districts as they are moving into curriculum
              reform.  Through  this project, the project will extend their history of
              testing and revising plans to reflect what they learn and to serve as a
              dissemination center to other districts around the country.    Cost sharing
              will be 46%.
