Title       : Spectroscopy and Electronic Interferometry for Undergraduate Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1995       
File        : a9552058

Award Number: 9552058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore W. Hodapp                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14222              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale W. Olson dale.olson@uni.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter L. Hoekje  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ali Badakhshan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-6437

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is part of a long-term program to improve applied  optics teaching
              and research in the Physics Department.   This  project improves introductory
              and intermediate lectures and labs  and, also, undergraduate research
              opportunities.   The first  project goal is to improve instruction in the many
              courses  involving light spectra through the purchase of a portable 
              user-friendly rapid-scan spectroscope.   A computer display or  LCD projector
              makes each spectrum visible to classes of up to 80  students.   In elementary
              and intermediate course lectures and  labs, sunlight, tungsten and fluorescent
              lamps, laser sources,  and gas tube sources can be quickly compared.   Filters
              can be  examined, including UV absorption by clear glass versus clear  plastic
              versus sunglasses, for example.   For intermediate to  advanced project and
              research work by physics majors,  holographically formed filters can be
              characterized, gas-tube  spectra measured, and emission, absorption, and
              reflection by  solids studied.   This experience lays the foundation for some 
              physics students to participate in a new research lab emphasizing  spectroscopy
              of semiconductor surfaces that has been established  in the Physics Department.
                A second project goal is to  strengthen the department's capabilities in
              electronically based  interferometry.   Two existing student and faculty
              research  programs, one on holographically based measurement of surface 
              roughness using scattered laser light and the other on  holographic
              interferometry applied to musical acoustics are   strengthened by the
              introduction of electronic fringe  measurement.   A computer-interfaced CCD
              camera is obtained for  this part of the project along with the upgrade of an
              optical  table used both for course work and for musical acoustics  research.
