Title       : Laboratory Training in the Behavioral and Neural Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9552099

Award Number: 9552099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah H. Olster olster@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin E. Reese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harry J. Carlisle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron Ettenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project provides funds for expanding and improving  undergraduate
              biopsychology teaching laboratory curriculum.   Two  upgraded versions of
              current courses (Laboratories in  Neuroanatomy and Animal Learning) and two new
              ones (Laboratories  in Hormones and Behavior and Human Psychophysiology) are
              being  offered to approximately 200 biopsychology majors.   A laboratory 
              complement is provided to lecture course material and emphasizes  the dynamic,
              i.e., ever-changing, nature of scientific discovery.    Other goals of the
              laboratory curriculum are as follows: (1) to  provide undergraduates with hands
              on experience in  state-of-the-art neuroscience research methodologies through 
              small group instruction in the laboratory, preparing them for  careers in the
              health sciences; (2) to teach undergraduates the  scientific method, by having
              them design and conduct independent  experiments to test specific,
              self-generated scientific  hypotheses; (3) to improve scientific literacy
              (including  critical thinking) and communication, by requiring students to 
              read the original scientific literature and present their own  data in written
              and/or oral form; (4) to enhance our students'  computer usage skills.  
              Achievement of these goals enables  graduates: (1) to be cognizant of their own
              physiology; (2) to  evaluate critically the enormous amount of information 
              (scientific or otherwise) presented by the media; (3) to compete  successfully
              in the markeplace for jobs or additional  postgraduate education; (4) to
              succeed in the increasingly  technology-driven workplace of current and future
              society.
