Title       : Impacts of the Education-Related Network-Based Projects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1996       
File        : a9552496

Award Number: 9552496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven A. Sanchez                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124577             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edys S. Quellmalz edys.quellmalz@sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Kozma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Kozma  9552496    The goals of this policy study are to provide the National
              Science  Foundation's Networking Infrastructure for Education program with: 
              (1) a conceptual framework for studying the impacts of NIE  investments in
              network-based projects, (2) policy options for  resource allocations, and (3)
              recommendations for approaches to  evaluating the impact of the NIE program and
              its projects.  These  options and recommendations will be useful both to NIE
              and to other  agencies funding network-based projects.  An analysis of the 
              distribution of the NIE funds across types of programs and in  relation to
              other NII projects can reveal redundancies, gaps, and  emerging needs. An
              assessment of the nature of the NIE portfolio  within the larger NII context
              can illuminate potentially powerful  partnerships for leveraging NIE's
              investments in pursuit of  education reform. Evaluation recommendations will
              help NIE program  staff advise proposers on their evaluation plans, assess the 
              quality of proposals, and monitor the execution of projects.   Improved plans
              for formative and summative evaluation of projects  will also increase the
              likelihood of project success and make it  more efficient and inexpensive to
              assess the impact of NIE, when it  comes time to evaluate that program.   
              These goals will be accomplished in the following seven steps:  (1)  SRI staff
              will meet with the staff of NIE and other related  programs to identify policy
              and evaluation issues and identify a  panel of national experts that will work
              on the project; (2) SRI  staff will propose and refine a conceptual framework
              that describes  the ways in which networkbased projects can affect educational 
              reform and provide NIE staff with information on the distribution  of their
              resources across the framework relative to the investments  of other federal
              programs and those of the private sector; (3) SRI  staff will formulate
              different evaluation criteria an methodologies  for NIE projects with different
              goals and activities; (4) on th e  basis of these analyses, SRI staff will make
              preliminary  recommendations regarding funding alternatives and evaluation 
              guidelines; (5) these recommendations will be reviewed and modified  by a panel
              of experts in science, education technology, policy, and  program evaluation;
              (6) a national Policy Conference will be  convened to review and discuss the
              recommendations; (7) on the  basis of these discussions, SRI staff will write
              up the final  recommendations to NIE staff.  ***
