Title       : A Signal Integrity Laboratory for Instruction in High Speed Digital VLSI and
               Electromagnetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1995     
File        : a9552344

Award Number: 9552344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31690              (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishnamurthy Soumyanath Ksoumyan@lumen.ee.tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur Uhlir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This laboratory uses the concept of Signal Integrity to augment  the curricula
              in electromagnetics and high-speed digital design  (both at the VLSI and board
              levels) for junior and senior level  students in computer and electrical
              engineering.  The  proliferation of high-speed (> 50 MHz) digital designs
              requires  that computer engineering students develop a sophisticated 
              understanding of the electromagnetic effects of signal  propagation in various
              media.   The experiments performed in this  lab describe the use of time-domain
              reflectometry (TDR) and  time-domain transmission (TDT), in conjunction with
              simulation  and analysis, for identifying, measuring and solving signal 
              integrity problems.   The experiments serve both to illustrate  the course
              material in electromagnetics and to educate the  students as to its usefulness.
                This applications-oriented  laboratory also serves to increase interest in
              the  electromagnetics curriculum, particularly amongst computer  engineering
              students.  Mixed-signal (analog/digital) circuits  have come into their own for
              wireless networks and can be  expected in avionics and intelligent highway
              applications, as  well both personal and commercial navigation.   A funded
              program  for retraining in the design of mixed-signal integrated circuits  may
              draw upon this laboratory as a remedial resource, and will  serve as an object
              lesson to current undergraduates about the  broad relevance of electromagnetics
              fundamentals.  Educational  objectives include the concept of wave transmission
              and  reflection, impedance matching in digital/mixed signal systems, 
              understanding the problems, possibilities, and techniques of  high-speed
              measurements, and an introduction to fast digital  oscillography.   The
              laboratory will also serve as a resource for  generating and evaluating
              realistic design exercises in  high-speed circuit fabrication.
