Title       : Enhancement of Instrumentation Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1995     
File        : a9552220

Award Number: 9552220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22571              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anand K. Ojha akojha@ualr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hirak C. Patangia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Little Rock
	      2801 South University
	      Little Rock, AR  72204    501/569-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              To meet the growing demand of industry and academia, the  university emphasizes
              automated data acquisition,  instrumentation, and process control.   In
              addition to supporting  the needs of Engineering Technology majors, the
              extended  interdisciplinary course offering in these areas provides 
              instructional and practical training to physical science majors  as well.  
              Major equipment includes four personal computers with  data acquisition and
              GPIB plug-in cards, as well as visual  programming software for analysis and
              data presentation.   These  four networked stations are being used to introduce
              automated  data acquisition, high-speed instrumentation employing the GPIB 
              bus, and process control.  The project enhances students'  theoretical and
              practical abilities in terms of how to sense  real-world quantities such as
              temperature, force, motion, sound,  light, etc., and also how to configure,
              use, interface, and  integrate such sensors to a personal computer (PC) based
              system.    This also provides students with the tools needed not only to  sense
              but also to control physical phenomena or devices.   The  new use of graphical
              programming language makes their task of  displaying the results, analyzing the
              data, and performing  mathematical and statistical calculations less tedious
              and  permits them to devote more time in learning about  instrumentation and
              control and less time in programming.   While  performing experiments, students
              see the necessity and usefulness  of the techniques of grounding, shielding,
              signal conditioning,  noise-filtering, hardware and software interfacing, etc.,
              in a  unified manner.   The integration of theoretical and practical  aspects
              learned by the students in several courses prepares them  better to meet with
              the technological challenges of the industry.
