Title       : GREEN TECHNOLOGY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9552549

Award Number: 9552549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1108789            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Thomas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Greater Wash Ed Tele Asso
	      2775 South Quincy Street
	      Arlington, VA  22206    703/998-2634

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              10        Physical Sciences                       
              12        Chemistry                               
              50        Engineering                             
              60        Life Sciences                           
              80        Social Sciences                         
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  95-52549  Thomas      ABSTRACT: The Greater Washington Educational
              Telecommunications Association (WETA) is producing and disseminating "Green
              Technology," a multimedia project that promotes active learning about
              environmentally beneficial technologies for the home, the workplace, and the
              community.  The objective of the project are to change or consolidate the
              public's concepts about the fundamental relationships between the environment
              and technology at the grassroots pocketbook level, to enhance their
              understanding of the pertinent science and technology, and to provide them with
              practical information about how to take action for oneself and in the
              fulfillment of a wider civic responsibility.    The components of the project
              include:    o Three one-hour prime time television programs  o Community
              Outreach through the National Community Education Association and their
              affiliates in 40 states.    o Development of community education material
              including a 30-minute highlight tape to serve as a discussion springboard with
              accompanying discussion and resource guides.  o A Viewer's Newsletter for each
              program which will include short articles on the basic science and technology
              explored in the program and a "What You Can Do" section.  o A CD-ROM for use by
              parents and children at home and by students in school.  o On-line information
              clearing house the SOLSTICE, the digital library of energy and environmental
              resources operated by the Center for Renewable Energy and Sustainable
              Technology.  o Teacher enhancement materials and activities for middle schools
              to be disseminated through the Teacher Educator's Network of the Association of
              Science-Technology Centers.  o The National Academy of Engineering will
              identify engineers who can serve as "on-line consultants" to students and
              teachers involved in examining specific environmental issues.    Richard
              Thomas, previously Executive Producer for "Mystery of the Senses" and "The
              World of Chemistry," will be PI and Executive Producer.  Principal Content 
              Advisory will be S. William Gouse, chief scientist and President of Energy
              Systems and Technology at MITRE.  William McDonough, Dean of the School of
              Architecture at the University of Virginia, will be the host of the television
              series.
