Title       : Capillary Electrophoresis in Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1995        
File        : a9552043

Award Number: 9552043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16140              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Harwood jharwood@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey O. Boles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thurston E. Banks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The purchase of a capillary electrophoresis (CE) instrument   will enable
              undergraduate students to become familiar with state of  the art
              electrophoresis methodology and with computerized data  acquisition and
              instrument control.  Experiments using the  instrument will replace or greatly
              enhance experiments presently  performed in two upper level chemistry courses,
              Instrumental  Analysis and General Biochemistry.  The instrument will also be 
              used in undergraduate research.         In Instrumental Analysis, commercial
              products will be analyzed  for organic acid composition, demonstrating the
              usefulness of CE in  the analysis of small molecules.  This experiment will
              replace one  in which ion chromatography is used to determine the inorganic ion
               composition of tapwater.         In General Biochemistry, CE will initially be
              used to add two  new experiments to the laboratory course:  1) enzymatic and 
              chemical digestion of a protein followed by separation and  quantitation by
              free zone CE and 2) a protein-substrate binding  analysis by affinity CE
              techniques followed by mathematical  treatment of the data by the method of
              Scatchard.  These   experiments will allow the students exposure to both
              additional  conventional and computational biotechniques.         It is likely
              that CE will assume increasing importance in the  undergraduate teaching
              laboratory.  We intend to share the results  of our experiences both through
              journal publication and  presentations at regional and national scientific
              meetings.
