Title       : Asset Teacher Enhancement Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a9552856

Award Number: 9552856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rowena S. Douglas                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4066980            (Estimated)
Investigator: Reeny Davison rdavison@assetinc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred B. Bortz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frances Alder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Greg Calvetti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kalyani V. Raghavan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent Valicenti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ASSET Inc.
	      15 Terminal Way
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152191299    412/488-1444

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9552856  Davison    Fifteen of Allegheny County's 43 school districts,
              including 53 schools and over 1,020 teachers, have been collaboratively
              developing a strategy for systematically reforming science education in their
              elementary schools.  To support this activity, Allegheny Schools Science
              Education and Technology (ASSET) Inc., a local non-profit consortium of bus 
              iness, education, and community leaders committed to reforming science
              education, was initiated in 1993 through the leadership of Miles Inc., (now
              called Bayer Inc.) a Pittsburgh-based company with major businesses in health
              care, chemicals, and imaging technologies.  The plan for reform includes: the
              development of a comprehensive curriculum for   each district based on FOSS,
              STC, and Insights units; the creation of a regional materials support center;
              the selection and preparation of coalition resource teachers (one per 200
              teachers) responsible with scientists for inservice and the support of teachers
              district-wide; the development of lead teachers in each building; regular
              classroom teac  her training; the creation and use of student assessments;
              connections to the informal science centers, the improvement of preservice
              education; and organized community involvement.  To accomplish this wide-range
              of activities, ASSET has brought together an impressive set of partners.  The
              Carnegie Science Center, industry, private and corporate f  oundations and the
              Allegheny Intermediate Unit are collaborating in the development and support of
              the Materials Center.  The Learning Research and Development Center (LRDC) of
              the University of Pittsburgh will support the use of student authentic
              assessment.  The Carnegie Science Center will coordinate the National Aviary,
              the Pittsburgh Zoo, Bee     chwood Farms Nature Preserve, and the Carnegie
              Museum of Natural History, as they offer learning opportunities for teachers
              and students.  Bayer Inc. will coordinate the training of professional
              scientists who will work with lead teachers and will  take the lead in
              developing the commun  ity outreach and communication effort.  The school
              districts will be responsible for the education and support of all teachers,
              the selection and support of the instructional materials, and the design for
              the institutionalization of the project. The cost sharing for the project will
              be 70% of the NSF portion.       ***
