Title       : Rain Forest Trail and Living Treasures of the Congo Gallery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1995  
File        : a9552543

Award Number: 9552543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara H. Butler                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145786             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Gwynne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wildlife Conservation Soc
	      185th Street & Southern Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  104601099    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9552543  Gwynne    The Wildlife Conservation Society will use this one year
              award to  move forward their planning for the "Rain Forest Trail and the 
              Living Treasures of the Congo Gallery."  This is the first phase of  an
              ambitious $29M, 6 acre outdoor exhibit area focusing on the  Congo Rain Forest
              and an indoor Environmental Education Complex.   The Wildlife Conservation
              Society (WCS) conducts extensive field  research in a number of central African
              sites and has an important  living collection of tropical African wildlife in
              the New York  facility.  The Congo Rain Forest/Environmental Education Center 
              will include three major interpretive areas and an educational  resource area. 
              NSF is being asked to support two components of the  Congo Rain Forest complex
              which are the Rain Forest Trail and  Living Treasures of the Congo Gallery. 
              The Rain Forest Trail, with  both indoor and outdoor elements, will be a total
              immersion exhibit  where visitors will be surrounded by a replication of an
              African  rain forest and will have the opportunity to encounter a variety of 
              its living inhabitants, and experience how its ecosystem functions.   They will
              have the experience of making scientific observations  thus gaining insight
              into how scientists work.  The goal of this  design technique "is to move
              beyond the limited scope of  traditional zoo exhibits (which simply portray the
              'animal as  object')", toward a presentation of animal and plant communities as
               they interact within an ecosystem.  The Living Treasures Gallery  will be a
              4000 sq. ft. space which is dedicated to the introduction  of the diversity of
              rain forest inhabitants, their environmental  adaptations, and complex
              interrelationships.  The gallery will be  divided into four areas: Adaptations
              for Survival, The Forest of  the Megavertebrates, The Interconnected Forest,
              and Seeing the  Unseen.  Numerous interactive devices will be developed to
              engage  the visitor in hands-on activities and materials will be developed 
              that link the themes of  the exhibit with the agenda of formal  education for
              both teacher and students.
