Title       : Digital Signal Processing Laboratory for Real Time Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9552046

Award Number: 9552046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41082              (Estimated)
Investigator: Selim S. Awad   (Principal Investigator current)
              Yi L. Murphey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew C. Bartlett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project reflects the importance of Digital Signal Processing  (DSP) in the
              analysis of important engineering problems and  developing effective solutions
              with DSP hardware and software  tools.   This project is modifying the overall
              curriculum to  ensure that DSP methods are introduced in the junior year for 
              electrical engineering students.   The ECE curriculum had placed  a primary
              emphasis on analog signal processing, including  communications, control
              systems, electronic circuits, and analog  filter design.   Due to the limited
              availability of DSP  facilities, ad hoc DSP projects had been assigned to
              students who  work under the supervision of senior staff.   There are about 
              100,000 professionals in the metropolitan Detroit area, employed  primarily in
              the automobile and related industries, and the  school is strategically located
              to allow for innovative  curriculum development to benefit both local and
              national  industries.   The project has an interdisciplinary thrust that 
              provides all engineering students with an opportunity to learn  the theory and
              practice of DSP techniques.   This is ensured  through the creation of two new
              undergraduate courses, which  include innovative experiments and projects that
              emphasize both  theoretical and practical aspects of DSP are proposed.   Also, 
              graphical tools are used to teach the basic concepts of DSP more  effectively. 
               Further, the DSP laboratory and capstone design  course provides students with
              practical skills in applying DSP  software and hardware tools for solving
              real-world problems.    The DSP laboratory operates cooperatively with the
              Vehicular  Electronics Design Laboratory (VEDL) has been developed as part  of
              the strategic plan of the School of Engineering.   Both  undergraduate students
              and practicing benefit engineers from  industry (through the continuing
              education program) benefit from  the establishment of the laboratory.
