Title       : A Testbed for Collaborative Interactive Remote Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1995     
File        : a9552593

Award Number: 9552593
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100065             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt J. Maly maly@cs.odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. M. Overstreet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9552593  Maly    Building on its expertise in networking, computer supported 
              collaborative work, and remote learning, Old Dominion University  will prepare
              to build a statewide highly Interactive Remote  Instruction (IRI) testbed based
              on networked workstations.  Technology and pedagogical methods developed in
              testbed will be  integrated into TELETECHNET, a state funded program in which
              Old  Dominion University and community colleges will provide four-year 
              programs.  The first two years will be taught at the community  colleges with
              the last two being provided by Old Dominion  University to remote community
              college campuses via networked and  televised course instructions.  The project
              will consist of a one-  year preparatory phase, covered by this proposal, and a
              three-year  phase of research, development, and implementation to be covered by
               a follow-on proposal.    Significant contributions of the proposed one-year
              project include:  1) refining an existing IRI prototype to provide an
              open-ended  teaching/learning environment with a set of basic features easy to 
              use by students and faculty of all disciplines; 2) developing the  basic
              concepts of new instructional methods to exploit the  interactivity of the
              system in support of higher domains of  learning; and 3) preparing to bring
              together a consortium of  government, industry and academic individuals who are
                dedicated to innovative approaches to education for the 21st  century. This
              will lay the foundation in providing Virginia with a  cost-effective method of
              delivering high quality education remotely  in support of some of the 50,000
              additional students expected to  enroll in Virginia's public colleges and
              universities by the year  2001.    The proposed hardware/software architectures
              use existing  technologies but anticipate the wider availability of a
              high-speed  Information superhighway and multimedia workstations in the near 
              future.  The architecture provides an open environment in which  many types of
              teaching materials and inst ructional software can be  incorporated.  The
              prototype provides two-way video to remote  sites; shared operation of X-window
              tools and applications;  interactive note-taking; a VCR-like replay of past
              classes and  ancillary material and a full motion video window which can
              display  the instructor, a classroom demonstration, or any PC, Macintosh or 
              X-window application.    This instructional capability goes beyond traditional
              TV courses  and traditional classrooms by enabling instructors and students to 
              access multimedia generated from a variety of sources and to use  group
              collaboration tools for interaction between two participants,  among small
              groups, or entire classes.  The system will provide  audio-visual interaction
              and allow faculty and remote-site students  to share the manipulation of
              software tools, such as spreadsheets  or chemistry models.  While the elements
              of IRI are currently  technically feasible, a major portion of the project's
              efforts are  directed to the developing of new student-centered teaching
              methods  and paradigms which take advantage of the environment and to  refining
              the hardware and software through experience of actual  instructional needs.
              Key to the success of our approach is an  interface which students and faculty
              from all disciplines can use  with intimal training.  This system will provide
              access to higher  education, not only for traditional students, who for
              personal or  financial reasons choose not to reside at a four-year institution.
                IRI will promote effective use of network and computer technology  for all
              participating students and faculty.  Exposure to  technology-enabled
              interaction will help prepare students for the  challenges of increased global
              competitiveness.    Old Dominion University will consider the total project a
              success  in developing a long-term self-sustaining system if half the 
              TELETECHNET courses use IRI within five years, both faculty and  students
              accept and benefit from this mode of teaching as  demonstrated with such metr
              ics as cost satisfaction and there is an  increase in the number of students
              completing four-year degrees.   We will consider the one-year phase successful
              if we shall have  used a version of the IRI system in a real class environment
              and  identified the problems in that version.  ***
