Title       : Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometry in Geology, Chemistry
               and Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9552128

Award Number: 9552128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Biagioni rnb266f@cnas.smsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erwin J. Mantei  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Miles C. Barnhart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Missouri State U
	      901 South National
	      Springfield, MO  658040027    417/836-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Chemistry, the Department of Geography,  Geology, and
              Planning, and the Department of Biology are  collaborating on an inductively
              coupled plasma-atomic emission  spectrometry (ICP-AES) system.   ICP-AES is a
              widely used  analytical technique that provides measurement of elemental 
              composition for many types of sample, including metals and  alloys; geological
              samples including minerals, rocks, ores, and  soil; water, including
              groundwater, seawater, and waste water;  and agricultural and biological
              materials.   The ICP-AES system  is being used primarily for upper-level
              laboratory courses and  undergraduate research.   Within the Department of
              Chemistry,  ICP-AES is being employed in instrumental analysis courses to 
              determine alloy composition and in an environmental chemistry  laboratory
              course to determine the quantities of heavy metal  levels in field studies of
              contaminated soil.   In the Department  of Geography, Geology, and Planning,
              ICP-AES is being used in a  mineralogy course to determine the elemental
              composition of  minerals, in a hydrology course to measure metal content in 
              ground water, and in a geochemistry field study project to  measure heavy metal
              contaminants in the land and streams near  landfills.   In the Department of
              Biology, ICP-AES is being used  to determine metal concentrations in plants and
              in freshwater  ecosystems.   The ICP-AES system can also be employed in a 
              variety of undergraduate environmental research projects aimed at  evaluating
              the fate of heavy metals contaminants which enter  streams, the levels and
              distribution of toxic metals in  environmental samples, and levels of
              industrial pollutants on air  quality.
