Title       : A Modeling and Simulation Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9552141

Award Number: 9552141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60409              (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Gearhart   (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Pierce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell J. Egbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   A modeling and simulation laboratory that will contain a  network of 25
              Pentium 90MHz microcomputers equipped with C++,  MATLAB and the simulation
              language SIMSCRIPT is being  established.  A computer-based approach to
              teaching mathematical  modeling is being developed with special emphasis on
              computer  simulation using a simulation language.  The laboratory and new 
              teaching approach revitalizes the applied mathematics program.   It represents
              a departmental effort to improve the education of  ethnically diverse students
              and, in the process, makes them  better prepared for employment.       A new
              introductory course is being developed that is  designed to help students
              become comfortable with the use of  personal computers to solve quantitative
              problems and discover  principles and concepts via experimentation.  Students
              use  interactive software, including MATLAB, as well as write programs  of
              their own. The course prepares students for the revised  2-course sequence in
              modeling.         The first of these courses focuses on deterministic models.  
              Models of systems, particularly ones that are difficult  mathematically, are
              introduced in class, and software  implementing the models is ppovided. 
              Students will then use the  computer to draw conclusions about the model and
              the system they  are studying.  The second course in the modeling sequence 
              introduces computer simulation of stochastic systems and covers  techniques of
              effective simulation modeling.  It also covers the  implementation of these
              models on personal computers using the  industry-standard simulation language
              SIMSCRIPT.         All three of these classes are held in the laboratory.  
              Instructors demonstrate the software and models by broadcasting  computations
              to workstations.  They are also able to view work in  progress at any of the
              computers in the network.  A computer is  available for each student.  Students
              will experiment with  models, explore their ramifications, contrast results
              with the  system they are studying,  and modify models as required.  They  will
              also be able to easily generate professional quality reports  and present their
              results.  In the process, students will gain  experience that will serve them
              well in their future careers.  It  is expected that several other courses,
              particularly those in  numerical analysis and statistics, will be taught in the
               laboratory with similar beneficial results.
