Title       : Experimental Laboratory Approaches to Teach Environmental Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1995      
File        : a9552302

Award Number: 9552302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8010               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Madigosky ofsmadigosky@cyber.widener.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott Van Bramer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Widener Univ Main Campus
	      14th and Chestnut
	      Chester, PA  19013    215/499-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Small class size and extensive laboratory experience are integral  to the newly
              developed Environmental Science program.  The  current interest in
              environmental issues by students provides an  excellent opportunity to develop
              their interests in science  through lab experiences that address key
              environmental problems.    This laboratory experience is enhanced through the
              acquisition of  equipment to assess air quality.   This will enrich the current
               curricula and enable students to participate in a genuine  research experience
              under the direction of faculty.   The project  also incorporates experimental
              laboratories into introductory  courses in environmental science and chemistry.
                Students in the  upper-division courses collaborate with scientists from the 
              Environmental Protection Agency on environmentally related  projects.   They
              also share their expertise with students from  local inner-city schools.   To
              accomplish this, the project funds  the purchase of a high-volume sampler for
              measuring atmospheric  particulate matter, a mass flow meter and vacuum pump
              for  sampling nitric acid vapor, and a nitrogen oxide analyzer.   In  addition,
              the project provides a computer system for data  acquisition and analysis.  
              This equipment permits the expansion  of laboratory offerings and provides
              students with a unique  opportunity to participate in environmental research.
