Title       : Enhanced Instruction of Molecular Biology: Incorporation of Electrophoresis and
               Related Techniques into the Biology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1995     
File        : a9552293

Award Number: 9552293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19807              (Estimated)
Investigator: Holly A. Downing   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lance Urven  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sibdas Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daryle A. Waechter-Brulla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Whitewater
	      800 West Main
	      Whitewater, WI  531901705    414/472-1027

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project funds laboratory equipment that enhances the quality  of
              instruction in the areas of cell and molecular biology.    Electrophoresis and
              related techniques are widely used in many  areas of biology.   A firm
              understanding of these processes is  essential for all of the university's
              students, but especially  those who plan to go to graduate school in cell and
              molecular  biology; those who hope to get jobs in cell, molecular, or 
              physiology laboratories; or even those who plan on teaching  middle or high
              school.   The most effective instruction in the  sciences is in the laboratory,
              where students gain hands-on  experience and can learn to understand what is
              involved and  potential problems that can arise at more than a theoretical 
              level.   By incorporating gel electrophoresis exercises in the  Introduction to
              Genetics and Cell Biology courses, faculty can  ensure that all majors graduate
              with a solid understanding of how  proteins and nucleic acids can be isolated
              based on molecular  weight and electrical charge and how the variability in
              proteins  can be related to genetic differences for population studies.   
              Advanced laboratories involving polymerase chain reaction and  techniques such
              as Western blotting are being included in upper-  division courses such as
              Microbiology, Plant Physiology,  Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology and used
              in independent study  projects and faculty research.   In addition, the new
              equipment  is being used to demonstrate electrophoresis and DNA  fingerprinting
              in Introduction to Criminology for the Criminal  Justice minor offered by the
              Sociology Department and possibly in  a science and math summer enrichment
              program for minority  students and teachers.
