Title       : Graduate Research Traineeships in Macromolecular Structure and Plant Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a9552837

Award Number: 9552837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Mayfield mayfield@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger N. Beachy  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GER-9552837  Beachy  One of the great challenges in  biology today is to
              determine the  functions of proteins and other  macromolecules in the context
              of  their three-dimensional structures.  This challenge defines the frontier 
              of research for a variety of  biological questions, including  many in plant
              biology. To train the  next generation of scientists in  this multidisciplinary
              area, a  research and training program has  been created at The Scripps 
              Research Institute. We are  requesting support to provide  training for PhD
              students pursuing  research problems in macromolecule  structure in Plant
              Biology as a  formal component of this PhD  program. An integral portion of the
               training program will be the  identification of qualified  students of
              underrepresented  minorities through established  linkages with two campuses in
              the  California State University system,  i.e., Los Angeles and San Diego 
              State University, and with the San  Diego Plant Science Center. These  students
              will participate in  research programs that include  structural and functional
              analyses  of macromolecules involved in key  aspects of plant biology. Our 
              faculty includes a diverse group of  innovative plant biologists whose 
              research requires collaborations  with leading experts in the  analysis of
              molecular structure by  x-ray crystallography, NMR  spectroscopy. The Fellows
              sponsored  by this program will enable these  collaborations.
