Title       : Teaching Undergraduates the Dynamics of Biology through Computer Assisted Image
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1995      
File        : a9552108

Award Number: 9552108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barton L. Bergquist Bergquist@uni.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean M. Gerrath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Darrell J. Wiens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Jurgenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              For various reasons, the dynamic nature of living organisms and  processes is
              not well understood by undergraduate college  students in biology.   That
              change and movement are the normal,  vital character of living things is not
              easily taught using  static images in books, slides, preserved specimens, and 
              photographs.   The development of computers that can capture and  digitize
              images presents an opportunity to teach the dynamic  aspects of biology in a
              fundamentally new way.   Through this  project, the university creates 10
              microscope/Macintosh  computer-based image analysis workstations that make it
              possible  for students to capture and analyze images of biological dynamics  in
              courses in the Department of Biology.   The workstations are  becoming
              important central tools in the laboratory work of  courses in plant
              development, animal development, experimental  protozoology, and general
              microbiology.   These instruments  enable students independently to investigate
              problems of plant  and animal development as well as movement of
              micro-organisms in  response to various stimuli.   Students are able to
              visualize and  comprehend biological phenomena in new ways.   The image
              analysis  equipment allows them to ask significant biological questions  based
              on observations and to learn how to use quantitative  approaches to answer
              questions and problems.   The impact of this  new capability is expected to
              extend beyond these courses to  other realms of the curriculum as videos and
              computer files  conveying dynamic, three-dimensional and developmental 
              representations of living processes are created and used in  teaching.
