Title       : An Automated X-Ray Diffraction System for Undergraduate Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1995        
File        : a9552135

Award Number: 9552135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49242              (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Mehegan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul K. Dixon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy D. Usher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louis A. Fernandez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through this project, the Departments of Geological Sciences and  Physics are
              provided funding for an x-ray diffractometer (XRD)  with a host computer and
              associated software for use in  undergraduate education.  This project provides
              instruction that  integrates science and technology in both geology and physics
              for  the following student groups:  (1) undergraduates that are  planning
              careers in precollege teaching, (2) current science  teachers enrolled in an
              M.A.  in Teaching Science, and (3)  science majors in geology and physics.  
              This goal is  accomplished by providing students with direct access to a modern
               instrument for student research at the introductory science level  and in more
              advanced science laboratory courses.  XRDs are  central components in industry
              and the research community.   If  our students are to function effectively in
              these  technology-dependent environments, they need experience with such 
              equipment.   Students in both disciplines learn about the  principles of x-ray
              diffraction and the utility of such  equipment.   For the non-science-majors,
              experience with an XRD  system will take away the abstract nature of what they
              learn and  make it a practical reality.  The choice of an XRD system is  based
              upon issues of utility, dependability, and safety.   This  instrument is
              powerful enough to serve adequately in the advanced  laboratories and in
              directed student research.   The new  interlocks and remote computer control
              help ensure the safety of  the students and protect the equipment from abuse.
