Title       : The Earth Systems Laboratory: An Interactive Tool to Improve Introductory
               Geoscience Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1995       
File        : a9552329

Award Number: 9552329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37127              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Grove kgrove@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa D. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project creates in the Department of Geosciences a new  interactive
              computer laboratory--the Earth Systems Laboratory  (ESL)--dedicated to the
              visualization and analysis of Earth  features.   The project addresses two
              curricular needs in the  highest enrollment courses of general education
              curriculum:   Introduction to Oceanography lecture and laboratory.   Two 
              important, but difficult-to-acquire skills are developed:  first,  the ability
              to visualize the structure and evolution of  three-dimensional Earth phenomena
              with different time and space  scales; second, the capacity to understand the
              process of  scientific inquiry as an exploration and evolution of ideas, not  a
              static collection of facts.   In the ESL, students are not   passive observers,
              but active participants in the observation,  description, interpretation, and
              integration of Earth data.   The  ESL provides the essential hands-on
              experiences that make the  scientific discovery process come alive for our
              nonmajors  students.   Computers are being connected to campus and global 
              networks, thereby giving students access to many of the resources  available to
              professional scientists.   The project provides them  a guiding path for their
              access to data and manipulating software  by using Mosaic-type browsing
              software to identify resources and  to create documents that link these
              resources to menu items that  can be selected by students.   The project is
              being implemented  through the creation of new exercises made possible through
              the  acquisition of hardware and software for the ESL.
