Title       : An Instructional Laboratory for Digital Signal Processing and Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1995     
File        : a9552427

Award Number: 9552427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Morley rem@dadent.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Linear Systems and Circuits These laboratory exercises are  designed to
              introduce students to the fundamental properties of  electro-optic devices, as
              well as the properties of classical  optics.   The topics covered in the
              lectures and accompanying  experiments include semiconductor lasers,
              photodetectors, thin  lenses, diffraction gratings, beam splitters,
              polarization, and  the basics of ray-tracing.   The motivation behind the
              exercises  is the optical section of the CD player.   The final experiment 
              includes design and construction of a large-scale version of the  CD optical
              system.   This is used to demonstrate the various  optical signals that are
              read from the CD and to show how the  optical section is related to the
              electronics (digital audio  signals) and servo (focus and tracking signals)
              systems.   Electromagnetics The goal of this group of laboratory exercises  is
              to bring a variety of electromagnetic fundamentals employed in  CD technology
              to the attention of the students.  Optics and  Optical Devices This laboratory
              exercise is designed to introduce  students to some of the properties of
              continuous-time and  discrete-time, linear, and time-invariant systems.  
              Topics  covered in both lecture and laboratory exercises include Fourier 
              analysis, frequency response, Kirchhoff's and Ohm's laws, power  transfer and
              impedance matching, operational amplifiers,  analog-to-digital and
              digital-to-analog conversion (ADC and DAC),  quantization effects, sampling,
              and aliasing.   Each of these  topics is motivated through the use of audio
              band circuits and  computer simulations.
