Title       : Supersonic Virtual Impactor for Separating Small Particles from Gases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1993   
File        : a9261185

Award Number: 9261185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William Felder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AeroChem Research Labs
	      P. O. Box 12
	      Princeton, NJ  085420012    609/921-7070

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1417,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This study develops a new method for the separation of small                   
              (10m. in diameter and smaller) particles from a gas stream.                   
              In this method, the gas stream is arranged to flow as a jet,                   
              and forced to impinge upon a conically shaped impactor                         
              surface.  The tip of the cone surface, and only a small                        
              fraction (termed the minority flow) actually moves through the                 
              aperture.  The average size of the particles in the minority                   
              flow is much larger than that in the mainstream which passes                   
              over the particles because the larger particles, with greater                  
              momentum, cannot negotiate the turn and follow the small                       
              particles into the aperture.  The aperture is joined to two                    
              concentric tubes.  The outer tube has a solid wall, and the                    
              inner tube a porous wall for a short distance near its end                     
              joining the solid plate.  Gas is supplied at high pressure to                  
              the annular space between the tubes, and passes through the                    
              porous part of the tube into the space behind the aperture                     
              creating a counterflow.  Finally suction is applied in the                     
              inner tube, downstream from the aperture.  The combination of                  
              suction and flow through the porous tube creates a plane of                    
              zero flow which separates gas flowing out of the bottom of the                 
              inner tube and gas flowing out of the aperture.  Particles                     
              that have traveled through the aperture must progress against                  
              the counterflow.  The ones large enough that their momentum                    
              can allow them to pass through the counterflow and eventually                  
              rejoin the majority flow over the cone.  By adjusting the                      
              counterflow pressure the plane of zero flow can be moved, and                  
              this provides some control of the particle size distribution                   
              collected at the downstream end.  The study will improve on                    
              this design by causing the jet gas stream impacting on the                     
              cone to move at supersonic speeds.  Supersonic speeds allow                    
              large particle velocities, and permits smaller particles to                    
              pass through the plane of zero flow and be collected.
