Title       : Fundamental Studies of Interacting Droplet Combustion of Low Grade Fuels Using
               Novel Laser Diagnostics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1993   
File        : a9261296

Award Number: 9261296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48284              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Bachalo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aerometrics Inc
	      755 North Mary Avenue
	      Sunnyvale, CA  94086    408/738-6688

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0313010   Air Pollution                           
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1407,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This program deals with the design, development, and                           
              application of novel laser diagnostic techniques for the study                 
              of spray/drop vaporization and combustion.  The overall                        
              objective is accurate determination of such parameters as                      
              droplet temperature and temperature gradient profiles of the                   
              gas media surrounding one or more interacting burning droplets                 
              to provide fundamental knowledge regarding their combustion.                   
              The specific objectives of the Phase I program are: a) Improve                 
              and further develop an existing test facility for burning fuel                 
              droplet streams; b) Develop the point-diffraction                              
              interferometric technique in conjunction with digital image                    
              processing techniques to define the gas temperature field                      
              around a stream of burning drops; c) Apply rainbow thermometry                 
              to measure instantaneous liquid droplet temperatures; d)                       
              Investigate the feasibility of automatically integrating all                   
              this information to allow full reconstruction of the                           
              temperature field surrounding the droplets; and, e) Perform a                  
              preliminary assessment of measurement errors associated with                   
              the technique.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The ultimate potential product is an instrument which would                    
              enable acquisition of fundamental information regarding the                    
              structure of the thermal fields surrounding interacting                        
              burning fuel droplets (notably, low-grade fuels) which is of                   
              paramount importance in development of future combustion                       
              systems which could utilize these fuels.  Potential                            
              applications include development/use of a novel fuel injector                  
              system for existing internal combustion engines which would                    
              enable them to use low grade fuels at high efficiency and with                 
              minimal production of pollutants.  These applications could                    
              significantly reduce U.S. dependency on foreign oil imports,                   
              and would help ensure world competitiveness and environmental                  
              responsibility in the use of low grade fuels.
