Title       : Mediation Skills Assessment Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1992  
File        : a9261379

Award Number: 9261379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49978              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa L. Russell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : HumRRO International Inc
	      66 Canal Center Plaza, Suite 400
	      Alexandria, VA  223141591    703/549-3611

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 1372,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In response to concerns of the Alternative Dispute Resolution                  
              (ADR) community, the project will develop and validate a                       
              Mediation Skills Assessment Program (MAP).  The MAP will be                    
              comprised of role-play exercises, work samples, structured                     
              interviews, and/or other tests shown to be valid predictors of                 
              success in mediator jobs.  Because MAP will identify individuals               
              who are likely to be talented mediators, MAP should reduce costs               
              associated with poor mediator performance and/or high mediator                 
              turnover.  The MAP will enable ADR programs to select, develop,                
              and maintain a high quality mediator workforce.                                
                                                                                             
              The strongest predictor validation programs integrate content,                 
              construct, and criterion-related methods.  Using a construct                   
              and/or content-oriented approach to the development of predictors              
              is good science, even if a criterion-related validation study is               
              planned.  This project for the development and validation of MAP               
              emphasizes the development of predictors that have strong content              
              or construct-oriented support.  A criterion-related validation                 
              study will be undertaken once the predictors are developed.  In                
              Phase I, the project will determine whether criterion-related                  
              validation is appropriate or feasible, and the type(s) of                      
              mediator jobs to be studied in Phase II.                                       
                                                                                             
              The research will yield several products useful to ADR programs:               
              A job analysis questionnaire, a data base of questionnaire data,               
              the Mediation Skills Assessment Program, a client satisfaction                 
              survey, and supervisory rating scales.  Because there currently                
              are no validated personnel management tools available to the                   
              mediation community, any one of these products could be marketed               
              to such organizations.
