Title       : A Center for Excellence for Computer Science Education and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9015006

Award Number: 9015006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen R. Mahaney                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1628720            (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Novick novick@cs.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Bernat  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2886,9178,9218,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) located on the                  
              U.S.-Mexico border has in the Fall of 1989, a student body                     
              comprised of 55.4% Hispanic, 33.3% Anglo, 3% Black, and 1.7%                   
              other minorities.  It's Computer Science Department is CSAB                    
              accredited. There were 239 undergraduates (53% Hispanic) and 48                
              graduate students (25% Hispanic) enrolled in 1989.  Computer                   
              science enrollments, unlike the national trend, have been                      
              increasing over the last several years.                                        
                   The primary goal of the project is to upgrade the quality of              
              education offered their predominantly minority student body.  To               
              accomplish this they must:                                                     
                   o  Attract and retain students, particularly minority                     
              students, through improved instructional support and outreach                  
              activities                                                                     
                   o   Encourage and prepare their most talented students to                 
              pursue graduate education either at UTEP or elsewhere                          
                   o  Enhance and support the research productivity of the                   
              faculty.                                                                       
                   An outstanding feature of their plan is the involvement of                
              upper division and graduate student assistants.  Each student                  
              assistant will be directly involved in both teaching and                       
              research.  The use of student assistants provides many benefits,               
              particularly in the educational program.                                       
                   Pipeline Activities: One of their major thrusts in computer               
              science is to increase the number of minority students intending               
              to major in computer science.  They will accomplish this by                    
              career development support in area middle and high schools,                    
              summer workshops designed to teach teachers how to teach computer              
              science and pre-college summer programs to introduce students to               
              science, engineering and computer science.                                     
                   Recitation sections: The core of their plan is the use of                 
              student assistants which will enable them to break up large                    
              introductory classes into two components.  The beginning courses               
              will consist of large, professor led lecture sections twice                    
              weekly and much smaller (10-15 students) student assistant led                 
              recitation sections thrice weekly.  The student assistants will                
              be trained in handling the recitation sections.  Such training                 
              will include teambuilding and leadership skills and knowing how                
              to recognize problems as they develop.  They will also receive                 
              support and counselling on how to solve these problems.                        
                   Role models: The student assistant leaders will also serve                
              as role models for the low division students.  They will                       
              encourage the assistants to discuss their research work in these               
              recitation sections.                                                           
                   Curriculum development:  They plan to deal with the                       
              deficiencies in their curriculum coverage by encouraging faculty               
              to develop expertise in new areas of teaching and research.  A                 
              second major curriculum development strategy is to re-orient                   
              courses in order to fit the new ACM-Denning action-oriented model              
              of computer science education and the newly emerging ACM                       
              Curriculum 1990 guidelines which argue that laboratory work                    
              should include exercises in which students modify and explore                  
              existing codes.                                                                
                                                                                             
                   UTEP will upgrade the research productivity of the faculty                
              through the avenues of technical expertise, student assistants,                
              and the acquisition of sufficient equipment, including a network               
              of workstations, and necessary software.                                       
                   These activities will maximize the number of Hispanic                     
              students who will choose to pursue advanced degrees and enter the              
              educational or research systems as their career choice.
