Title       : Neutrino Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1993      
File        : a9015634

Award Number: 9015634
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Cherry cherry@phunds.phys.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              On every list of outstanding astrophysical problems in the late                
              twentieth century is the "solar neutrino problem."  This problem               
              refers to the measured low rate of neutrino production in the Sun              
              compared to rates expected from theoretical interior models of                 
              the Sun.  Since the rate of neutrinos generated is proportional                
              to the thermonuclear energy rate in the Sun, there is a keen                   
              interest to confirm our basic understanding of what makes the Sun              
              shine.  The discrepancy between the observed and predicted rate                
              calls this understanding into question, hence the term "solar                  
              neutrino problem."  The Principal Investigator (PI) proposes a                 
              three-year continuation of his work in the Soviet-American                     
              Gallium Experiment (SAGE) located in the Bakyan Neutrino                       
              Laboratory in the Soviet Union.  This experiment will provide the              
              most sensitive test yet of solar interior and neutrino theories                
              because it is sensitive to low and moderate energy neutrinos,                  
              whereas existing experiments (at Homestake, South Dakota and                   
              Kamiokande in Japan) are sensitive to the relatively few high                  
              energy neutrinos produced by side-nuclear reactions.  The SAGE                 
              experiment became operational in early 1990 and has already                    
              produced exciting results, an extreme dearth of neutrinos                      
              relative to the theoretical predictions.  If future monitoring of              
              the Sun with more sensitive equipment confirms these early                     
              results, then either our understanding of the Sun's interior                   
              structure or the fundamental nature of neutrinos must be changed.              
              The PI has played a vital role in constructing the proportional                
              counter detectors for the SAGE experiment.  The PI proposes to                 
              continue this role both because the old detectors deteriorate                  
              with time and also because more detectors will provide a more                  
              sensitive test of the neutrino discrepancy.  In addition, these                
              detectors provide a means of discriminating between bonafide                   
              solar neutrinos and neutrinos produced by alternate processes on               
              the Earth.  Thus, the PI's efforts will help to define the extent              
              of the neutrino discrepancy, leading to its earlier resolution.
