Title       : CCD Photometry of RR Lyrae Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1994   
File        : a9015728

Award Number: 9015728
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113315             (Estimated)
Investigator: Horace A. Smith smith@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              RR Lyrae variables are a group of pulsating stars that occur in                
              old regions of the Galaxy, such as in globular clusters and the                
              general galactic halo.  Because these variable stars are all                   
              known to have nearly the same luminosity, they were first used as              
              "standard candles" by Harlow Shapley earlier this century to                   
              determine the distance from the Sun to the Galaxy's center.                    
              Moreover, since many of these stars are thought to have been                   
              formed during the early stages of the Galaxy's collapse soon                   
              after the Big Bang, their age is important in determining the age              
              of the Universe.  Recent work has shown that the luminosities of               
              RR Lyrae stars have a residual dependence after all on their                   
              metal content and age.  Additionally, there is an important                    
              standing controversy over whether globular clusters were all                   
              formed soon after the Big Bang or over an extended period of                   
              time.  To resolve these issues requires a careful determination                
              of the incidence of these stars among various globular clusters,               
              the distribution of their periods, and the dependence of their                 
              luminosiites on their surface temperatures.                                    
                                                                                             
              Past efforts to improve our knowledge of the properties of RR                  
              Lyrae stars have been hampered by their faintness and their                    
              crowding together in dense star conglomerates in the sky.  The                 
              Principle Investigator proposes to monitor the luminosity                      
              variations of a large number of RR Lyrae stars in metal-poor and               
              metal-rich globular clusters to separate out the residual                      
              dependences of these physical characteristics.  The Investigator               
              will use a modern Charge Coupled Device on a small telescope to                
              perform this work.  Such devices are sensitive even to small                   
              variations in light output.  Additionally, because many star                   
              images may be focussed independently on the detector surface, one              
              may use non-variable stars on the same image to subtract out                   
              changes in sensitivity caused by instabilities in the instrument               
              and the Earth's atmosphere.
