Title       : NSF/DARPA Agreement for Use of DARPA VLSI Implementation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MIP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1992 
File        : a9015601

Award Number: 9015601
Award Instr.: Contract Interagency Agreement               
Prgm Manager: Paul T. Hulina                          
	      MIP  DIV OF MICROELECTRONIC INFOR PROCESS SYS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2061595            (Estimated)
Investigator: John Toole   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Research Proj Agy
	      3701 North Fairfax Drive
	      Arlington, VA  222091714    /   -

NSF Program : 4733      MOSIS PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A 1986 Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the National                  
              Science Foundation (NSF) and the Defense Advanced Research Projects            
              Agency (DARPA) established a three-year joint program supporting               
              VLSI (Very Large Scale Integration fabrication by MOSIS (Metal                 
              Oxide Semiconductor Implementation Service) for qualifying                     
              universities.  This is a three-year continuation to that agreement,            
              commencing October 1, 1989.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This continuation of the MOU expands the original program to                   
              accelerate critical capabilities for Microsystems Design and                   
              Prototyping in U.S. universities.  This includes expanding the                 
              original services and technologies available  to universities                  
              authorized to use MOSIS as they become generally available (e.g.               
              semi-custom and gallium arsenide chip fabrication); stressing VLSI             
              education, especially undergraduate education needed for designing             
              future electronic systems; exploring new fabrication services                  
              designed specifically for the research and education community's               
              desire for cost effective experimentation of state-of-the-art                  
              technologies (e.g. design of advanced sensor and micromechanical               
              devices); and rapid prototyping methodologies, tools and services              
              needed for complete systems.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The program has been widely acclaimed by both universities and                 
              industry as essential to the U.S. research and education effort,               
              and important in the national effort to improve U.S.                           
              competitiveness.  As of June 1, 1990, over one hundred forty (140)             
              universities are authorized to use MOSIS for VLSI educational                  
              purposes and over 5500 students are enrolled in university VLSI                
              Design classes.  This has provided a valuable cost effective                   
              educational tool for teaching VLSI, as well as resulted in a sound             
              human resource base that has significantly contributed to important            
              research successes supported by both the NSF and DoD.
