Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research on the Measurement of Protein Crystal
               Impedance to Determine Dielectric Constants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1991 
File        : a9015100

Award Number: 9015100
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : October 1,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Benno P. Schoenborn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brookhaven Nat'l Lab
	      Building 460
	      Upton, NY  11973    631/344-3320

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1144,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a two-year collaborative project between               
              Dr. Benno P. Schoenborn, Center for Structural Biology, Brookhaven             
              National Laboratory, and Professor Hans G. L. Coster, University of            
              New South Wales, Kensington, Australia, under the U.S.-Australia               
              Cooperative Science Program.  The scientists will cooperate in                 
              measuring the dielectric constants of selected protein crystals.               
              Such information is important in understanding electrostatic                   
              interactions within and between protein molecules.  These interactions         
              are believed to play key roles in biologically important protein               
              functions.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Crystalline myoglobin will be studied initially in this project.               
              The procedure is experimentally difficult, requiring micro-                    
              instrumentation as well as the use of extremely small electric                 
              currents.  Existing equipment and instrumentation need to be                   
              improved before the measurements can be carried out, new computer              
              software must be developed, and the theoretical approach used to               
              convert the measured impedance values to useful dielectric constants           
              needs to be further investigated.  The respective strengths of the             
              cooperating laboratories will be utilized in carrying out these                
              preliminary tasks, as well as in the later measurements and data               
              analysis.  Dr. Schoenborn is an expert in using neutron scattering             
              and other techniques to investigate the structure of proteins.                 
              Professor Coster has had considerable experience in impedance                  
              measurements of membranes.  Working together in this project they              
              expect to be able to obtain an increased understanding of protein              
              structures and of the relationship between structure and function.
