Title       : U.S.-Australian Cooperative Research on the Analysis and Manipulation of the
               Algal Carbon Dioxide Concentrating Mechanism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1992  
File        : a9015166

Award Number: 9015166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21690              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin H. Spalding mspaldin@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1142,1145,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a two-year collaborative project between               
              Professor Martin H. Spalding, Department of Botany, Iowa State                 
              University, and Dr. Murray R. Badger, Australian National University,          
              Canberra, under the U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program.  The           
              scientists will study aspects of the photosynthetic process in the             
              unicellular alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.  This and other                    
              unicellular algae are very efficient in their use of external                  
              inorganic carbon for photosynthesis, and exhibit additional                    
              interesting photosynthetic characteristics as well.  The cooperating           
              researchers believe these effects are the result of intracellular              
              carbon dioxide concentration levels in the algae which are                     
              significantly greater than in most higher plants.  A "carbon                   
              dioxide-concentrating mechanism" has been proposed by the                      
              investigators which involves energy-requiring transport of inorganic           
              carbon (as carbon dioxide or bicarbonate ion) into and within the              
              algal cells, followed by enzyme-catalyzed conversion of accumulated            
              bicarbonate ion to yield enhanced levels of carbon dioxide.  It is             
              the aim of this cooperative project to understand better the                   
              transport mechanism and to determine the location of the enzyme                
              (carbonic anhydrase) within the cell.                                          
                                                                                             
              Both the U.S. and Australian groups have been active in this area of           
              research, using complementary approaches and techniques.  Professor            
              Spalding and his colleagues have emphasized molecular genetic                  
              studies of the CO2-concentrating mechanism in microalgae, while Dr.            
              Badger and his group in Australia have focused their related efforts           
              on cyanobacteria, and have developed special mass spectrometric and            
              centrifugation techniques to aid in the analyses.  The cooperative             
              project will build upon the strengths of both groups, and will                 
              involve exchanges by the principal investigators as well as by                 
              their postdoctoral associates.
