Title       : Novel Polymer Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1993  
File        : a9015729

Award Number: 9015729
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry W. Gibson hwgibson@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
              Polyrotaxanes, comprised of macrocyclic rings threaded by linear               
              macromolecules, are a new and still unexploited family of polymers.            
              Due to the potential for the macrocyclic components to move                    
              lateraly along the linear backbone as well as circumferentially,               
              these systems are expected to possess properties distinct from                 
              those of traditional covalently bonded polymeric materials or                  
              blends thereof.                                                                
                                                                                             
              The synthesis and characterization of a wide variety of structural             
              types of polyrotaxanes will be carried out.  Synthesis by                      
              statistical threading of macrocycles by linear monomers will rely              
              on use of the cyclic as the solvent for the polymerization.  A                 
              directed method is based on an attractive force between the                    
              macrocycle and the linear monomer, forming a stable threaded entity            
              (a rotaxane) prior to polymerization.  Stability against loss of               
              the macrocycles by diffusion is ensured by incorporation of large              
              end caps or bulky spacers along the backbone.  Various combinations            
              of the two components, over a range of polarity, will be                       
              considered.  Among the macrocycles are both rigid and flexible                 
              crown ethers, hydrocarbons, and quaternary ammonium systems.                   
              Linear polymeric components, likewise, will vary widely from                   
              flexible to rigid-rod structures, formed by both step and chain-               
              growth methods.                                                                
                                                                                             
              The overall objective is to explore and exploit the novel                      
              topographic and topological features of this novel polymer                     
              architecture.  Potential areas of utilization include interfacial              
              bonding (adhesion, blend compatibilization), improved                          
              processability (enhanced solubility, lower melting points),                    
              stabilization (encasement of labile functionality), improved                   
              control of molecular ordering (electron and energy transport,                  
              molecular level interpenetrating networks for better mechanical                
              performance), and understanding the diffusion of linear                        
              macromolecules in the bulk.
