Title       : Determination of Metal-Oxygen Bond Strength in Oxide Catalysts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1992   
File        : a9015221

Award Number: 9015221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold H. Kung hkung@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In this project, the energies of metal-oxygen bonds involved                   
              in reduction and reoxidation of an oxide are measured by                       
              calorimetry using a heat-flow calorimeter.  Heats of reduction                 
              are measured for reduction by carbon monoxide or by hydrogen;                  
              this permits calculation of heats of formation for metal-                      
              oxygen bonds using the known heats of formation of small                       
              molecules, or, if necessary, the mesured heat of reoxidation.                  
              If surface hydroxyls are formed, their heats of formation can                  
              also be determined.  Laser Raman spectroscopy, performed                       
              before and after the calorimetry, is used to identify and                      
              track the particular bonds made or broken in the calorimetric                  
              reactions.  Initial experiments are on the highly dispersed                    
              phases of vanadia supported or gamma-alumina and anatase                       
              (titania).                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Data on the energies of metal-oxygen bonds are not available.                  
              Such data should be very useful for understanding the                          
              catalysis and surface chemistry of oxides, particularly                        
              selective catalytic oxidation reactions in which the surface                   
              is the proximate source of oxygen; the effort proposed is a                    
              formidable task.  Selective oxidations are major elements in                   
              the production of a variety of commodity and specialty                         
              chemicals.  Although catalytic behavior is the focus of this                   
              study, the results will also contribute to understanding                       
              semiconductor surfaces and insulating layers in electronic                     
              materials, and passivation an corrosion in structrual                          
              materials.
