Title       : Distributed Concurrent Hypertext for Multireader CooperativeSystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1990    
File        : a9015439

Award Number: 9015439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lou L. Rosenberg                        
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : September 1,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18400              (Estimated)
Investigator: P. David Stotts, Jr.   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard K. Furuta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Furuta                                                                         
              This research is funded under the Special Initiative on                        
              Coordination Theory and Collaboration Technology.  This is one of              
              eleven winners under that competition.  This project is to develop a           
              system that allows rapid prototyping and evaluation of                         
              collaboration support structures.  It operates in the context of a             
              data browsing and information system based on the Trellis model of             
              hypertext.  Trellis uses a formally defined concurrent process                 
              model (nets) to implement hypertext.  This approach provides                   
              parallel automation semantics on tip of the features of the                    
              commonly used annotated directed graph.  A Trellis document has a              
              well defined and analyzable formal structure, and the concurrency              
              aspects of nets give Trellis the capability of managing groups of              
              interactive agents within the structure of a linked document.                  
              Trellis documents not only represent relations among information               
              elements, but also serve as the basis for construction of high-                
              level cooperative process descriptions in which the agents of                  
              computation are coarse grained and of moderate speed and number.               
              This corresponds to groups of people interacting cooperatively on              
              the solution of a problem involving the browsing and manipulation              
              of information.                                                                
              This project integrates collaboration support methods into                     
              hypertext documents and browsing.  The unique features and                     
              capabilities of the Trellis hypertext model, coupled with the                  
              proposed formal extensions and analysis techniques, make this not              
              only technically feasible, but especially appropriate and succinct.
