Title       : U.S.-Australian Cooperative Research: Pollination Ecology and Selection in
               Plants that Mimic Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1992  
File        : a9015133

Award Number: 9015133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29967              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven N. Handel handel@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1123,5912,9179,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a three-year collaborative research project            
              between Professor Steven N. Handel, Department of Biological Sciences,         
              Rutgers University, and Professor Andrew J. Beattie, School of                 
              Biological Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia.  The             
              activity takes place under the U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science              
              Program.  The scientists will study the ecology and evolutionary               
              biology of so-called sexually deceptive plants (plants with flowers            
              that mimic female insects, thus attracting male insects to mate and            
              thereby effecting pollen transport).  The mimicry is known to occur            
              only within the orchid family, and though unusual, it is observed              
              among hundreds of species in Australia, and to a much lesser extent            
              elsewhere.  The investigators wish to explore the hypothesis that              
              the genetic structure of these plant populations is significantly              
              different from those in which pollination is the result of an insect           
              foraging strategy based on food rewards (nectar or pollen).                    
              Specific species of the orchid genus Chiloglottis, pollinated by male          
              thynnine wasps, will be studied.  Field observations of the wasp               
              flight movements among the flowers, as well as pollen transfer                 
              dynamics, will be carried out.  The effects of varying average                 
              inter-flower distance and flower height on pollinator behavior will            
              be investigated.  In addition, plant samples will be taken from                
              representative populations in the field and their genetic profiles             
              determined, using the technique of gel electrophoresis. Correlations           
              between the observed pollination patterns and gene flow in these               
              species will be sought.  This research in evolutionary ecology will            
              provide an independent test of current theoretical generalizations             
              that insect movement patterns determine the genetic structure of plant         
              populations.  In addition, the work has implications for the                   
              conservation of these orchids, some of which are endangered species.           
                                                                                             
              The cooperating scientists in this project bring complementary                 
              research strengths to the study.  Professor Handel's expertise is in           
              plant ecology, especially pollination biology and gene flow dynamics.          
              Professor Beattie has considerable experience in population genetics           
              and the biochemical analysis of plant populations.  The field                  
              studies will be carried out at selected Australian locations, and              
              the laboratory analyses performed at Macquarie University, in Sydney.
