Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Regulation of Ferritin Expression in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1991     
File        : a9015929

Award Number: 9015929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8040               (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth C. Theil   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1143,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in biochemis-                   
              try between Dr. Elizabeth Theil, North Carolina State                          
              University, and Dr. Jean-Francois Briat, University of                         
              Grenoble. The objective of the research is to investigate                      
              the regulation of ferritin expression in plants.                               
                                                                                             
              Iron is required for critical reactions (e.g. cell division                    
              and respiration), as well as plant-specific reactions (e.g.                    
              photosynthesis and nitrogen fixation).  Alterations in iron                    
              storage in ferritin occur in chlorosis and nematode                            
              infection.  In animals, ferritin is encoded in a multigene                     
              family and is regulated by iron and through a conserved                        
              translational regulatory sequence.  Comparable information                     
              is lacking in plants.  Recently the investigators have                         
              shown that pea and soybean ferritins share 55-65% sequence                     
              identify with vertebrate ferritins, but soybean ferritin                       
              mRNA also encodes a transit peptide apparently related to                      
              the plastid location of ferritin.  The effect of iron on                       
              ferritin synthesis in plants is to change ferritin mRNA                        
              concentration.  In this project, which combines US and                         
              French expertise on ferritin and on gene expression in                         
              plants, the investigators will carry out a joint study of                      
              ferritin regulation and accumulation in plants during iron                     
              stress, nodule formulation, and seed development.  Ferritin                    
              cDNAs and antibodies will be used to examine:  1) ferritin                     
              sequences (regulatory and coding) in plant genomes, 2) the                     
              effect of iron on ferritin mRNA content and transcription,                     
              and 3) ferritin mRNA and protein accumulation during normal                    
              and abnormal nodulation, leaf maturation and seed formation.                   
              The results will be important for understanding iron                           
              metabolism and ferritin regulation in plants, as well as                       
              providing a model in the future for intracellular trafficking                  
              related to plastid development.
