Title       : U.S.-Australia Joint Workshop on Skeletal Microchemical Marine Fish Analysis,
               Hobart, Australia, March 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1991 
File        : a9015099

Award Number: 9015099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : September 15,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Francis rfrancis@fish.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0511302   Role-Trace Element Component            
              0521700   Marine Resources                        
              0521800   Shelf & Esturine Ecosystem              
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award supports the transportation and per diem costs of six               
              U.S. participants in a U.S.-Australia Joint Workshop on Skeletal               
              Microchemical Marine Fish Analysis, to be held in Hobart (Tasmania),           
              Australia, March 2-6, 1992.  The meeting takes place under the                 
              auspices of the U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program, and will           
              bring together researchers who are using the relatively new technique          
              of skeletal microanalysis to study marine fish populations.  This              
              approach, which involves x-ray spectrometric analysis of ossified              
              structures (e.g. otoliths) in fish, offers an opportunity for                  
              greater understanding of the migration patterns of some commercially           
              important fishes.  The basis of this promise is the observation that           
              trace element composition and isotope ratios in fish skeletal                  
              structures show differences depending on the environmental history             
              of the fishes, such as the particular river system or other area               
              where spawning occurred.  The co-organizers of the seminar are                 
              Professor Robert C. Francis, Director of the Fisheries Research                
              Institute, University of Washington, and Dr. Ronald Thresher, of the           
              Australian CSIRO Division of Fisheries, Hobart, Tasmania.  Australian          
              participation is being supported by the Australian Department of               
              Industry, Technology, and Commerce.  There will also be a few                  
              attendees from other countries.                                                
                                                                                             
              The extent of dispersal of fishes from their spawning areas, as a              
              result of passive movement of larvae and, later, the active migration          
              of fish juveniles and adults, determines the geographic size of                
              marine populations.  Knowledge of the size, structure, and origins of          
              these populations is of importance to ecologists, fisheries                    
              biologists, and those responsible for management of coastal habitats.          
              Older procedures used to measure the movement of fishes, and thus the          
              spatial scale of fish populations, have given ambiguous results.  The          
              relatively new technique of skeletal microanalysis offers important            
              advantages, if it can be further deloped.  Australian scientists              
              are world leaders in this area, and most of the scientists using the           
              new methodology are either in the U.S. or Australia.  Different                
              research groups are using different approaches, and difficulties               
              still remain in the interpretation of results.  The seminar will               
              permit some of the most active practitioners of skeletal microanalysis         
              to share their experimental details and results with their colleagues          
              and with other scientists more grounded in the physical basis of the           
              measurements.  This is expected to lead to a greater understanding             
              and utilization of the technique, and to a greater efficiency of               
              effort in exploiting it in the future.  The technology has potential           
              for application in the U.S. Global Change Research Program (GLOBEC),           
              an initiative to understand the marine animal population and                   
              ecosystem responses to global change.  Based on the seminar, a                 
              summary document on applications of microchemical techniques to                
              analysis of marine populations will be prepared.
