Title       : Analysis of Conductorless Antennas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1993     
File        : a9015328

Award Number: 9015328
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Virginia M. Ayres                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231257             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen W. Glisson aglisson@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmed A. Kishk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Darko Kajfez  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In this project it is proposed to investigate the                              
              characteristics of dielectric resonator radiating                              
              structures.  Antennas comprising dielectric material                           
              are expected to be more efficient and more                                     
              economical in the high microwave frequency range                               
              than are microstrip and similar metal antennas.  The                           
              circular dielectric disk radiator will serve as the                            
              fundamental radiating element for the study, but                               
              other configurations, such as the use of several layers                        
              of dielectric to make the element suitable for use                             
              over an increased range of frequencies, may also be                            
              investigated to better understand the effects of                               
              various parameters on the performance of the                                   
              antenna.  Rigorous numerical modeling of the                                   
              dielectric structure will be based on the Surface                              
              Integral Equation Formulation, but other numerical                             
              methods such as the Finite Integration Technique will                          
              also be used where appropriate.  Precision                                     
              measurements will consist of radiation pattern,                                
              radiation efficiency, and input impedance                                      
              investigations, and will serve to validate the                                 
              theoretical results obtained for various configurations.                       
              Different excitation methods for the conductorless                             
              dielectric resonator antenna, as well as different                             
              antenna configurations, will be analyzed.  The three                           
              investigators will cover the numerical aspects, the                            
              electromagnetic system aspects, and the experimental                           
              aspects of the conductorless antennas.
