Title       : US-France Cooperative Research: Studies of Surface Melting in Crystalline
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1991  
File        : a9015952

Award Number: 9015952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13950              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Gregory Dash dash@phys.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Oscar E. Vilches  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1764,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in low                          
              temperature physics between Drs. Jay Dash and Oscar Vilches                    
              and their students, University of Washington, and Professors                   
              Michel Bienfait and Jean Suzanne, University of Aix-Marseille,                 
              France.  The objective of the proposed project is to carry                     
              out studies of surface melting in crystalline systems. Two                     
              systems of particular interest are hydrogen dioxide-ice and                    
              thick physisorbed films of solid hydrogen isotopes.                            
                                                                                             
              The surface melting of ice is of both fundamental interest                     
              and environmental importance.  Ice undergoes melting or                        
              disordering transitions at its surfaces with many types of                     
              solids.  The fundamental mechanisms which cause these                          
              changes, the characteristics of the transition layers and                      
              their dependence on the chemistry and morphology of the                        
              substrate are in dispute.  The proposed research will seek to                  
              determine these characteristics by a combination of techniques,                
              especially neutron diffraction and quasi-electric neutron                      
              scattering.  The melting temperature of molecular hydrogen                     
              can be depressed to below 7.2 K by a combination of surface and                
              quantum effects.  The study of this effect is of major                         
              importance to the understanding of quantum fluids and solid-                   
              liquid interfaces of dissimilar materials.  The proposed                       
              research focuses on characterization of the surface melted                     
              liquid by quasi elastic neutron scattering, complementary to                   
              thermodynamic measurements currrently underway at the                          
              University of Washington. The research will benefit from the                   
              complementary expertise of the two groups of investigators.                    
              Drs. Dash, Vilches and thier students have had a leading role                  
              in the study of adsorbed films and thier surfaces, particularly                
              by thermoidynamic techniques.  Drs. Bienfait and Suzanne have                  
              ha a comparably prominent role in the study of these same                      
              systems, but primarily by scattering techniques.
