Title       : Industry Perceptions of ERC Graduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1991     
File        : a9015927

Award Number: 9015927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52168              (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig S. Scott   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  One of the basic purposes of the ERC program is to improve the            
              education of engineering undergraduate and graduate students.                  
              Because of the improved educational environment and opportunities              
              offered by the ERC, its graduates should be better engineering                 
              problem solvers and well versed in the systems aspect of                       
              engineering practice.                                                          
                                                                                             
              The proposed research would lay the foundation for evaluating the              
              success of the ERCs in training engineers.  The project would                  
              define outcome criteria and establish statistically valid sampling             
              procedures.  The focus would be on Industry's satisfaction with ERC            
              graduates as employees.  This preliminary study would include a                
              pilot survey to test the methods developed and to lay a baseline               
              for continuing evaluation of the educational effectiveness of the              
              ERC concept.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The subject population of this pilot study would be 90 industry                
              supervisors of ERC graduates and 90 supervisors of similar                     
              graduates from a non-ERC university that is comparable to the ERC              
              school.  A conference/workshop, including selected ERC and industry            
              representatives, would reach a consensus regarding the                         
              definition(s) of educational success as related to ERC graduates               
              and to refine the outcome statements.  The pilot study would focus             
              on the graduates of two of the ERCs that were established prior to             
              1987.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The report would be distributed to NSF staff, ERC Directors, and               
              the ECD Advisory Committee.  The results will be useful to NSF in              
              monitoring the ERCs and to the ERCs themselves to improve their                
              educational programs.
