Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Global Studies of Einstein Spacetimes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1991     
File        : a9015153

Award Number: 9015153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent E. Moncrief vincent.moncrief@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1244,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaboration in mathematical                          
              physics between Dr. Vincent Moncrief, Yale University and                      
              Dr. Yvonne Choquet-Bruhat, University of Paris VI, France.                     
              The main objective of the project is to obtain new results                     
              on the global behavior of large classes of cosmological                        
              solutions of Einstein's equations.                                             
                                                                                             
              The investigators aim to characterize the maximal Cauchy                       
              developments of such spacetimes by providing the analogue                      
              of global existence theorems for general relativity.  They                     
              will also study the boundary behavior of singular solutions                    
              and hope to derive expansion methods which will allow one                      
              to "put a microscope" on the spacetime singularities                           
              themselves and to classify them in a geometrically natural                     
              way.  These aims have been longstanding challenges to                          
              general relativists, but now mathematical methods are                          
              becoming available which may allow genuine progress on such                    
              fundamental problems.  Earlier global existence results for                    
              spacetimes with high symmetry may now be extendible to very                    
              much larger families of solutions and new techniques, such                     
              as the application of the method of "multiple scales", may                     
              provide the needed tools for the analytical study of                           
              spacetime singularities.  The basic approach of this                           
              research will be to try to extend the range of applicability                   
              of the established mathematical methods, such as the use of                    
              light-cone and higher order energy estimates, to larger and                    
              less symmetric families of spacetimes, and at the same                         
              time, to develop new methods, such as the expansion                            
              techniques alluded to above. This research will benefit                        
              from the extensive expertise of the US and French investi-                     
              gators in the area of mathematical general relativity.
