Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Major Patterns in the Phylogeny of
               Flowering Plants: Floral Development and Relationships Among "Basal"
               Non-Magnoliid Dicotyledons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1993    
File        : a9015123

Award Number: 9015123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10110              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Crane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
              This award will support cooperative research between Dr.                       
              Peter Crane of the Field Museum of Natural History and                         
              Dr.Andrew Drinnan of the University of Melbourne. The                          
              flowering plants comprise the largest group of plants,                         
              Angiospermae with approximately 500,000 species.  In                           
              addition to their sheer diversity, the angiosperms are                         
              of great economic importance to humans. Angiosperms are                        
              also major elements of many or most terrestrial                                
              ecosystems. Understandably, botanists have been interested                     
              in developing models and inferences concerning the                             
              origin and radiation of this highly significant group.                         
              Within the past two decades, techniques such as molecular                      
              systematics have become available to permit rigorous                           
              scientific inquiry into the problem of the origin of the                       
              flowering plants and phylogenetic models of the group.                         
              The focus of this research is a detailed study of floral                       
              development and morphology in the angiosperm family                            
              Buxaceae to clarify homologies and resolve generic level                       
              relationships. Utilizing developmental information and                         
              other data, the project will critically assess contrasting                     
              hypotheses on the phylogenetic position of the Buxaceae.                       
              In addition, the broader implications for angiosperm                           
              phylogeny of incorporating the Buxaceae within, or close                       
              to, the Trochodendrales will be assessed.  Because the                         
              Trochodendrales occupy a central position in angiosperm                        
              phylogeny, the results will have important consequences                        
              for resolving interrelationships among major groups of                         
              flowering plants.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The project represents excellent collaboration between                         
              the Australian and the U.S. scientist in combining their                       
              joint knowledge of the taxa to be considered and the                           
              techniques to be employed. Their complementary expertise                       
              on critical developmental, morphological and phylogenetic                      
              issues of flowing plants has the potential to signifi-                         
              cantly advance knowledge of the origin of flowering                            
              plants and phylogenetic models of the group. This is                           
              also important fundamental work on interrelationships                          
              among major groups of flowering plants, and has the                            
              potential to stimulate additional research using new                           
              molecular approaches to these problems.
