Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Topics in Semiparametric Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1991     
File        : a9015141

Award Number: 9015141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7036               (Estimated)
Investigator: David Ruppert davidr@orie.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0510604   Analytic Tools                          
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1259,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              David Ruppert of Cornell University and Dr. Peter Hall of the                  
              Australian National University. The problem of binary                          
              regression analysis is to relate an outcome Y to a predictor                   
              X. An example of such a problem is to relate diet and other                    
              personal factors (X) to predict the development of breast                      
              cancer (Y).  Usually such binary regression problems are                       
              modeled through a logistic regression relationship. The focus                  
              of this research is on cases when X has measurement error and                  
              a surrogate W is used as an estimate of X. Recently, mathe-                    
              maticians have studied the problem of logistic regression                      
              with measurement error in predictors, and have pointed out                     
              that ignoring the measurement error and performing an                          
              ordinary logistic regression of Y on W leads to inconsistent                   
              and seriously biased estimates of the parameters in these                      
              equations. One solution which has been proposed to the                         
              problem of measurement error is a semiparametric method,                       
              which relies on the original parametric logistic regression                    
              model combined with nonparametric regression techniques.                       
              Building on this proposed solution, the objective of this                      
              project is to work on several problems of general importance                   
              to statistics through combining classical parametric with the                  
              more modern nonparametric techniques. Theoretical problems                     
              involving estimation of nonparametric and parametric components                
              will be investigated. Combination of parametric and nonpara-                   
              metric techniques to solve the problem of binary regression                    
              when the predictors are subject to measurement error will be                   
              studied. A third study area will concern combining data                        
              transformation and nonparametric regression.                                   
                                                                                             
              The project represents excellent collaboration between the                     
              U.S. mathematician, whose work, under National Science                         
              Foundation support, focuses on nonparametric regression                        
              analysis and the Australian group, who have published many of                  
              the seminal papers in this area. This is important fundamental                 
              work in advancing the use of nonparametric techniques in                       
              important problems of mathematical statistics.
