Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Stereoselectivity in Metalloprotein
               Electron Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1991     
File        : a9015101

Award Number: 9015101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14724              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack R. Pladziewicz PLADZIJR@UWEC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Eau Claire
	      Park & Garfield
	      Eau Claire, WI  54701    715/836-2637

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1964,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              John R. Pladziewicz of the University of Wisconsin at                          
              Milwaukee and Dr. Alan Sargeson at the Australian National                     
              University (ANU). This research is to investigate the extent                   
              to which electron-transfer reactions of metalloproteins                        
              depend on the three-dimensional structure of other reactants.                  
              Rates of electron transfer will be compared for metallo-                       
              proteins reacting with optical isomers, i.e., molecules which                  
              contain the same atoms connected in the same way, but which                    
              differ in their three-dimensional structure so that they are                   
              non-superimposable mirror images. The results of the project                   
              will explain the selectivity exhibited by many biological                      
              electron-transfer reactions and advance understanding of                       
              stereochemical control of biological electron transfer.                        
                                                                                             
              The project represents excellent collaboration between the                     
              U.S. and Australian researchers.The expertise and equipment                    
              for synthesizing certain novel metalloproteins essential to                    
              the project are available in the ANU laboratory.  This,                        
              combined with Dr. Pladziewicz's expertise in metalloprotein                    
              electron transfer studies, represents a combination of                         
              knowledge and skills for making progress on this chemistry                     
              not achievable by either laboratory separately. This is                        
              important fundamental work in stereochemical control of                        
              metalloprotein electron transfer, as well as having potential                  
              for developing biological sensors of molecules such as                         
              glucose and urea.
