Title       : Principals of Uncertainty and Information in Expert Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1992     
File        : a9015675

Award Number: 9015675
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ron Ashany                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Klir gklir@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The principal objective of this research is to develop adequate                
              principles for dealing with uncertainty in expert systems.  The                
              focus is on four relatively new mathematical theories of                       
              uncertainty: possibility theory, fuzzy set theory, random set                  
              theory, and the Dempster-Shafer theory of evidence.  In each of                
              these theories, as in probability theory, well-justified                       
              functions that measure uncertainty are now well established.                   
              These functions are crucial for the following three principles of              
              uncertainty to be investigated: principles of maximum                          
              uncertainty, minimum uncertainty, and uncertainty invariance.                  
              According to the principle of maximum uncertainty, conclusions in              
              any form of ampliative reasoning are determined by maximizing                  
              relevant uncertainty function subject to constraints that                      
              represent information available. The principle of minimum                      
              uncertainty is fundamental to a variety of problems involving                  
              unavoidable increase of relevant uncertainty, such as                          
              simplification or conflict-resolution problems.  According to                  
              this principle, solutions are determined by minimizing relevant                
              uncertainty function within constraints representing the                       
              requirements of each problem.  The principle of uncertainty                    
              invariance is concerned with information-preserving                            
              transformations between distinct theories of uncertainty.  This                
              project is developing mathematical and computational foundation                
              of the three principles as well as investigating their practical               
              role in expert systems.
