Title       : Observations of the Physical Structures in Supernova Remnants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1990  
File        : a9015786

Award Number: 9015786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Dickel johnd@astro.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Dickel has planned several specific projects to answer                     
              questions about the structural properties of filaments in supernova            
              remnants and the generation of their observed emission.  The                   
              projects include searching for radio wavelength emission from the              
              remnant SN1885 in the galaxy M31, continuum radio observations at              
              more than one wavelength from remnants with different ages to                  
              evaluate their spectra and their particle acceleration mechanisms,             
              radio wavelength polarimetry to study both the field strength and              
              the relation of the field structure to the morphology of the                   
              emitting regions, and some studies of emission measures to                     
              investigate the depth along the line of sight and relate the                   
              emission to models of variously shaped emitting features.                      
                                                                                             
              Supernova remnants have a variety of structures which can be                   
              observed in all wavelength regimes from the radio through the x-               
              ray.  Young remnants show a few very thin optical filaments on the             
              outer periphery of the shell and then a thicker irregular shell at             
              radio and x-ray wavelengths.  The older remnants have identical                
              radio and optical morphology consisting of a collection of sinuous             
              filaments in a shell of more diffuse x-ray and radio emission.  The            
              resolution, sensitivity, and accuracy of modern aperture synthesis             
              radio telescopes and optical detectors are now giving us the                   
              opportunity to answer some important questions relating to the                 
              structures of the remnants of supernovae.  Dr. Dickel's research               
              program is designed to take advantage of recently available state              
              of the art instrumentation to examine supernova remnant structures             
              in detail.
