Title       : Physiology, Ecology and Biochemistry of Nitrogen Fixation byMarine Planktonic
               Microorganisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1991    
File        : a9015606

Award Number: 9015606
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300887             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Carpenter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Drs. Carpenter and Capone propose to continue their                            
              investigations of the biochemistry, physiology and ecology of                  
              N2 fixation in planktonic microorganisms, and particularly the                 
              non-heterocystous cyanobacterium Trichodesmium.  These studies                 
              are important as Trichodesmium is a substantial component of                   
              the phytoplankton populations of tropical and subtropical seas                 
              and a major contributor of new nitrogen to these systems.                      
              Furthermore, the nitrogenase enzyme system of Trichodesmium                    
              appears distinct in several respects from the more well studied                
              non-heterocystous analogues.  An understanding of the                          
              biochemical and molecular mechanisms used by Trichodesmium to                  
              maintain active nitrogen fixation would be of broad relevance.                 
                                                                                             
              They will determine the factors (biochemical and ecological)                   
              which regulate N2 fixation and growth in Trichodesmium, as well                
              as its importance in the marine food web.  Specifically, they                  
              will pursue studies of:  1) the mechanisms for protecting                      
              nitrogenase from oxygen deactivation (oxygen protective enzyme                 
              systems such as superoxide dismutase, uptake hydrogenases                      
              etc.); 2) factors controlling the apparent endogenous rhythms                  
              of nitrogenase synthesis and activity, and of regulation of                    
              nitrogenase synthesis and activity, ATP/ADP ratios); 3) how                    
              fixed nitrogen is transferred between N2 fixing and non-fixing                 
              cells within a colony; 4) the causes and significance of diel                  
              changes in buoyancy; and 5) the fate of nitrogen and carbon                    
              recently fixed by Trichodesmium in near surface waters.                        
                                                                                             
              This research program is unique in that it brings together a                   
              diverse group of investigators to work on a broad array of                     
              topics concerning the biology and ecology of Trichodesmium and                 
              other open ocean nitrogen fixers.
