Title       : Dissertation Research: Determining the Seasonal Use of Archaeological Sites: The
               Potential for Cementum Annuli Analysis of East African Assemblages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9015709

Award Number: 9015709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. O'Brien  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Henry Bunn, Professor of Anthropology               
              at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, Mr. Christopher O'Brien               
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation thesis.  He will               
              spend twelve months in northern Tanzania and work with a group of              
              Hadza speaking hunters and gatherers to collect a large series of              
              faunal remains.  At the end of this period, he should have teeth               
              from a number of different species and these should span the                   
              yearly range of environmental variation.  He will then section                 
              these specimens to examine the annuli or incremental growth                    
              structures which are characteristic of mammalian species and to                
              determine the relationship between the development of these                    
              annuli and seasonality.  Extensive research has demonstrated that              
              in temperate environments with well defined summer and winter                  
              seasons, a clear relationship exists between seasonality and                   
              annuli development.  On this basis, it is possible for                         
              archaeologists to examine sites which contain fauna, section                   
              teeth, and determine the times of year they were occupied.  It is              
              not known, however, whether such a relationship exists among                   
              tropical species, and Mr. O'Brien postulates that in areas such                
              as Tanzania which have alternating rainy and dry periods, annuli               
              development may also be seasonally determined.  The large series               
              collected should allow him to examine this hypothesis on a                     
              species by species basis.                                                      
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  The technique,                
              if it works, will prove a valuable tool useful not only to                     
              archaeologists but to biologists as well.  From an                             
              anthropological perspective, it would prove particularly                       
              important because it would shed light on the behavior of early                 
              hominids who populated eastern Africa several million years ago.               
              Remains of butchered animals have been recovered from many sites               
              in this region.  The project is also important because it will                 
              assist in the training of an extremely promising young scientist.
