Title       : Coordination of Distributed Decision Making in a Corporate Planning Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1992       
File        : a9015526

Award Number: 9015526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Su-Shing Chen                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237376             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Boland Boland@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research is funded under the Special Initiative on                        
              Coordination Theory and Collaboration Technology.  This is one of              
              eleven winners under that competition.                                         
              In distributed decision environments, intelligent agents at network            
              nodes interact with private databases, common databases, and each              
              other to coordinate their independent actions.  This project                   
              explores how certain human, organizational, and technological                  
              elements in a distributed corporate planning setting, condition the            
              level of coordination and integration of the agents' individual                
              plans.  The researchers work with the  Management Systems Research             
              Group of Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) to develop, test and              
              evaluate decision support facilities for their individual,                     
              autonomous planning decisions.  The researchers evaluate the                   
              outcomes of systems use among a set of interdependent business unit            
              managers in terms of the coordination and integration of their                 
              individual plans taken as a whole, as well as the level of trust,              
              commitment, understanding a cooperation they experience in this                
              distributed planning setting.  The distributed decision making of              
              these autonomous, yet interdependent, agents is a setting of very              
              high equivocality and uncertainty.  the research is action-based,              
              selectively adding structure and feedback capabilities to increase             
              the richness of communication supported by the systems.  It is a               
              theory driven, empirical, investigation of how increased                       
              communication richness of a decision support facility affects the              
              experience and outcome of a distributed planning systems.
