Title       : U.S.-France Collaborative Research: Air-Snow Transfer Function in Greenland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1991      
File        : a9015954

Award Number: 9015954
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7050               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Luc Jaffrezo   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack E. Dibb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cliff I. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5113,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research between US and                  
              French scientists on the topic of the air-snow transfer                        
              function in Greenland.  The participants are: Drs. Jean-                       
              Luc Jaffrezo, Cliff Davidson and Jack Dibb, Carnegie Mellon                    
              University, and Dr. Michel Legrand, Laboratoire de Glaciologie                 
              et Geophysique de l'Environment, St. Martin d'Here, France.                    
                                                                                             
              The US (GISP II) and European (GRIP) deep drilling projects                    
              involve acquisition of two deep cores to bedrock from the                      
              Summit region of Greenland over the next two years.  The                       
              cores will provide a detailed record of about 200,000 years,                   
              yielding information on the earth's geologic history, climate                  
              change and variations in the chemical composition of                           
              atmospheric constituents.  One important component of the                      
              GISP II and GRIP projects is a program in atmospheric                          
              sciences, which is designed to help relate the ice core data                   
              to atmospheric conditions in previous times.  There are three                  
              objectives to this program:  1) Source regions and atmospheric                 
              pathways for the chemical constituents reaching the Summit                     
              will be identified; 2) Incorporation of these species into                     
              precipitation at the Summit will be investigated, in order to                  
              determine the mechanisms and rates of deposition during                        
              snowstorms; and 3) Changes in the chemical composition of the                  
              icesheet will be quantified.  These objectives will be                         
              achieved by a multicomponent program that incorporates field                   
              work, laboratory analyses, and computer modelling. This award                  
              will support collaboration between US and French researchers                   
              for the purpose of carrying out laboratory work, data                          
              interpretation and joint publications related to the above                     
              projects.  This effort will benefit from the complementary                     
              expertise of the US and French teams in the geochemistry of                    
              gases and aerosols, of tracers of natural and anthropogenic                    
              emissions and of transport and deposition mechanisms.  The                     
              results of this research are expected to improve greatly the                   
              ability of the scientific community to retrieve information                    
              from deep ice.
