Title       : Microorganisms on Burrow Walls of Infauna: Predictable or Fortuitous Occurrence?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1991     
File        : a9018599

Award Number: 9018599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44042              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred C. Dobbs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The burrows of macro-infaunal organisms  are generally sites of                
              intense microbial activity and often harbor abundant populations               
              of microorganisms. Since the various infaunal species differ                   
              greatly in their biology (e.g., feeding guild, motility) and                   
              specifically, in aspects of their burrow construction and                      
              ventilation, it is reasonable to anticipate that the microbiology              
              of their burrows will also vary. This project will test whether a              
              burrows' increased microbial abundance and activity simply                     
              represents enhancement of ambient microorganisms or whether there              
              are specific microbial populations that predictably occur in                   
              burrows, independent of the ambient microbial community. A                     
              comprehensive assessment of these complex microbial communities                
              will require non-selective methods; the microbes' phospholipid,                
              ester-linked fatty acids (PLFA), the chief constituent of                      
              membrane lipids in eubacteria and eukaryotes will be examined.                 
              These PLFA, which have already been extracted from field samples               
              of burrows and ambient sediments, are powerful, discriminating                 
              tools for determining microbial biomass, composition, and even                 
              physiological condition. These biochemical markers will be used                
              to compare the burrow microbes of five infaunal species,                       
              representing three phyla, sampled across six sites. Comparisons                
              will be made at interspecific and intraspecific levels using                   
              multivariate analysis. This project will test an intriguing                    
              biogeochemical hypothesis and impinge on the very attractive                   
              concept of "microbial gardening".
