Title       : Advances in Chemical Metallurgy - Conference and Workshop, Bombay, India,
               January 9-13, 1991 Group Travel Award in U.S.and Foreign Currencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1990  
File        : a9018243

Award Number: 9018243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1990  
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72830              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil Birks birks@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 6164      INDIA - INDIVIDUAL TRAVEL
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 5919,5951,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description: This project supports the participation of 17                     
              U.S. scientists at an International Conference and Workshop                    
              on Chemical Metallurgy, to be held in Bombay, India,                           
              between January 9 and 13, 1991.  The Indian organizer is                       
              Dr. C.K. Gupta of the Bhabha Atomic Research Center                            
              (BARC).  The topics of the conference will include:                            
              physical chemistry of metal extraction; experimental                           
              techniques and measurement in metallurgical thermodynamics                     
              and kinetics; advances in pyro-and hydro-metallurgy of                         
              metals and of sulphides; oxide and halide reduction                            
              processes with special reference to the extraction and                         
              refining of refractory and reactive metals; nuclear metals                     
              and materials processing; rare earth metals technology;                        
              electrothermics, melting and refining; fluidized bed                           
              processes; minerals processing; chemical vapour deposition;                    
              plasma and laser applications in material processing;                          
              vacuum metallurgy; ultrapurification; computer applications                    
              in process metallurgy; process modelling and optimization;                     
              and energy conservation and pollution control in                               
              metallurgical processes.  The binational workshop will                         
              identify areas for future collaboration between U.S. and                       
              Indian scientists in the following broad topics: process                       
              metallurgy and optimization; energy conservation and                           
              pollution control in metallurgical processes; reagents in                      
              mineral industries; and solvent extraction and                                 
              electrowinning of base metals.  A workshop proceedings is                      
              planned to be published and distributed to U.S. and Indian                     
              interested scientists.                                                         
                                                                                             
              Scope:  The field of the conference and workshop is very                       
              important for the recovery and utilization of metals in                        
              view of the energy and environmental concerns in the U.S.                      
              and in India.  The two cooperating scientists, and the                         
              proposed U.S. participants are all well known and respected                    
              researchers in the field.  BARC is one of the largest and                      
              most productive research organizations in India.  The                          
              binational workshop should greatly enhance the potential                       
              for scientific collaboration between India and the U.S.
