Title       : Pleistocene Interglacial Marine Climates, U.S. Mid-Atlantic and Southeastern
               Coastal Plains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  1992    
File        : a9018463

Award Number: 9018463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Krantz dkrantz@strauss.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The project will examine the marine climate along the Atlantic            
              Coast of the U.S. during three middle and late Pleistocene                     
              interglacial periods.  The project will have two main goals: 1)                
              produce detailed records of seasonal temperature ranges for the                
              Virginia and South Carolina coasts during these interglacial                   
              periods, and 2) potentially improve the chronology of these                    
              transgressive events using strontium-isotope stratigraphy.                     
                   The seasonal paleotemperature ranges will be calculated from              
              the stable oxygen (  O) and carbon (  C) isotope profiles of fossil            
              mollusk shells.  Shell growth increments will be measured to                   
              identify periods of cessation of shell growth that truncate the                
              isotope profiles.  The growth increment data will also be used to              
              assess an independent paleothermometer based on the geographic                 
              variation in ontogenetic growth trends.                                        
                   The timing of the Pleistocene transgressions onto the Atlantic            
              Coastal Plain is the subject of an active debate over various                  
              interpretations of amino acid racemization and uranium-series                  
              dating methods.  The strontium isotope analyses included in the                
              proposed project should provide an independent set of data that                
              addresses the geochronology of these units.                                    
                   All geochemical analyses will be performed on the same                    
              specimens that have been analyzed for amino acid racemization, so              
              that the climatic and geochronologic information will be directly              
              comparable.
