Title       : Cellular Mg2+ Regulation: Role of ATP and Growth Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1994  
File        : a9018677

Award Number: 9018677
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Grubbs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              While it is clear that cells maintain a cytoplasmic free magnesium             
              level well below the magnesium equilibrium potential and require               
              magnesium ion for the normal activity of many enzymes, the role of             
              intracellular magnesium in regulatory events in cellular physiology            
              remains largely unexplored.  Attempts to study mechanisms that                 
              regulate intracellular magnesium levels and to assess the                      
              physiological role of this cation have been limited by the lack of             
              adequate techniques for measurement of intracellular free                      
              magnesium.  The development of magnesium-sensitive fluorescent                 
              indicators that can be loaded into cells has made it possible to               
              monitor intracellular magnesium on a second by second basis for the            
              first time.  Having established a technique for utilizing one of               
              these new indicators, Mag-fura2, to measure internal magnesium in              
              BC3H-1 cells, the primary goals of this proposal are: 1) to                    
              characterize the kinetic relationship between intracellular                    
              magnesium and ATP/creatine phosphate levels in BC3H-1 cells, 2) to             
              develop a technique for determining the magnesium buffer capacity              
              of these cells, and 3) to characterize the effect of acute exposure            
              to epidermal growth factor and other growth factors on ATP levels              
              in BC3H-1 and Swiss 3T3 cells.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Since cells maintain their intracellular magnesium levels within               
              certain limits, and require magnesium for the regulation of a                  
              variety of critical cellular functions, it seems likely that                   
              regulation of intracellular magnesium is a physiologically                     
              important process.  Recent advances in the development of                      
              fluorescent probes for magnesium ion now make it possible to                   
              approach this problem.  The proposed research will take advantage              
              of these new research tools to provide fundamental new information             
              about the intracellular regulation of magnesium, the most abundant             
              cation found in mammalian cells.
