Title       : Relative Stabilities of Organic Compounds in Geochemical Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1991  
File        : a9018468

Award Number: 9018468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131855             (Estimated)
Investigator: Everett L. Shock   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary goals of this research are an enhanced understanding               
              of how organic compounds respond to aqueous alteration and the                 
              relation of this response to the observed distribution of organic              
              compounds in petroleum, oil-field brines, low-grade metamorphic                
              rocks and hydrothermal fluids.  These objectives will be met by                
              computing the relative stabilities of organic compounds in                     
              coexisting gas, aqueous, petroleum and disseminated phases, and                
              using these calculations to help interpret field, analytical and               
              experimental observations.  Relative stabilities will be                       
              evaluated from thermodynamic data as functions of temperature,                 
              pressure, fugacities of various gases (O2, H2, CO2, CH4, NH3,                  
              N2, H2O, etc.), and activities of organic and inorganic aqueous                
              species.  Where experimental data are not available, existing                  
              estimation methods will be used.  In the case of aqueous species,              
              these methods will be enhanced to account for a variety of                     
              organic compounds (branched and cycloalkanes, polycyclic                       
              aromatics, dicarboxylic acids, sulfur-bearing compounds, etc.)                 
              which have not yet received attention, and for which high                      
              temperature/pressure data are generally not available.  The                    
              geologic focus of this research will be conditions at which                    
              aqueous solutions interact with organic compounds in petroleum                 
              reservoirs, sedimentary rocks, hydrothermal systems and                        
              metamorphic terranes.  This research requires an                               
              interdisciplinary approach combining theoretical equations,                    
              thermodynamics and kinetic data, computer techniques and field                 
              and laboratory observations to achieve these goals.
