Title       : Mechanistic Studies on DNA Packaging by Bacteriophage Lambda
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1992    
File        : a9018767

Award Number: 9018767
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : February 15,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos E. Catalano   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9135,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to examine at the molecular                  
              level the mechanism of assembly of viral precursors into an                    
              infectious virus particle.  A common mechanism for DNA                         
              packaging by the phage viruses has been proposed and consists                  
              of 1) binding of an enzyme called terminase to concatemeric                    
              (immature) viral DNA, 2) binding of this complex to a pre-                     
              formed capsid, 3) unidirectional of DNA into the capsid in an                  
              ATP-dependent reaction and4) nicking of the duplex and strand                  
              separation such that a single (mature) genome is packaged.                     
              Phage terminase is now obtainable in high yields and represents                
              an ideal system in which to study viral DNA packaging.  The                    
              enzyme possesses DNA-dependent ATPase, DNA translocase,                        
              restriction endonuclease and DNA helicase activities all                       
              manifest within a heterodimeric protein structure.                             
              Thermodynamic binding constants for ATP and DNA will be                        
              determined using equilibrium dialysis, gel-retardation and                     
              DNase footprinting techniques.  The interactions between enzyme                
              and ATP as well as enzyme and viral DNA will be examined using                 
              photoaffinity labeling techniques.  Covalently modified                        
              residues will be identified by proteolytic digestion of the                    
              protein, isolation of the labeled peptide(s) and N-terminal                    
              amino sequencing analysis.  A complete kinetic analysis of the                 
              endonuclease and helicase activities will be performed and a                   
              minimal kinetic mechanism defined using steady state and pre-                  
              steady state kinetic techniques.  The experiments outlined in                  
              this proposal will allow a detailed characterization of phage                  
              terminase and serve as a basis for comparative studies with                    
              terminases from other phages  Examination of these enzymes may                 
              reveal evolutionary relationships not only between terminases,                 
              but also other functionally related enzymes such as ATPases,                   
              restriction enzymes and helicases.  Moreover, DNA packaging,                   
              the procaryotic version of chromosomal condensation, may yield                 
              insight into the basis mechanisms and energetics of cellular                   
              chromosome manipulation.
