Title       : Enhancement of DNA Replication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1994     
File        : a9018718

Award Number: 9018718
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria L. Gennaro   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Public Health Res Inst
	      
	      New York, NY  10016    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9111,9178,9251,
Abstract    :
              With the exception of plasmid copy control, the mechanisms                     
              regulating initiation of DNA replication are still to be defined.              
              The goal of this proposal is to understand how initiation of DNA               
              replication is regulated by cis-acting elements that are located               
              outside of the origin of replication.  The present studies will                
              focus on cmp, a cis-acting enhancer of plasmid replication which               
              is located about 1 Kilobase away from the plasmid's origin of                  
              replication.  The effects of cmp on plasmid replication (                      
              demonstrated by plasmid competition studies and by analysis of                 
              exponential replication rates) appear to derive from a change in               
              the efficiency with which the plasmids's replication origin                    
              interacts with its initiator protein.  cmp activity is                         
              orientation-independent and can be detected over a wide range of               
              distances from the origin.  cmp is recognized by a site-specific               
              DNA-binding protein 9CBF) encoded by the bacterial host.  The                  
              goal of this proposal is to understand the molecular mechanism by              
              which cmp enhances plasmid replication and to define the role of               
              host factors in cmp enhancing activity.  To achieve this goal,                 
              genetic and biochemical studies willbe performed, often in                     
              parallel.  Deletion analysis of cmp DNA will define the minimal                
              sequence for cmp and the DNA site for CBF binding within cmp will              
              be identified by footprinting.  In vivo, cmp activity will be                  
              studied using a replication assay; footprinting and nicking                    
              assays will define the effect of cmp on the interaction between                
              replication origin and initiator protein.  The role of CBF will                
              be studied by inactivating the gene encoding CBF and determining               
              the effect of the mutation on plasmid replication.  Purified CBF               
              protein will be obtained to design appropriate probes to screen a              
              library of bacterial chromosomal DNA.  Host involvement will be                
              also investigated by isolating host mutants that suppress the                  
              plasmid's Cmp defect.  The regulatory interaction between cmp and              
              ori may be mediated by a protein-protein bridge involving CBF and              
              the initiator protein, with the intervening DNA looping out.                   
              Formation of such a protein complex will be investigated by                    
              chromatographic and electrophoretic techniques, and the                        
              configuration of the protein-bond plasmid molecules will be                    
              examined by electron microscopy.  Interactions between cmp and                 
              other cis-acting elements in the plasmid and/or other plasmid                  
              encoded factors will also be addressed by genetic studies                      
              involving isolation of plasmid-linked second-site mutations that               
              suppress the Cmp-phenotype.  A knowledge of the loaf-range                     
              regulatory interactions in the activity of cmp will contribute to              
              our understanding of how initiation of DNA replication is                      
              regulated by cis-acting elements distantly located from the                    
              origin of replication. cmp will provide a novel model system to                
              investigate "action at a distance (along DNA)" in general
