Title       : Molecular Genetics of Pectin Lyase Regulation in Erwinia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1993    
File        : a9018733

Award Number: 9018733
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arun K. Chatterjee achatterjee@psu.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Erwinia carotovora subsp. carotovora (hereafter Ecc) and most                  
              other soft-rot Erwinia spp. produce an assortment of                           
              extracellular degradative enzymes such as pectin lyase (Pnl),                  
              pectate lyase (Pel), polygalacturonase (Peh), cellulase, protease              
              and phospholipase.  A long-term goal of our research is to                     
              clarify the genetic and physiological aspects of extracellular                 
              enzyme production in soft-rot Erwinia and to elucidate the role                
              of these enzymes in bacterial plant pathogenicity.  We have shown              
              that while pectinolytic (Pnl) and pectolytic (Pel and Peh)                     
              enzymes cause maceration of plant tissue, they are regulated                   
              differently.  In contrast to pectolytic enzymes, most of which                 
              are induced by catabolic products of polygalacturonate or pectin,              
              Pnl is induced by DNA-damaging agents such as mitomycin C,                     
              nalidixic acid, or ultraviolet light.  In Ecc strain 71 (Ecc71)                
              the induction of pnlA, the pectin lyase structural gene, by these              
              DNA-damaging agents requires products of recA and an activator                 
              gene, digR (= regulator of damage-inducible genes).  These                     
              products also appear to control bacteriocin (carotovoricin, Ctv)               
              production and cellular lysis in this bacterium.  We have                      
              reconstituted and inducible Pnl system in a RecA+ E. coli strain               
              carrying a pnlA+ plasmid and a digR+ plasmid.  The E. coli strain              
              responds to the same regulatory signals as the Ecc71 Pnl                       
              producing system.  Moreover, our recent findings indicate that                 
              digR and not pnlA is induced by DNA damaging agents in a RecA+                 
              LexA+ E. coli.  These observations suggest a cascade type of                   
              regulation wherein a regulatory gene (digR), required for the                  
              transcription of pnlA and possibly other damage-inducible genes,               
              is controlled by DNA damaging agents.  The objectives of this                  
              research are (a) to identify and characterize upstream DNA                     
              segments of pnlA that regulate transcription, (b) to characterize              
              the activator gene, digR and to identify its product, (c) to                   
              elucidate the expression of digR, and (d) to understand the                    
              mechanism by which DigR activates pnlA transcription.  In these                
              studies we intend to utilize genetic and molecular technologies                
              and various tools already available in E. coli and in Ecc71.  The              
              emerging knowledge should help in defining the regulatory circuit              
              and in understanding the molecular events in the expression of a               
              plant virulence factor by DNA-damaging agents.
