Title       : Free-Ranging Energetics of Bottlenose Dolphins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1992       
File        : a9018626

Award Number: 9018626
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Costa costa@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randall S. Wells  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The bottlenose dolphin, Tursiops truncatus is likely the                  
              most extensively studied small cetacean, yet very little is know               
              about their physiological ecology. Virtually all studies                       
              concerning the energetic expenditures of Odontocete cetaceans                  
              have been performed either on captive animals or on trained                    
              animals doing open-ocean respirometry. Thus far there have been                
              no direct field studies of the energy requirements of any free-                
              ranging cetacean.                                                              
                                                                                             
                   This project represents the next phase in a continuing                    
              program designed to elucidate the metabolic and behavioral                     
              adjustments which occur during normal seasonal cycles in                       
              dolphins. Over the previous 3 years, measurements have been made               
              of the changes in the insulative blubber stores of dolphins in                 
              Sarasota Bay, FL, as well as measurements of metabolism and water              
              and energy flux in captive dolphins. The next phase is to measure              
              the free-ranging foraging energetics of these animals. The                     
              Sarasota Bay dolphin community iis ideal for these studies as it               
              is possible to repeatedly recapture known individual dolphins.                 
              This capability allows one to correlate seasonal changes in                    
              energy expenditure, measured using the double-labelled water                   
              technique, with changes in the animals insulative capability and               
              foraging costs. In previous research, blubber thickness was found              
              to vary seasonally. However, it has not been possible to separate              
              whether these changes in blubber thickness were related solely to              
              seasonal changes in the animals energy stores (i.e., are they                  
              responding to changes in prey availability and composition) or                 
              whether these changes are in response to variations in the                     
              ambient water temperature. In addition, data derived from this                 
              study will provide the first direct measurement of the at-sea                  
              metabolic rate of a small cetacean. Measurement of cetacean                    
              foraging energetics will increase our understanding of the costs               
              and efficiencies of various foraging modes in the marine                       
              environment.
