Title       : Novel Methods to Assess the Effects of Ultraviolet Radiationon Phytoplankton
               Photosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1995   
File        : a9018441

Award Number: 9018441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224597             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Cullen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Neale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. Lesser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
              One result of the ozone depletion in the Antarctic is an increase              
              in the transmission of ultraviolet radiation to the earth's                    
              surface.  This project addresses the effect of ultraviolet                     
              radiation on phytoplankton physiology.  Methods will be developed              
              to generate environmentally-relevant action spectra                            
              (wavelength-dependent biological weighing functions) for                       
              photoinhibition of photosynthesis in phytoplankton.  Action                    
              spectra will be measured using an experimental incubator that                  
              exposes phytoplankton to combinations of ultraviolet and visible               
              radiation.  Photoinhibition will also be examined with new                     
              indicator assays.  Three types of assay will be tested: 1)                     
              fluorescence-based measurements designed to distinguish the                    
              primary damage to photosynthesis from ultraviolet vs visible                   
              radiation; 2) a spectrophotometric measurement of photosystem II               
              reaction center activity that also might distinguish the effects               
              of ultraviolet radiation from those of excess visible light; 3) a              
              technique to measure repair function that is very sensitive to                 
              ultraviolet radiation and to excess visible light.  The action                 
              spectra will be used to model photoinhibition.  The indicator                  
              assays will quantify photoinhibition without relying on                        
              incubation- based measurements of photosynthesis.  Models and                  
              methods will be tested by comparison with direct measurements of               
              the harmful effects of ultraviolet and excess visible radiation                
              on photosynthesis by natural phytoplankton in the Antarctic.
