Title       : Characterization of a Growth Inhibitory Activity from Urogenital Sinus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1991      
File        : a9018138

Award Number: 9018138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas E. Brady                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Rowley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      1200 Moursund Avenue
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/790-4846

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              During prostate gland organogenesis the fetal urogenital sinus                 
              mesenchyme induces and directs the phenotypic differentiation of               
              the apposing epithelium. This leads to the formation of glandular              
              ducts and acini, typical of the adult gland morphology. Previous               
              studies from Dr. Rowley's  laboratory have used organ cultures of              
              fetal urogenital sinus to identify potential growth and                        
              differentiation regulatory factors from mesenchyme. These studies              
              have identified a growth inhibitory factor in the conditioned                  
              medium from urogenital sinus organ cultures and derived                        
              mesenchymal cell lines. In addition, the growth inhibitory                     
              activity affects bladder and prostatic epithelial cell lines,                  
              suggesting this activity may affect cell differentiation. The                  
              protein responsible for activity has been purified to near                     
              homogeneity. The long term goals of this project are to                        
              understand the fundamental role of this factor, termed UGIF, in                
              mesenchymal epithelial interactions during organogenesis. The                  
              immediate objectives of the studies proposed here are: to develop              
              antibody and oligonucleotide probes specific for the UGIF                      
              protein; to isolate and clone the cDNA encoding UGIF and; to                   
              determine the spatial and temporal pattern of expression of UGIF               
              in vivo. The proposed studies will set the foundation to                       
              determine the potential significance of UGIF as a regulatory                   
              factor in vivo, and its specific role in the basic mechanisms of               
              mesenchymal epithelial interactions and associated organogenesis.
