Title       : Cloning of Tomato Fruit Polygalacturonase (PG) Converter Protein : Analysis of
               PG Isozyme Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1993     
File        : a9018154

Award Number: 9018154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean DellaPenna   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The activity of the tomato the tomato fruit pectin-hydrolyzing                 
              enzyme polygalacturonase (PG) increases dramatically during                    
              ripening due to the presence of three closely related isoforms,                
              PG1, PG2A and PG2B.  The Pg2 isoforms are composed of single                   
              catalytic PG polypeptides while PG1 is a heterodimer consisting of             
              one PG2 polypeptide in tight association with an ancillary                     
              glycoprotein, the PG converter.  The involvement of each isoform               
              in pectin degradation and other aspects of fruit ripening remain               
              unclear.  The PG isoform levels in planta appear to be determined              
              by the level of converter protein.  In order to increase our                   
              understanding of the biosynthesis, assembly and biological activity            
              of cell wall enzymes such as PG, the levels of individual PG                   
              isoforms will be manipulated in vivo by altering the levels of                 
              converter protein in transgenic wild-type plants.  To accomplish               
              this the converter protein will be purified, cloned and its                    
              structure and expression during wild-type fruit ripening studied.              
              Converter protein levels will be manipulated by expressing a                   
              converter cDNA in sense and antisense orientations in transgenic               
              wild-type tomato plants presumably resulting in accumulation of                
              only PG1 or PG2.  These studies will increase our knowledge of the             
              effect of individual PG isoforms on polyuronide degradation and                
              other physiological parameters associated with fruit ripening.                 
                                                                                             
              Several enzymes and structural proteins are secreted from plant                
              cells into the cell wall.  The activities of these proteins are                
              essential for normal growth and development as well as specialized             
              functions such as fruit ripening and plant defense.  An important              
              question is how the activities of such important proteins is                   
              controlled when they are secreted from the cell and not subject to             
              the normal mechanisms associated with the regulation of cytoplasmic            
              enzymes.  This proposal describes an interesting approach to                   
              studying the processing and function of an extracellular enzyme,               
              polygalacturonase, which degrades polyuronides in the cell wall                
              during fruit ripening.  //
