Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Normal/Abnormal Cardiac Rhythms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1994     
File        : a9018811

Award Number: 9018811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17688              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa R. Chay trcl@vms.cis.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 5927      EAST ASIA, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Teresa R. Chay,                     
              Department of  Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh,                  
              to pursue with Dr. Young Seek Lee, Hanyang University, for a                   
              period of 24 months, a program of cooperative research on                      
              normal/abnormal cardiac rhythms.  The research will consist                    
              of two parts, (1) studying the properties of single channel                    
              activity in the heart cells from patch-clamp recordings and                    
              (2) understanding cardiac arrhythmias by the theory of                         
              nonlinear dynamics and the effects of antiarrhythmic drugs.                    
              Computer simulation of impulse  initiations and propagation                    
              will show how changes in the ionic channel properties would                    
              bring the system to chaos.  These studies will allow the                       
              researchers to predict the onset of arrhythmias and predict                    
              the effect of antiarrhythmic substances known to block sodium,                 
              calcium, and potassium ion channels.                                           
                                                                                             
              The availability of advanced scientific computers has greatly                  
              expanded the possibility for using mathematical modeling as an                 
              approach to the study of physiological processes.  The                         
              ultimate goal of this research is  to develop a thorough                       
              understanding of the electrical phenomena that underlie the                    
              rhythmic activity of the heart.  The U.S. and Korean                           
              collaborators not only have extensive individual research                      
              records but also a record of successful collaboration in the                   
              field of the proposal.  This project is relevant to the                        
              objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program                       
              which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between                       
              U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange                  
              of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and                   
              through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  Korean                   
              participation in the project is supported by the Korea                         
              Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).  The PI's primary                  
              research costs are supported under NSF Grant No. DCB-8819245,                  
              to which the present project adds an international cooperative                 
              dimension.
