Title       : The Role of Cutinase in the Determination of Tissue Specificity of Fungal Plant
               Pathogens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1993     
File        : a9018076

Award Number: 9018076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfram D. Koeller wkll@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harvey C. Hoch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Staples  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Plants have evolved an effective arsenal of defense systems and are            
              resistant to the vast majority of attempted infections by fungal               
              pathogens.  In sharp contrast to cultivar and non-host resistance,             
              the acknowledged fact that specific plant tissues (e.g., stems and             
              leaves) are either susceptible or resistant to a particular                    
              pathogen has not been under investigation as a source for durable              
              disease resistance.  We have provided first evidence that fungal               
              cutinases are involved in the determination of fungal tissue                   
              specificities.  Conclusive evidence exists that they are generally             
              involved in the penetration of the pathogens through the protective            
              and polymeric cuticle layer.  Although this function of cutinases              
              appears identical for most of the pathogens investigated, the                  
              enzymatic properties are surprisingly diverse.  Evidence exists                
              that one of these parameters, the pH-dependency  of cutin                      
              hydrolysis, is related to the tissue specificity of the respective             
              pathogens.  This hypothesis will be tested with Alternaria                     
              brassicicola, an non-specific pathogen that produces both                      
              prototypes of cutinase.  The enzymes will be purified and                      
              characterized.  Antibodies will be used to clone both cutinase                 
              cDNAs and, ultimately, both genes.  The ultimate goal is the                   
              disruption of each of the cutinase genes independently, and to                 
              study the impact of these changes on the pathogenicity on different            
              host tissues.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The ability of a pathogen to infect plant tissues depends on                   
              factors in both the host and the pathogen.  The pathogen must be               
              able to invade the plant tissue and avoid a variety of host                    
              chemical defenses.  To be resistant to infection, the host must                
              effectively recognize the pathogen and respond appropriately.  Some            
              pathogens need a portal of entry, such as a wound, to infect plant             
              tissues; whereas other more virulent pathogens have the ability to             
              digest the outer protective layers of the plant and, hence, only               
              need to come in contact with the plant to initiate infection.  The             
              outer layer of the plant is composed of an insoluble polymer called            
              cutin, and invading pathogens must first degrade this layer with               
              enzymes known as cutinases.  The work supporting this proposal has             
              shown that tissue specificity of plant pathogens may depend in part            
              on the different specificities of the cutinase enzymes.  This also             
              implies that host resistance may depend in part on the                         
              heterogeneity of the cutinase polymer produced by the plant.  This             
              work should provide a better understanding of this heterogeneity               
              that will add to our knowledge of pathogenic specificity that can              
              be used in the design of new forms of plant defense through changes            
              in cutin structure.//
