Title       : Import of Polypeptides into Chloroplasts and Mitochondria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1993     
File        : a9018902

Award Number: 9018902
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony R. Cashmore cashmore@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,9109,9251,
Abstract    :
                 Plant cells are unique, among eukaryotic cells, in that they                
              contain two organelles, the mitochondria and the chloroplasts,                 
              thought to be derived from prokaryotic endosymbionts in an                     
              ancestral organism.  Most of the proteins in these organelles are              
              encoded in the nuclear genome and are synthesized in the cytoplasm.            
              These proteins are produced as precursors, with N-terminal                     
              extensions of their polypeptide chains known as transit peptides.              
              These precursors bind to receptors on the two organelles and are               
              transported inside, where the transit peptides are proteolytically             
              removed.  Although the two import systems are similar in many                  
              respects, the transit peptides seem capable of conferring complete             
              targetting specificity, in vivo, if they are fused to a "passenger             
              protein."  Analysis of the structure of the two types of transit               
              peptides have revealed differences related to proposed domain                  
              structures.   The aim of this project is to determine what                     
              structural properties of the transit peptides confer targetting                
              specificity, distinguishing them, if possible, from properties                 
              required simply for import into the isolated organelles.  In order             
              to do this, artificial transit peptide / passenger protein fusions             
              will be prepared and assayed for their ability to be imported into             
              isolated plant organelles and in transgenic tobacco plants.  The               
              prototype transit peptide sequences will be derived from a                     
              chloroplast pre-protein of pea and from a mitochondrial pre-protein            
              from Arabidopsis.                                                              
                                                                                             
                 The project addresses a very important problem in cell biology,             
              that is, intracellular compartmentation.  In order for cells to                
              function properly, it is necessary that the macromolecules of the              
              cell be organized in such a way as to facilitate cellular                      
              processes.  This compartmentation is achieved through molecular                
              specificity and recognition at the cellular level.  In the case of             
              the two organelles under study in this project, mitochondria and               
              chloroplasts, the macromolecular components of each consist of a               
              mixture of nuclear gene encoded and organelle-specific gene encoded            
              products.  The two organelles have striking similarities: they                 
              contain electron-transporting protein complexes and catalyze                   
              bioenergetic reactions; they contain specific DNA, RNA, and                    
              functional ribosomes; the internal spaces are separated from the               
              cytoplasm by a double set of membranes; and the mechanisms by which            
              nuclear-encoded proteins enter the organelles seem very similar.               
              However, nuclear chloroplast proteins do not find their way into               
              mitochondria, and nuclear mitochondrial proteins do not find their             
              way into chloroplasts.  The molecular mechanism which confers this             
              critical organelle specificity to the import process is unknown.               
              This set of experiments is likely to shed light on this important              
              question.
