Title       : The Molecular Organization of Yeast Chromosome I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1991   
File        : a9018923

Award Number: 9018923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112800             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Kaback   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Jersey Medical School
	      100 Bergen Street
	      Newark, NJ  071032407    /   -

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1112,
Abstract    :
              There is much to be learned about how chromosomes are faithfully               
              transmitted during mitosis and meiosis.  Determining the detailed              
              structure of an entire eucaryotic chromosome should yield much                 
              information about its functions.  As a first step towards this                 
              goal, we have been examining the structure of the 250 kb DNA                   
              molecule from chromosome I, the smallest Saccharomyces cerevisiae              
              chromosome.  We have cloned almost all of it and have determined               
              the physical location of all but two of its classically                        
              identified genes on a restriction map of the entire chromosomal                
              DNA molecule.  In collaborative efforts, we have determined the                
              transcription map on 160 kb of chromosome I and are in the                     
              process of locating all the cloned ARS elements.  We propose to                
              continue elucidating the transcription map of the entire                       
              chromosome.  These studies will provide the foundation for                     
              further analyses on many aspects of chromosome function and                    
              behavior.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Classical genetic studies have succeeded in identifying less than              
              20% of all yeast genes.  In this respect, chromosome I is                      
              typical.  Hybridization studies suggested that chromosome I                    
              encodes 90-100 genes.  However, despite intense efforts, only 15               
              of these genes were identified by classically obtained mutations.              
              These proportions also apply to essential genes.  The number of                
              essential genes identified by classical genetic studies                        
              throughout the entire yeast genome and on chromosome I in                      
              particular was far lower than predicted.  If we are to understand              
              the molecular biology of a simple organism, it would be                        
              advantageous to have a more complete set of mutations in genes                 
              essential for its life cycle.  It is clear that molecular                      
              approaches are needed to obtain this large number of mutants.  We              
              have already produced deletion mutations in 28 genes that were                 
              defined only by the presence of an unidentified transcribed                    
              region.  Five of these genes were essential for vegetative growth              
              on rich medium.  Counting the previously identified genes, we now              
              have mutants for 41 of the 90-100 genes on this chromosome.                    
              Based on these results, we suggest that 18-24% (1100-1500) of the              
              genes in yeast are essential for growth on rich medium.  We                    
              propose to continue these studies in order to eventually obtain a              
              catalogue of mutants for every gene on chromosome I.  Deletion                 
              mutations in approximately 5 additional transcribed regions will               
              be produced using one-step gene replacement and their phenotypes               
              will be partially characterized.  These studies will enhance our               
              knowledge about a large number of genes that have not been                     
              investigated previously.
