Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Experimental Study of the Effect ofSediment Sorting on
               Bed Forms, Bed-Surface Texture and Fractional Transport Rates in Coarse,
               Mixed-Size Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1994       
File        : a9018292

Award Number: 9018292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54200              (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Southard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   When a unidirectional current passes over a bed of coarse                 
              mixed-size sediment, a variety of bed forms are generated, and                 
              there is segregation of particle sizes among the load, the bed                 
              surface layer, and the substrate.  There is a strong and complex               
              interdependence between the bed forms, the transported sediment,               
              and the substrate.  Many studies in well sorted sands, both in                 
              the laboratory and in the field, have led to fairly good                       
              understanding of the behavior of the familiar dune bed forms and               
              the interaction between bed forms and transport.  More recently,               
              features variously described as bed-load sheets, gravel waves,                 
              and clast jams have been reported in flows over poorly sorted                  
              sand-gravel mixtures.  The relationships among these seemingly                 
              diverse bed features, and their dependence on size segregation in              
              the bed, is unclear.                                                           
                   This is an experimental study of the nature of bed features               
              in unidirectional flows as a function of flow strength and                     
              sediment sorting involving several sediment mixtures with the                  
              same mean size of about 4 mm but with widely varying sorting and               
              making series of runs at several mean flow velocities over each                
              sediment mixture.  The objective is a unified picture of the                   
              fundamental characteristics and interrelationships of the various              
              kinds of bed features produced in these flows.                                 
                   The work will be done in cooperation with Prof. Hiroshi                   
              Ikeda, Prof. Shigemi Takayama and Dr. Fujiko Iseya of the                      
              Environmental Research center at the University of Tsukuba.  This              
              proposal covers salary and travel for the PI and a Graduate                    
              Research Assistant for two years.  A companion proposal with                   
              identical scientific text is being submitted by Prof. Peter R.                 
              Wilcock (The Johns Hopkins University).  The Japanese group                    
              already has funds for building the experimental apparatus and                  
              conducting the experiments.
