Title       : RUI: Interacting hobo Transposons in the Drosophila Genome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1994  
File        : a9018545

Award Number: 9018545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johng K. Lim   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Eau Claire
	      Park & Garfield
	      Eau Claire, WI  54701    715/836-2637

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              In particular strain of Drosophila melnogaster, hobo transposable              
              elements in the X chromosome are responsible for a high rate of                
              mutations, and most of the mutations are associated with chromosome            
              rearrangements.  Two hobo elements at a time are involved in the               
              production of rearrangements, and our results suggest that the type            
              of rearrangements produced is determined by the orientation of the             
              elements--deleting the region marked by two elements in the same               
              orientation and inverting the region flanked by two elements in                
              opposite orientation.  Also, one the hobo elements in the X                    
              chromosome is more active (active element) than the others (passive            
              elements) in rearrangement formation.  We propose to test these                
              ideas by inserting the cloned hobo elements that can be mobilized              
              by the P transposase into a strain of the fly with colorless eyes.             
              The cloned hobo element is linked to a modified fly eye-color-gene,            
              so emergence of flies with pigmented eyes will signal the insertion            
              of the cloned hobo element.  Therefore, the inserted hobo sequence             
              can be transposed to a desired X-linked site by introducing a P                
              transposase source and then eliminating it with another cross.  The            
              modified eye-color-gene is known for its sensitivity to the                    
              neighboring DNA sequences.  For this reason, changes in the eye                
              color of the transformed flies may indicate the structural change              
              of the chromosome associated with the relocation of the inserted               
              hobo element.  The rearranged chromosomes detected in this manner              
              will be analyzed by cytogenetic and molecular methods.  The                    
              cytogenetic analyses include in situ hybridization of rearranged               
              and pre-rearranged chromosomes with a set of appropriate probes.               
              A sample of DNA sequences representing the rearrangement                       
              breakpoints will be cloned for molecular analyses to determine the             
              orientation of the hobo element in each of the rearrangement                   
              breakpoints.  The activities of the inserted active hobo element               
              will also be compared with those of the inserted passive elements.             
                                                                                             
              Information resulting from this study will enhance our                         
              understanding of the many ways whereby DNA structure can be                    
              modified and thereby modify gene expression.***
