Title       : The Development and Application of an Advanced Infrared Imaging System for
               Ground-Based Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1994  
File        : a9018527

Award Number: 9018527
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. W. Van Citters                       
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $675000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian McLean mclean@bonnie.astro.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric E. Becklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1218      ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES & INSTRM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides funds for the development and exploitation of              
              a state-of-the art infrared camera system for the wavelength                   
              interval.  The new UCLA infrared camera will be based largely on               
              the well-established series of IRCAMs developed for the 3.8m                   
              United Kingdom Infrared Telescope by McLean during the period                  
              1984-1989, but it will be more sensitive than its predecessors.                
              The improved design will allow for two wavelength channels,                    
              making it possible to image in two colors simultaneously and to                
              optimize independently the low background region from 1-2 um and               
              the higher background region from 2-5 um.  Initially, the best                 
              pixel detectors available will be selected by comparing several                
              different devices but the camera design will permit an upgrade to              
              even larger detector formats later.  A special feature of the new              
              infrared camera will be a low-background cryogenic coronagraph                 
              mode which may be used in conjunction with an imaging polarimeter              
              mode.  The camera will also have a grism and be compatible with                
              several telescopes.  The new instrument will enable the co-                    
              investigators and students at UCLA, and collaborators elsewhere                
              to pursue a challenging observational program.  The key topics of              
              the science program are:  an extensive search at several infrared              
              wavelengths for very low mass stars and sub-stellar objects                    
              (brown dwarfs) or possibly large planets; ultra-deep, multi-                   
              wavelength searches for protogalaxies and galaxy phenomena at                  
              high redshifts; infrared coronagraphic polarimetry with high                   
              angular resolution of dusty star formation regions and the disks               
              that form around both young stellar objects and evolved stars; a               
              survey of the occurrence of carbon-rich dust particles around                  
              Wolf-Rayet stars; cosmic distance scales using infrared light                  
              curves of variable stars; studies of dust-embedded active                      
              galactic nuclei.
