Title       : Translocation and Energetic Contribution of Zooxanthellae toAnimal Reproductive
               Effort
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1991        
File        : a9018698

Award Number: 9018698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincent P. Gutschick                    
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Kempf   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1141,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Symbiotic associations are common in our environment and, may be               
              extremely important to the success of both plant and animal                    
              species.   Some of the most interesting are found in the coral                 
              reef environment and involve an algal symbiont known as                        
              zooxanthellae and various invertebrate hosts.  Coral reefs                     
              constitute a major ecosystem that is dependent on algal                        
              symbiosis.  Global warming is thought to cause bleaching in coral              
              symbionts and this inhibits reproduction of coral.  An                         
              understanding of the relationship between symbiosis and                        
              reproduction in host organisms is essential to the understanding               
              of symbiotic ecosystems.                                                       
                                                                                             
              Algal symbionts form the basis for much of the reef's primary                  
              productivity since they convert carbon dioxide and other                       
              inorganic compounds into organic substances that can be utilized               
              by host species.  A high diversity of species may be supported in              
              large numbers in the reef environment.  Perhaps the most                       
              important, unasked, question about zooxanthellae symbiosis is:                 
              "What effects do symbiotic zooxanthellae have on the reproductive              
              success of their invertebrate hosts?"  The species to be used is               
              Berghia verrucicornis, a marine slug.  This species has a number               
              of characteristics that make it particularly useful for studying               
              the reproductive ramifications of zooxanthealle symbiosis.  These              
              include (1) its own zooxanthellae symbiosis, (2) its ease of                   
              culture in the lab, and (3) the fact that it lays discrete,                    
              easily collected egg masses.  This project will utilize                        
              biochemical analyses, radioisotopes, and energetic analysis to                 
              determine what portion of the organic materials produced by                    
              zooxanthellae are incorporated into the eggs of Berghia                        
              verrucicornis.  The results and conclusions derived from this                  
              research will provide for a better understanding of the role of                
              zooxanthellae in the reproduction and success of reef-dwelling                 
              species that harbor these symbionts in their tissues.//
