Title       : Empirical Analysis of Auctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0112047

Award Number: 0112047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196732             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip A. Haile phaile@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	
Because auctions are among the market institutions most convincingly captured
              by the kind of game theoretic analysis that dominates modern economic theory,
              auction data provide important opportunities to evaluate modeling approaches
              and assess the importance in practice of strategic behavior predicted by
              theory. Auctions also play an increasingly important role in the allocation of
              public resources, so goals of efficient allocation and revenue generation
              provide strong policy motivations for understanding auctions. This project
              consists of four components that contribute to this understanding through
              empirical studies of auction markets and development of new statistical tools
              for analysis of auctions.
       The first component addresses estimation of
              demand at auctions in which sellers use reserve prices.  By exploiting
              variation in the reserve prices that results from heterogeneity in seller
              valuations, one can consistently estimate the full distribution characterizing
              demand at standard auctions---the model primitive needed for a wide range of
              policy simulations.  This is done without parametric distributional
              assumptions.The second component addresses inference from bids at English
              auctions in which bidders may be asymmetric or have correlated valuations. This
              allows also environments in which bidders, but not the econometrician, observe
              a common factor shifting their private values---a common situation in
              applications. The third component develops nonparametric tests for common
              values at first-price auctions. Exploiting recent advancements in the
              econometrics of auctions, we show how one can use variation in the number of
              bidders to test for the presence of the winner's curse and, therefore, common
              values. The fourth and  final project studies an online auction market with
              many buyers and sellers trading a homogeneous object. It addresses the effects
              of auction rules, seller reputation and other auction characteristics on bidder
              participation and bids. Arbitrage behavior is documented, and the prevalence
              and predictors of fraudulent seller behavior are studied.


