Title       : Technological Change in a Deregulated Era: A Study of Innovation in
               Environmentally Preferable Technologies in a Restructured Electric Utility
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0112430

Award Number: 0112430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81443              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Hirsh rhirsh@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Richard Hirsh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
              
Technological Change in a Deregulated Era: A Study of Innovation in
              Environmentally Preferable Technologies in a Restructured Electric Utility
              System

This project examines how technological innovation in the American
              electric utility system has been affected by deregulation, specifically
              examining research on technologies with low environmental impact, such as
              renewable energy and energy-efficient devices.  The subject has interest
              because ongoing deregulation of the utility system has highlighted apparently
              contradictory public policy goals relating to these technologies. On the one
              hand, reduction of state utility regulation in a few states has already
              unleashed free-market forces and spurred innovation on technologies that can
              provide novel services at low cost. On the other hand, reduced state oversight
              has diminished research efforts on technologies that produce and use
              electricity less wastefully; in the past, those efforts had been spurred by the
              same type of regulation that is now being discarded. 

To gain an
              understanding of the unusual forces  driving--and hindering-technological 
              innovation in an increasingly deregulated electric utility system, this study
              focuses on public interest advocacy groups,  corporate entrepreneurs,
              government entities, and formerly regulated utilities.  The technologies most
              affected by changes in public policy--and the technologies that will be the
              subject of this research-include renewable energy technologies, such as wind
              turbines, photovoltaics, and biopower; cogeneration, gas turbine, district
              heating, and other generation technologies that use fossil fuel, but at higher
              efficiencies (and with less environmental impact) than traditional electric
              utility hardware;  energy-efficiency technologies (or demand-side, end-use
              technologies).

Most generally, this research examines the effects on
              technological innovation of government and nongovernment parties that seek to
              achieve the apparently cherished--but perhaps inconsistent--goals of reduced
              state regulation and environmental improvement in the electric utility system.
              Using a systems approach that spans disciplinary boundaries, outcomes include
              several articles (and the foundation for a new book) dealing with technological
              innovation during a period of rapidly changing public and economic policy.  The
              project contributes to this useful STS approach by focusing on a system that,
              unlike those studied by other scholars, has seen its momentum altered
              significantly because of the use of new technologies. As in past projects by
              this PI, this research has practical significance to STS practitioners, as well
              as to contemporary policy makers in the worlds of business and government. 

