Title       : Discrete Choice and Hedonics: Identification, Estimation, and Application to
               Housing and New Goods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0112106

Award Number: 0112106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200494             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick Bajari bajari@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. Lanier Benkard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There are two primary goals for this research project. First, the project
              derives new methods for iden-tification and estimation of random coefficient
              discrete choice models, focusing particularly on discrete choice models with a
              finite dimensional error term sometimes called "pure hedonic" models.  Such
              models are superior economic models with which to an-alyze the effects of a
              policy change.   Second, these new methods are applied to two important
              empirical applications: an analysis of housing choice and new housing policy,
              and measurement of the welfare gains to individuals from recent innovation in
              personal computers.

Besides improving the theoretical economic properties of
              the model, these econometric methods have two distinct advantages over existing
              methods.  The project develops a new identification strategy, using a hedonic
              pricing equation, which does not require the instruments that have been widely
              used in the recent literature. In order to achieve identification, the recent
              literature has typically made the assumption that observable product
              characteristics are uncorrelated with unobserv-able product characteristics.
              Such an assumption is in conflict with a long run equilibrium in which firms
              optimally choose their products' characteristics conditional on the
              characteristics of their rivals' products. Because the pricing equation is used
              to identify unobserved product characteristics, it can then be used for
              individual utility maximization to nonparametrically identify individual taste
              coefficients. Recovery of individual random coefficients is important because
              it allows the researcher to evaluate the distributional consequences of a
              policy change, and because it provides for a richer aggregate demand
              system.

These techniques are used to evaluate important empirical questions
              in two industries. The first industry considered is housing. Specifically, the
              analysis of Bajari and Kahn (2000) is extended to address the question of why
              racial segregation persists.   The project also studies current housing policy,
              specifically the question of where to locate new public housing units. Second,
              individual welfare from innovation in personal computers is measured over the
              last decade. Our approach is well suited to this problem because of its
              emphasis on individual heterogeneity. In particular, the investigators are able
              to break out the source of consumer welfare gains (e.g., product quality versus
              product price) and the distribution of welfare gains across different groups of
              individuals, evaluating such questions as a precise measurement of the form and
              extent of the "digital divide".   The investigators also revisit the important
              issue of how to construct an ideal price index for an industry with rapid
              quality change like computers.

