Title       : Maternal Control of Epithelial Motility in the C. Elegans Embryo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0112803

Award Number: 0112803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Hardin jdhardin@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0112803
Hardin

As the fertilized egg develops into an embryo, its shape
              changes dramatically as it gradually transforms into a recognizable animal, a
              process known as morphogenesis. Two of the major cellular movements that shape
              animal embryos are rearrangement of cells in a preferred direction, and
              spreading of cell sheets.  Both processes require parts of moving cells to
              extend in very specific directions. The Hardin laboratory will investigate
              directed movements of cell sheets, using the embryonic epidermis of the
              nematode, C. elegans, as a model system. They seek to answer the following
              questions:
(1) What events during epidermal morphogenesis are regulated by the
              dishevelled family member DSH-2? DSH-2 is required for cell rearrangement in
              the dorsal hypodermis, and for the subsequent epiboly event known as ventral
              enclosure. They will analyze the defects in dsh-2 embryos dynamically, using
              computer-assisted microscopy, analysis of fluorescent proteins in living
              embryos using the green fluorescent protein, and markers for the cytoskeleton
              and differentiation.
(2) What cells require DSH-2 function for epidermal
              morphogenesis? They will determine the localization of DSH-2 during
              morphogenesis, and drive DSH-2 expression in specific tissues.
(3) What
              molecular pathways require DSH-2 during epithelial morphogenesis? They will use
              deletion constructs to identify which parts of DSH-2 are required for epidermal
              morphogenesis. They will also investigate the relationship between the
              maternally acting Frizzled MOM-5, other candidate Wnt/Frizzled molecules, and
              DSH-2.
(4) What other genes act maternally to regulate epidermal morphogenesis
              in C. elegans? The Hardin laboratory has conducted an extensive pilot screen
              for additional genes that act in early steps of epidermal morphogenesis. They
              will analyze candidate mutants, using standard techniques. 
As a result of
              these studies, the Hardin laboratory will gain fundamental insights into
              regulation of polarized movement of epithelial sheets, a process that is
              fundamental to many processes in embryonic development.

