Title       : The Evolution of Questioning in Presidential Press Conferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0112221

Award Number: 0112221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Clayman clayman@soc.sscnet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Heritage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Historians have argued that journalists have become increasingly aggressive and
              adversarial in their treatment of government officials and political
              candidates.   If so, this trend runs counter to established norms of politeness
              in interaction and to rituals of deference to political leaders.  This project
              investigates whether and how a rise in adversarialness has emerged in
              presidential press conferences - the major venue for relationships between the
              press and the nations' top political leader.  The press conference remains a
              central institution of political communication where the president explains and
              justifies policies, and where journalists discharge their questioning task
              under public scrutiny.  Thus recognizing the crucial importance of presidential
              press conferences, the project examines the evolution of the practices
              journalists use to question presidents, the level of deference or
              adversarialness embodied in the questions, and the mix of journalistic,
              political, and historical factors that explain patterns of questioning over the
              latter half of the twentieth century.

Using a sample of presidential press
              conferences from Dwight Eisenhower (1953) to Bill Clinton (2000), the project
              codes each question asked on the basis of four primary dimensions of
              adversarialness: 1) initiative, 2) bluntness, 3) assertiveness, and 4)
              hostility.  Analysis of the data reveals if there has been a general decline in
              deference and a rise of adversarialness, if changes relate to specific
              historical events or individual presidents, if the introduction of broadcast
              journalism and television cameras affects the type of questions, if political
              partisanship explains some of the variation in questions, and if the
              president's standing in the polls influences the style of questioning.  The
              answers the project provides to these questions enhance our understanding of
              the institutions of the presidency and journalism, and their co-evolution over
              time. 

