Title       : ITR: Simulation and Optimization of Thermal Manufacturing of Materials Under
               Uncertainty: Application to Optical Fiber Drawing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0112822

Award Number: 0112822
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409140             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ranga Pitchumani r.pitchumani@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luke E. Achenie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene Santos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1385,1652,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Advanced materials form the backbone of our everyday life, including the
              hardware that supports the information technology (IT) enterprise. Thermal
              manufacturing of these materials involves strongly coupled transport phenomena
              that occur at multiple temporal and spatial scales. Process simulation models,
              based on description of the governing physical phenomena, play an important
              role in guiding process understanding and development. However, their complete
              potential remains unrealized in practice, for two principal reasons. First, a
              fundamental gap exists between simulation capabilities and practice in that
              whereas practical processes are carried out amidst a cloud of impreciseness and
              uncertainty, the simulation models are deterministic in the way they treat the
              process variables. Secondly, process simulations are often computationally
              tedious owing to the need for a rigorous resolution of the physical phenomena
              at multiple scales. The computational demands are tremendously intensified when
              the ability to account for process uncertainty is embedded in the simulation
              framework, and further, when the simulation models are used in an optimization
              endeavor.

The research seeks to develop advanced computational methods aimed
              at addressing the foregoing challenges. A stochastic modeling framework will be
              developed for incorporating the effects of process uncertainties in the
              simulations. Towards addressing the challenge of enabling rapid and efficient
              computations, agent-based computing strategies in a heterogeneous environment
              and an innovative portfolio-based technique for large-scale optimization under
              uncertainty will be developed. The advanced computational methods will be
              applied to an optical fiber manufacturing process, which is an important
              process in the optical networking industry and typifies the complexities of the
              multiscale physical phenomena involved in general thermal manufacturing
              processes. The methodologies may be readily applied to other materials
              processing applications.

