Title       : Remembering Choices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0112284

Award Number: 0112284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211139             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mara Mather mather@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eldar Shafir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marcia K. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research focuses on people's memory for past choices. Memory for
              choices has the potential
to affect people's self-concept, well-being,
              attitudes, and future decisions. Regret for options not taken can cast a
              shadow, whereas satisfaction at having made the right choice can make a good
              outcome seem even better. Our memories of past options provide essential
              information about our tastes and experience in the context of current and
              future decisions. These memories have implications for other people as well
              (e.g., as we give advice about others' choices or participate in collective
              decisions). Understanding the causes and consequences of distortion in memory
              for choices, and possible ways to avoid such distortion, can have far- reaching
              benefits in domains ranging from therapy and consumer education to medical
              decision making and the law.

Theoretical explanations of memory distortion
              share many common themes and emphasize the constructive
nature of memory
              (e.g., Bransford & Johnson, 1973; Loftus, 1979; Reyna & Lloyd, 1997; Roediger
              &
McDermott, 2000; Schacter, Norman, & Koutstaal, 1998). The current proposal
              uses the source monitoring
framework (e.g., Johnson, Hashtroudi, & Lindsay,
              1993), one of the most well-developed theoretical
approaches to memory and its
              distortions, to help predict how factors that have been shown to be
              associated
with memory distortion will affect memory for choices. Preliminary
              work (e.g., Mather, Shafir, & Johnson,
2000) indicates that people have
              choice-supportive biases in memory, favoring the option selected over the
one
              rejected. This choice-supportive tendency goes beyond simply selectively
              remembering the strengths of
chosen options and the weak attributes of
              rejected alternatives. People also tend to make errors that favor
their chosen
              option, misattributing positive features to their chosen option and negative
              features to the
rejected option. The studies in the first section of the
              proposal investigate the mechanisms underlying such
choice-supportive memory
              distortion. The second section investigates some potential effects of
              choice-
supportive memory on well-being and on future decisions, and the final
              section investigates how choice-
supportive biases may be avoided or
              attenuated.

Remembering choices plays a central role in making future
              decisions. A better understanding of memory
distortion and its influences may
              help improve decision making in important domains. Better insight into
              the
role of memory also promises to add to our understanding of intuitive
              decision making practices and
emergent biases. Finally, an understanding of
              how memory of past decisions affects our satisfaction, goals,
perceived
              responsibility, and remembered experience may contribute to well-being in
              numerous ways. The
proposed studies are intended to shed light on how past
              choices may be remembered or misremembered, on
how these tendencies may be
              altered, and on the hedonic consequences that such alterations might have.

