Title       : ITR: Heat Transport and Chemical Reactions in Proteins and Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0112631

Award Number: 0112631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331830             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Leitner dml@chem.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1686,1956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              David Leitner of the University of Nevada Reno is supported by the Division of
              Chemistry under the Information Technology Research (ITR) program to carry out
              computational studies of thermal transport in proteins and nanoscale clusters. 
              This work will examine central questions directed toward broader goals of
              describing the events that control chemical reactions in complex mesoscopic
              environments, in particular the role of the energy flow into and away from a
              reacting system.  Computations exploring the role of scale and disorder in heat
              transport properties of proteins and simpler cluster models will be performed,
              with the objective of describing thermal conductivity in terms of protein
              components.  As well, chemical reactions in clusters will be explored, focusing
              on trans-stilbene photoisomerization in a glassy cluster as a prototype for
              photochemical isomerization reactions in proteins.  Research outcomes are
              expected to provide detailed mechanistic understanding of events that control
              reactions in proteins and nanoscale machines on the picosecond timescale.
              

In the continuing technological drive towards miniaturization, much effort
              is directed toward fabricating small devices that draw at least part of their
              energy from the same organic molecules as those that power proteins in living
              cells.  Success with such devices is hoped one day to lead to the development
              of molecular machines that could interact with proteins within biological cells
              to manufacture medicines or repair cellular damage, enabling a revolution in
              the health sciences.  The outcomes from these computational studies of
              biomolecules and clusters promise insights that will be important to address
              critical issues surrounding the design of efficient heat dissipation
              capabilities for working nanoscale devices.
