Title       : ITR/AP: Large-Scale Quantum Mechanical Molecular Dynamics Simulations:
               Challenges, New Directions, and Applications to Carbon-Based Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0112824

Award Number: 0112824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $456000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chakram S. Jayanthi csjaya01@gwise.louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shi-Yu Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1652,1682,9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award is the result of a proposal submitted to the Information Technology
              Research initiative.  Advances in computational materials science depend on the
              development of efficient and reliable computational methods for large-scale
              quantum mechanical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.  Linear-scaling or
              order-N (O(N)) methods have been developed with the aim of overcoming the
              bottleneck associated with the N3-scaling in the computation of the total
              energy and atomic forces in quantum mechanics-based simulations.  Despite this
              progress, O(N)- ab initio-MD is still limited to systems containing relatively
              small numbrs of atoms because of the overhead associated with the
              self-consistent calculations in ab initio MD.  On the other hand, MD schemes
              based on two-center tight-binding (TB) Hamiltonians are orders of magnitude
              faster than O(N)-ab initio-MD methods.  However, they have been found to be
              unsatisfactory in systems where charge transfer or bond breaking/rebonding
              plays a significant role.  Therefore, there is a pressing need for developing
              transferable semi-empirical Hamiltonians that would be superior to traditional
              two-center TB Hamiltonians, but would include all essential ingredients of ab
              initio Hamiltonians without being computationally excessive.  The O(N)-MD
              scheme using such a Hamiltonian can predict accurately the properties of
              complex systems of large sizes.

In this research a general scheme will be
              developed to construct such reliable and transferable semi-empirical
              Hamiltonians for materials (metal or semiconductor) in the framework of linear
              combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO) that explicitly includes the
              self-consistently (SC) determined charge transfer and environment-dependent
              (ED) multi-center interactions.  The SCED-LCAO Hamiltonian will be implemented
              within the O(N)-MD scheme developed previously.  Using O(N)/SCED-LCAO-MD as our
              simulation tool, we will investigate the properties of carbon multi-wall
              nanotubes and carbon nanorods, and evaluate their potential as components of
              molecular-scale devices.  Specifically, we will study the following three
              projects of current interest: (1) Energetics, structure, electronic, mechanical
              and vibrational properties of carbon multiwall nanotubes (MWNT), (2) A study of
              the properties of contacts between metal elctrodes and MWNT, and (3)
              Energetics, structure, electronic, mechanical and vibrational peoperties of
              carbon nanorods (CNR).  Project (2) will be done in collaboration with the
              experimetal group of Professor Alphenar of Lousiville, whereas project (3) will
              be done in collaboration with the experimental group of Professor Chen of
              Academia Sinica (Taiwan).
%%%
***


