Title       : Ketene Complexes: Structure, Bonding, Catalysis, and Interconversion with
               Carbene Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a0112223

Award Number: 0112223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas B. Grotjahn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Douglas B. Grotjahn, Chemistry Department, San Diego State University, is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              of the Chemistry Division for research into the chemistry of metal ketene
              complexes. Metal-ketene complexes are important intermediates in unique
              bond-forming reactions starting from carbene complexes and they allow rapid
              access to a variety of organic products, many of which would require multistep
              syntheses using standard organic reactions. However, nearly all of these
              processes are stoichiometric in the metal complex. The goal of the project is
              to develop catalytic reactions that are likely to become attractive synthetic
              organic procedures. To achieve this, new ketene complexes will be prepared and
              catalytic systems developed from them. Specifically, unusually stable Ir and Rh
              ketene complexes will be prepared, metal-ketene bonding within them will be
              characterized by X-ray diffraction and IR and NMR spectroscopy, the
              thermodynamic and kinetic relationships between(C,C)and (C,O) linkage isomers
              will be delineated, and the interconversion of carbene-CO and ketene complexes
              will be studied. Using these data, catalytic carbon-carbon bond-forming
              reactions involving ketene or carbene complexes as intermediates will be
              developed.

The proposed research will contribute to the fields of
              organometallic and organic chemistry and catalysis, relevant to both organic
              synthesis and industrial chemistry. Ultimately, more convenient, less-toxic
              large scale synthetic preparations of organic compounds will be possible. In
              addition to the basic science, underrepresented minority and undergraduate
              students will be trained during the course of the project. 


