Title       : Farm Tenancy in the U.S., 1890-1938: New Evidence from an Old Study for
               Assessing the 'Agricultural Ladder'
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0112093

Award Number: 0112093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph P. Ferrie ferrie@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee J. Alston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mobility up the farm ladder came to be seen as a problem in the United States in
              the early decades of the twentieth century as the fraction of farm operators
              who were owners fell. Concerns were voiced about the continued viability of
              American agriculture as the number of renters, sharecroppers, and laborers
              rose. Commentators feared for the quality of the soil and for the quality of
              the nation's farmers, as the "agricultural ladder" (the progression from
              laborer to cropper to renter to owner) seemingly became more difficult to
              ascend. Similar concerns motivate much of the interest in farm tenancy and land
              reform in developing countries today. Though these are issues of importance in
              their own right, the causes of farm tenancy and the ascent up the agricultural
              ladder are also of interest because, in the South, they were an important part
              of the context within which black migration to the North occurred. Though much
              emphasis has been placed on changing Southern farm technology and Northern
              employment opportunities in promoting this migration, not know much is known
              about the extent to which limited opportunities for advancement up the
              agricultural ladder in the early twentieth century South influenced this
              massive population redistribution.

This study addresses these issues. It
              uses individual-level data from five counties in the 1920 Census of agriculture
              along with a uniquely detailed survey of farmers conducted in 1938 to explore
              the dynamics of the agricultural ladder. We will supplement the
              individual-level data with county-level data from the 1920 Census. The census
              data contain information on: the prior farming experience of tenants and
              owners, the ages at which farmers ascended the ladder from wage laborer to
              tenant to owner, the time spent on various rungs of the ladder prior to
              becoming owners, and the relationship of tenants to owners. The survey data
              contain information on each individual's complete career history (their tenure
              status at each date back as far as 1890), their location, and a variety of
              their personal and farm characteristics.  We develop hypotheses to explain the
              extent of movement up and down the agricultural ladder and why it changes over
              time, and across space. The preliminary examination of the data from 1938
              indicate that, contrary to the pessimism of commentators at the time, we do not
              find dimmer prospects for farmers in the 1930s than the previous two decades.
              For our sample, farmers fared worse (in terms of job mobility) in the 1920s
              than the 1930s. Consistent with expectations, the 1910's proved to be years of
              general ascent up the agricultural ladder. 

