Title       : Effects of Sexual Selection and Predation on a Genetic Polymorphism for Body
               Size
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0112656

Award Number: 0112656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $466321             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandra L. Basolo basolo@cricket.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Effects of Sexual Selection and Predation on a Genetic Polymorphism for Body
              Size
Alexandra Basolo

	The long-term goal of this study is to understand
              the factors that maintain variation within populations in genes that affect
              adult body size, and the factors that cause differences between populations. 
              In many animal systems, variation for adult body size is common. Both natural
              selection and sexual selection can contribute to the maintenance of body size
              variation. Intrasexual selection via male-male competition often favors large
              male size, as larger males more often win contests. However, small males may
              adopt alternative mating strategies, such as sneaking, to avoid direct contests
              as well as subvert female choice for larger males. Natural selection via
              predation may also favor the maintenance of certain size classes. In some
              species, the level of predation risk is positively correlated with body size,
              and in other species, it is negatively correlated with body size. In addition,
              generation time may favor smaller individuals if smaller individuals reproduce
              at an earlier age. Thus, sexual selection, predation and generation time may
              affect the evolution of body size. The traditional view for the evolution of
              sexually-selected traits is that such traits evolve until they are countered by
              some source of natural selection, usually predation. When sexual selection and
              predation both favor larger size, however, life history correlates of size,
              such as age at first reproduction, may constrain the evolution of body
              size.
	Variation between individuals in age and size at sexual maturation is
              commonly observed, but the underlying genetic basis of this variation is rarely
              known. However, such knowledge is important to understand the evolutionary
              mechanisms responsible for body size variation. This study proposes to
              investigate the factors affecting allelic variation at a locus (the P-locus)
              that strongly influences adult body size in the southern platyfish, Xiphophorus
              maculatus. Alleles at this locus vary within and across natural populations. A
              primary effect of these alleles is the initiation of sexual maturation.
              Individuals with different P-alleles become sexually mature at different times.
              Females continue to grow after sexual maturation, but males grow very little
              after sexual maturation. These alleles then affect both the size at sexual
              maturation and adult body size in males. Genetic stocks are available with
              linked color patterns. It is thus possible to use these color markers to track
              changes in P-allele frequencies in experimental populations. X. maculatus
              therefore provides a known genetic system with which to test hypotheses about
              body size polymorphism.
	A set of experiments will be conducted to examine the
              effect of sexual selection and natural selection via predation on the evolution
              of P-alleles. First, male-female mating interactions will be observed in the
              absence of direct male-male competition for both large and small male morphs.
              Second, the mating success of large and small male morphs will be assessed. In
              these experiments, large and small males will be tested with females to
              determine if male mating behavior changes in the presence of another male, e.g.
              if smaller males adopt an alternative mating strategy. Male mating success will
              be determined by progeny analysis. Third, the importance of natural selection
              via predation on body size will be investigated and P-allele evolution will be
              quantified in populations with predatory fish and populations without predatory
              fish. Color pattern markers will be used to track changes in P-allele
              frequencies over time. A comparison between these populations will determine to
              what level predation maintains P-alleles for larger male body size by tracking
              the change in P-allele frequencies in each replicate and comparing the
              trajectories. 

