Title       : Mathematical Biosciences Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0112050

Award Number: 0112050
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000001           (Estimated)
Investigator: Avner Friedman afriedman@mbi.osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. March  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Terman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis K. Pearl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Wolfe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Mathematical Biosciences Institute (MBI) at Ohio State University
will be a
              base for interdisciplinary work by mathematical scientists
and biological
              scientists on a broad range of biological problems.
The mission of the MBI is
              (i) to develop mathematical theories,
statistical methods, and computational
              algorithms for the solution of
fundamental problems in the biosciences; (ii)
              to involve mathematical
scientists and bioscientists in the solution of these
              problems; and
(iii) to nurture a community of scholars through education and
              support
of students and researchers in the mathematical biosciences. 
              To
promote its mission and overall goals, the MBI will build upon
existing
              research efforts in the mathematical biosciences and will
encourage human
              research development and intellectual growth.

The MBI will establish
              emphasis year programs, current topic
workshops, educational problems, and
              research projects.
Participants in MBI programs will be recruited nationally
              from
the disciplines of the biosciences, mathematics, and
statistics, and
              will include senior researchers, postdoctoral
fellows, and graduate students. 
              To increase the impact and
cohesion of the program, there will be efforts each
              year to
connect to and build upon progress achieved in the preceding
years. 
              The MBI will hold special workshops on current topics in
the biosciences that
              offer opportunities for mathematical
involvement.  The Institute will also
              conduct summer educational
programs in the mathematical biosciences for
              college instructors,
students, and high school teachers.

