Title       : Genetic Approaches to Study Polarity in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a0112461

Award Number: 0112461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $373863             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph S. Quatrano rsq@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0112461
Quartrano

Within all cells, asymmetries are found in relation to
              gradients of external signals such as light, gravity, neighboring cells, etc. 
              These asymmetries generate an intracellular polarity, as axis with different
              ends, which often results in the differentiation of subsequent daughter cells.
              To understand the molecular mechanisms used to interpret environmental inputs
              that bring about changes in cell polarity requires a system that combines
              experimental tractability at the cellular, molecular and genetic levels. 
              Impressive progress has been made to establish the common moss plant (e.g.
              Physcomitrella patens) as an excellent model to explore the molecular basis of
              cellular polarity, primarily because moss is the only plant system in which
              homologous recombination is available for functional genetic approaches, i.e.,
              gene knockouts and gene replacements, which can be used to confirm the role of
              a specific gene in polar processes.  The moss system is now ideally and
              uniquely suited to confirm hypotheses concerning the nature of the proteins
              involved, e.g., proteins in the secretory system and cytoskeletal proteins. 
              Using moss as a model, our main objective is to identify and demonstrate the
              function of specific genes in these polar processes by a combined molecular,
              cellular and genetic approach.
 
Genes involved in the realignment of the
              polar axes in response to gravity in apical cells of moss will be isolated and
              identified using a number of random genetic approaches.  A more targeted
              approach will focus on genes already identified that are likely to play a role
              in polarity, e.g. those functioning in actin cytoskeleton dynamics. The
              particular properties of the moss system and approaches outlined in this
              proposal will allow us to identify genes that play important roles in one of
              the most fundamental processes of living organisms, i.e., how cellular
              asymmetries are established and maintained to direct polar development and
              pattern formation.


