Title       : ITR/SI: On Topologies, Power Laws, and Hierarchies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0112649

Award Number: 0112649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405298             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramesh Govindan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Internationl CompSci Inst
	      1947 Center Street
	      Berkeley, CA  947041105    510/666-2900

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Recent work has pointed out the existence of power-laws in the degree
              distribution of real-world
networks. In retrospect, these findings while
              widely publicized are perhaps not surprising; power-laws
for various notions
              of size in real-world phenomena have been known for several
              decades.
Nevertheless, these findings have sparked extensive interest in the
              structure and macroscopic properties
of the Internet. Such interest is timely;
              recent work has also revealed that network topology properties
may impact
              protocol performance
     Generating realistic topologies is a prerequisite
              for understanding the impact of topology on pro-tocol
performance. Our recent
              work on topology generation motivates the proposed research and is
driven by
              the perceived dichotomy between structural generators those that explicity
              embody some
notion of hierarchy in constructing topologies and
              connectivity-based generators those that at-tempt
to generate topologies with
              power-law degree distributions.
     Our preliminary research on this larger
              question reveals several interesting results: that real net-works
are
              well-modeled by connectivity-based generators, and that these generators result
              in graphs
with a continuum of levels of hierarchy. Continuing on from this
              work, our proposed research will at-tempt
to increase our fundamental
              understanding of the structure of real networks, and their impact on
protocol
              performance. Conceptually, our proposed research has three interrelated parts:
              understand-ing
hierarchy in real networks, devising structural models for
              topology construction based on Highly
Optimized Tolerance, and examining more
              closely the impact of topology on protocol performance.
     The structure of
              networks, and their impact on protocols, has received little attention until
              recently.
In terms of broader impact, this work has the potential for making
              fundamental progress in the areas
of topology modeling. In a larger sense, it
              may develop methods that can be used to understand the
physical processes that
              lead to the development of other real-world networks, such as the Web
              topology
and social networks.
