Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Mechanism of Photochromism of Dithizonate
               Complexes Useful for Commercial Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0112607

Award Number: 0112607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mostafa A. El-Sayed mostafa.el-sayed@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : X764      STATE-MOD 6
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0112607
Elsayed

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project between Dr. Mostafa El-Sayed, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
              Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia and Dr. Mohamed F. R. Fouda,
              Department of Inorganic Chemistry, National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. 
              They plan to study the molecular mechanism of the phenomena of photochemical
              transformations in dithizone complexes.  They plan to synthesize transition
              metal primary and secondary complexes as well as organo-mercuric compounds, and
              follow the photochemical transformations on the femtosecond-to-second scale by
              the use of optical and infrared transient laser spectroscopy.  The formation
              and decay times of the different intermediates formed during the photochromic
              process will be followed in time from their electronic and vibration absorption
              spectra.  The effect of the exciting wavelength, temperature and solvent
              (including different polymers) will be examined.  

Scope: The project
              supports collaboration between two very experienced investigators. Professor
              El-Sayed is a world-renowned expert in laser spectroscopy and in
              femtochemistry.  Dr. Fouda has excellent experience in dithizone complexes
              synthesis and properties.  These complexes have very important photochromic
              properties and represent important materials of commercial and industrial
              applications.  The synthesis of the compounds will be made at the NRC in Cairo
              while the spectroscopic studies will be carried out at Georgia Tech. The
              project will include the two scientists and a graduate student from Egypt. 
              Visits by these three will be exchanged in each of the three years of the
              project.  The proposal meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative
              research in areas of mutual interest.  This project is being supported under
              the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
              engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.
