Title       : Evaluation of Chemical and Microbiological Factors Affecting Nitrification in
               Chloraminated Drinking Water Distribution Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0112128

Award Number: 0112128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $476193             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Harrington harringt@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Noguera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              011218  Harrington  The objective of this research project is to develop a model
              
integrating the chemical and microbiological phenomena that occur in
              chloraminated drinking water systems.  As chloramines decay, disinfection
              potential decreases  and the ammonia formed by the decay is converted to
              nitrites by ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB).   This causes two problems:
              first, nitrite is a public health concern and second, nitrite accelerates the
              decomposition of the chloramine residual, further reducing disinfection
              potential and creating more ammonia for the AOB to nitrify.  In general,
              nitrification will occur when the growth rate of AOB (due to the presence of
              ammonia) is larger than the inactivation rate of AOB (due to the presence of
              chloramines).  The specific objectives of this research are to: 1) Develop a
              food-to-biocide ratio indicative of nitrification potential and evaluate the
              ability of this ratio to predict the time to onset of nitrification in various
              chemical environments within the distribution system, 2) Evaluate the microbial
              ecology of AOB and nitrite-oxidizing bacteria in chloraminated distribution
              systems and determine the chloramine resistance of representative strains
              isolated from the distribution systems and 3) Interconnect the chemical and
              microbiological fundamentals of nitrification in chloraminated distribution
              systems using a mathematical model that simulates nitrification in model
              distribution systems.  The development of a nitrification potential indicator
              may help utilities establish criteria to minimize nitrification episodes. 
              Furthermore, the evaluation of the onset of nitrification under different
              environmental conditions will provide relevant information to formulate
              strategies for nitrification control.  The microbial ecology studies and the
              isolation of relevant chloramine resistant strains will provide the means to
              explore the mechanisms of disinfectant resistance.  ***

