Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Comparative Paleoecology of Late Miocene Eurasian
               Hominoidea Based on Bovid and Equid Metapodial Functional Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2001      
File        : a0112659

Award Number: 0112659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11979              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Kappelman jkappelman@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Researchers have advanced many hypotheses about the influence of ancient
              environments on the history of our species, Homo sapiens.  However, reliable
              reconstructions of ancient environments are often unavailable for important
              fossil sites relevant to these hypotheses.  One method of reconstructing
              ancient environments uses information about modes of locomotion of fossil
              animals found at sites to test hypotheses about the environment used by these
              animals.
Here, the researcher will develop reconstructions of ancient
              environments at sites relevant to questions about the influence of environment
              on the late Miocene Eurasian hominoids, a group of fossil apes potentially most
              closely related to our first bipedal ancestors.  Comparative data on limb bones
              of fossil three-toed horses, modern Equus, and fossil and living antelopes will
              be used to describe the morphological correlates of the modes of locomotion
              employed by these animals.  This information will allow the researcher to
              identify the types of environments represented at fossil sites by identifying
              the modes of locomotion of animals common at these sites.  For instance, sites
              with many fast-running species adapted to flight from predators across open
              country would indicate a plains or savanna-like environment.
The comparative
              data collected in this study will consist of traditional metric data, digital
              photographs, and high resolution X-ray CT scans of fossil and rare museum
              specimens.  Data collection is non-destructive and will create a valuable
              archive essential to understanding both the locomotion of extinct species, the
              influence of environment on human relatives, and the long ongoing history of
              environmental change on our planet.

