Title       : US-Pakistan Workshop: 26th International Nathiagali Summer College on Physics
               and Contemporary Needs: Islamabad, Pakistan, 25th June - 14th July, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a0112863

Award Number: 0112863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Talat S. Rahman rahman@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5943,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0112863 
Rahman

Description: This project supports the participation of US
              scientists in the 26th International Nathiagali Summer College on Physics and
              Contemporary Needs in Islamabad, Pakistan, June 25-July 14, 2001.  Dr.
              Riazuddin, Director of the National Center for Physics at Quaid-e-Azam
              University, Islamabad, Pakistan is the organizer of a one-week session on
              condensed matter physics (CMP) at the College.  Scientists from Europe,
              Pakistan and the United States will make presentations.  Attendees include
              scientists, mostly recent Ph.D.'s, from a number of developing countries in the
              region, including Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, China, India, Iran, Nepal,
              Tajikistan, Turkey, as well as Pakistan.   They also include graduate students
              from Pakistan. There are four areas covered during the three week College.  The
              US team will participate mainly in the CMP session.  The topics are selected
              with the aim of providing a synoptic view of latest advances and trends in
              these fields of research.  These include the statistical mechanics of systems
              far from equilibrium; studies of nanostructuring and etching of metal surfaces;
              theory, synthesis and characterization of nanostructured materials for
              photocatalysis; macroscopic studies of thin film growth on semiconductor
              surfaces; atomistic studies of thin film growth on metal surfaces, carbon
              nanotubes; studies of permanent magnetic materials and magnetic multilayers;
              and studies of permanent magnets, magnetic nanostructures and magnet recording
              applications.  The organizers are planning to have a publication of the
              proceedings of the entire College presentations. 

Scope: This project
              enables eight US scientists to attend an important meeting and to allow
              scientists from countries in south Asia to stay in touch with recent
              developments in physics, especially condensed matter physics, resulting from
              observations at facilities in advanced countries. This is an excellent
              opportunity for scientists from the advanced countries to take their knowledge
              and ideas for exchange, development, and application in other communities. 
              Lecturers and speakers from Europe, China and Japan are increasingly
              participating in these summer colleges.  This project allows the US to maintain
              a presence in programs like this and to remain competitive in scientific
              collaborations, recruiting graduate students and visitors, and to have the
              opportunity to disseminate results of research.  Past colleges have resulted in
              recruitment of several new graduate students who have added significantly to US
              research programs. The project meets INT objectives in supporting seminars
              where mutual benefits and dissemination of information is likely to result.
