Title       : Learning in Multiple Behavioral Contexts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0112067

Award Number: 0112067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334291             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Papaj papaj@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha R. Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Learning in Multiple Behavioral Contexts
Daniel R. Papaj and Martha R.
              Weiss

The study of animal learning from an ecological perspective is
              expanding. One area that has received relatively little attention is learning
              in multiple contexts. This is surprising because most animals must learn in
              multiple behavioral contexts, and it is reasonable to expect that learning in
              one context affects learning in another. In the proposed research, a butterfly
              will be used to address if and how learning interacts across behavioral
              contexts. Color learning in a species of swallowtail butterfly will be
              evaluated in egg-laying and nectar-foraging contexts, two situations in which
              associative learning of color is known to occur in this species and for which
              dual learning has been demonstrated.  The objectives of this proposal include:
              (1) assess color preferences of native individuals in each behavioral context;
              (2) assess a butterfly's selectivity to color under training in each context
              singly. (3) assess a butterfly's selectivity in responses to color combinations
              under dual training in different contexts and; (4) explore how learning in one
              context might interfere with learning in the other context. To meet these
              objectives, a battery of laboratory and enclosure assays will be undertaken. 
              Results of the proposed research will be of general interest to students of
              animal learning in diverse fields, and will provide a link between work in
              behavioral ecology, on the one hand, and laboratory-based studies of learning
              and memory from psychological, ethological, and neurobiological perspectives,
              on the other.  With respect to broader impacts, involvement of undergraduates
              through university-sponsored programs at both the University of Arizona and
              Georgetown University will enable students to experience the pleasures and
              challenges of research first-hand.  In addition, an undergraduate-level
              laboratory exercise on butterfly learning initiated by co-PI Weiss will be
              refined and made available to the scientific community through the Animal
              Behavior Society web site.  Finally, taking advantage of the broad public
              appeal of butterflies, our findings will be disseminated not only in scientific
              publications but also through popular essays, public talks, and visits to
              primary and secondary schools.

