Title       : Affective Processes in Judgment and Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0112158

Award Number: 0112158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Slovic pslovic@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Decision Sci Res Inst
	      1201 Oak Street
	      Eugene, OR  974013519    503/485-2400

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research in this proposal attempts to articulate the role of affect in
              guiding judgments and decisions.  As used here, "affect" means the specific
              quality of "goodness" or "badness" (i) experienced as a feeling state (with or
              without awareness) and (ii) demarcating a positive or negative quality of a
              stimulus.  Affective reactions occur rapidly and automatically - note how
              quickly one senses the feelings associated with the stimulus word "treasure" or
              the word "hate."  We have characterized reliance on such feelings when making
              judgments or decisions as "the affect heuristic."

The theoretical framework
              underlying this project comes from research in cognitive and social psychology
              and cognitive neuroscience that informs us about two basic modes of thinking,
              experiential and analytic. 

The experiential system is intuitive, automatic,
              image-based, fast, and intimately associated with affective feelings.  The
              analytic system is deliberative, reason-based, and slow.  There are strong
              elements of rationality in both systems.  It was the experiential system that
              enabled human beings to survive during their long period of evolution.  Long
              before there was probability theory, risk assessment, and decision analysis,
              there were intuition, instinct, and gut feelings to tell us whether an animal
              was safe to approach or the water was safe to drink.  As life became more
              complex and humans gained more control over their environment, analytic tools
              were invented to "boost" the rationality of our experiential thinking.

We
              now recognize that the experiential mode of thinking and the analytic mode of
              thinking are continually active, interacting in what we have characterized as
              "the dance of affect and reason".  While we may be able to "do the right thing"
              without analysis (e.g., dodge a falling object), it is unlikely that we can
              employ analytic thinking rationally without guidance from affect.  Affect is
              thus essential to rational action.

Based upon this theoretical framework and
              supporting research, we plan in this project to conduct a series of experiments
              to better understand the role of affect in decision making and the interaction
              between the experiential, affect-based mode of thinking and more analytic and
              deliberative processes.  We shall also attempt to demonstrate how the findings
              from this research provide insight into ways to improve a wide-range of
              important practical decisions about matters involving finance, medical
              treatments, cigarette smoking, insurance, and risk perception.

 
