Title       : CSEDI Collab. Research: Modeling the Earth's Deep Interior: An Integrative
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0112289

Award Number: 0112289
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157867             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Guy Masters gmasters@uscd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Gabrielle Laske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Masters 
Weidner 

The vision of a "standard model" which unifies many
              now-distinct disciplines within the Earth sciences is one that an increasing
              number of geoscientists are beginning to share, largely because of recent
              advances in mantle flow-modeling which begin to integrate large-scale
              seismological models, mineral physics data, and geodynamical modeling.
              Unfortunately, our current progress is slow because of artificial boundaries
              between disciplines and the tradition of small groups working in relative
              isolation. 

As part of an ongoing CSEDI grant, seismic data sets, codes, and
              models have been compiled which, in principle, allow the global seismologist a
              more synoptic view of the problem of determining the 3D structure of the Earth.
              This program is now at the point where there is near-consensus on a
              seismological "background" (or long-wavelength) 3D model.  A collaboration
              between UCSD and Harvard (with significant involvement of UC Berkeley) will
              work towards establishing the background elastic model (which includes a 1D
              model). While the outcome of this research will be a specific model (or family
              of models), the "reference" data sets will be made available to the community
              (as well as a wide variety of other shared data sets) to ensure broad
              participation in the construction of reference models. 

Most importantly,
              the current program will be extended beyond seismology and initially will
              include a mineral physics component (SUNY) and a flow-modeling component (U.
              Toronto). Tools and data sets will be developed that allow forward modeling of
              a wide range of potential compositions for conditions which span the mantle. 
              The goal is to make these tools sufficiently easy to use so that
              non-specialists can test compositional models directly against seismic and
              geodetic data. 


