Title       : ITR/SY Collaborative Research: A Unified Relational Approach to Grid Information
               Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0112891

Award Number: 0112891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225862             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Dinda pdinda@cs.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              An application running in a distributed computing environment such as the
              Computational Grid must adapt to the available hardware and software resources.
              This requires information about the properties of Grid resources such as hosts,
              network switches, links and paths, software libraries and systems, user and
              organization rights, software services, event channels and dictionaries, and
              more.  The information needed for an application to run, the values of the
              information (how fast the information changes) and the freshness of the
              information (how fast updates must be pushed to the application) can vary
              dramatically. These attributes place significant demands on the resource
              information service, demands that are arising with increasing prevalence in the
              general area of directory services as well. The Grid Forum, an international
              standards body for world-wide Grid computing, is developing standards for
              representing and querying this information. There is much that is excellent
              about these evolving standards, but there are many forms of highly desirable
              queries that will be difficult or expensive to perform in these systems. In
              particular, dynamic information will require very high update rates not
              supported by LDAP-based implementations.

This project will address these
              concerns through a proposed (and tentatively named) Grid Resource Information
              Service (GRIS), a unified relational approach to grid information services. The
              research will start with the full ACID
              (Atomicity/Consistency/Isolation/Durability) functionality of a relational
              database system and "build down" to a practical resource information system
              that still provides most of the benefits of the RDBMS.  Such a system will
              provide a single highly flexible query model and language for all types of Grid
              resource information, no matter how dynamic.  The research will culminate in an
              extensible implementation based on commodity database systems and the SQL
              language, including "canned queries" for non-SQL users. The project will
              evaluate the new system and techniques using logged updates and queries from an
              existing Grid information service, and comparing results with a hierarchical
              system such as Globus MDS2. To facilitate comparisons, the project will produce
              a set of benchmark queries from discussions with users, tool developers, and
              Grid Forum members, and will quantify the limits of these queries.


