Title       : ITR/AP(DMS): Numerical Studies of the Nonlinear Interaction Between Turbulent
               Air Flow and Sea Surface Waves, with Application to Ocean Surface Wave
               Turbulence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2001    
File        : a0112759

Award Number: 0112759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Fogwell                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499682             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Baker baker@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt M. Berger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joel T. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1686,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project develops a numerical model for turbulent airflow over
              nonlinearly evolving water surfaces that overcomes the limitations of previous
              studies. Efficient computational algorithms for modeling airflow, efficient
              hydrodynamic methods to evolve the sea surface boundary, and parallel computing
              techniques will be combined to make statistical analyses of realistic problems
              in both two and three dimensions possible. Scientific visualization methods
              will be applied to analyze results and to improve understanding of the
              nonlinear interactions between wind and waves that are important for sea
              surface growth and dissipation. Studies will be performed to determine the
              conditions under which "decoupling" the interacting complex systems into
              airflow-only or hydrodynamic-only simulations is possible by including
              appropriate forcing terms; the form of these forcing terms, when applicable,
              will be compared with existing empirical and analytical models to clarify the
              important physical processes. Decoupled hydrodynamic-only simulations will be
              pursued to investigate wave-wave energy transfer effects in larger scale
              problems than those possible in the coupled air-water model, and resulting
              forms of the equilibrium sea surface spectrum will be obtained. Commonly
              applied approximate hydrodynamic models will also be considered to assess their
              performance, and wave spectra obtained from numerical studies will be
              extrapolated using applicable approximate models to include breaking-wave
              effects not captured in the full numerical simulations. Results of the project
              will be significant for studies of the global climate, sea wave forecasting,
              and interpretation of direct and remotely sensed oceanographic data. More
              generally, project results will clarify important physical effects that can
              occur in a system of coupled nonlinear turbulent systems. 

The generation of
              sea surface waves by winds is one of the fundamental air-sea interaction
              processes that affect the global climate. Although this topic has been studied
              extensively through both physical modeling and experimental measurements,
              understanding of the physics involved remains limited due to the nonlinear
              phenomena implicit in both airflow and sea surface wave evolution. Numerical
              simulations offer a means to improve understanding of the complex interactions
              of this problem, but only recently have computing resources improved to make
              sufficiently large scale simulations possible. The proposed project represents
              an interdisciplinary collaboration between applied mathematics and engineering
              researchers. Educational efforts also comprise a principal objective of the
              project, including graduate and undergraduate education and research. All
              participants in the project will gain information technology (IT) experience
              through algorithm and code development. Project results will be communicated to
              the external community through conference and journal publications and through
              use of the world-wide-web; project web resources will also be used in classes
              taught by the research team to introduce students to scientific applications of
              IT research. 

