Title       : Language Processing and Representational Constraints in Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0112231

Award Number: 0112231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219870             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Gordon pcg@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randall Hendrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Peter Gordon and Randall Hendrick
              will conduct three years of linguistic research on the functions of human
              memory during language comprehension. Their focus is working memory, which is
              the memory that keeps track of information as people actively engage in complex
              tasks. Language comprehension includes complex tasks like identifying and
              interpreting parts of sentences. Such tasks require that intermediate
              representations of sentence parts be held in working memory and accessed during
              comprehension. The project tests the hypothesis that working memory's
              constraints in language, and other cognitive domains, reflect its
              susceptibility to interference during encoding, storage, and retrieval. This
              interference arises from the similarity of the items being processed. This
              research uses three complementary methods: eye tracking during reading,
              analyses of patterns in large corpora of printed language, and memory load
              tasks during language comprehension. The broader aims of the project are
              pursued by focusing each method on two central issues: How is language
              processing affected by the proximity of similar expressions, and what are the
              psychologically salient dimensions of similarity that cause interference? 
              

The significance of the project is that it will advance knowledge of the
              relationship between language and other aspects of cognition, particularly
              memory. Basic scientific research on the organization of the cognitive
              processes involved in crucial facets of mental life will be of benefit for
              later development of more applied goals. These include the creation of
              effective information technology, the teaching of reading, and the diagnosis
              and treatment of language impairment. 

