Title       : Political Science Research Infrastructure: Comparative Study of Electoral
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0112029

Award Number: 0112029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $688371             (Estimated)
Investigator: W.Phillips Shively shively@polisci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy E. Burns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES) is an international
              collaboration of more than 50 national election studies across the world.  It
              represents a globally coordinated comparative project to study electoral
              behavior under varying institutional conditions.  By collecting systematically
              comparable survey and associated institutional context information at the time
              of national elections and then making the resulting data freely available to
              the scholarly community, it provides a unique resource for comparative research
              on the ways in which institutions constrain and shape electoral behavior and
              attitudes toward democracy.
CSES is a collaborative-survey and macro-data
              collection and distribution project.  It serves as the mechanism for planning, 
              merging into a single file, and distributing (a) survey data collected through
              a collaboratively developed ten-minute module administered identically as part
              of each country's regular survey study; (b) commonly coded social and economic
              background variables of the respondents; and (c) collaboratively specified
              macro-data on relevant characteristics of each country's government and
              electoral system, their political parties, and the candidates.  CSES in not
              intended to support any individual country's data collection.   Rather it
              provides the infrastructure for collaboration that allows the project to exist.
               Specifically, CSES is the mechanism for collaboration in designing the survey
              modules and specifying the macro-data to be collected; the agency for creating
              electronically-accessible merged data sets, documentation, and an archive of
              related material from the individual submissions of each participating country;
              and the medium of communication among participating (and potentially
              participating) countries-and thus, a facilitator of cross-national research.  
              The CSES micro-and macro-datasets are made available to the research community
              immediately once they have been processed.
One of the great virtues of CSES is
              its efficiency as "big science."  All direct costs of data collection are borne
              by the individual participating projects which then submit the data at no cost
              to CSES for inclusion in the comparative dataset.  As a result, funding is only
              needed for the centralized functions of the project, including providing
              organizational and administrative support to the CSES Planning Committee in
              designing and distributing the modules and making sure that as many countries
              as possible administer the module in the appropriate way; serving as the chief
              information office of the project, including providing organizational and
              administrative support to the CSES Planning Committee in designing and
              distributing the modules and making sure that as many countries as possible
              administer the module in the appropriate way; serving as the chief information
              office of the project, including assisting participating countries with
              questions they have regarding its administration; creating and distributing the
              merged data set and documentation files from the submissions of the
              participating countries; maintaining an auxiliary archive of the project; and
              maintaining the CSES web site, which is the primary location of the CSES
              archive, including further developing its capacities for international
              collaboration.

