Title       : ITR/SI+IM (CISE):Distributed Data Compression and Dissemination for Wireless
               Sensor Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0112801

Award Number: 0112801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399350             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Neuhoff neuhoff@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mingyan Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop new methods for the efficient dissemination of the
              data collected by wireless
sensor networks. With recent and projected advances
              in small, low cost microelectronic and micro-electromechanical sensors, it is
              easy to envision that a large array of sensors, distributed over
              an
appropriate region, will be able to measure the spatial and temporal
              variations of important attribute
field such as temperature, moisture, sound,
              light, gas concentrations, etc.. However, to realize the
benefits of such
              arrays, wireless communication networks must be devised that with low power
              encode
and disseminate the large amounts of data they generate. With this as
              the goal, the project will
develop new methods of distributed data compression
              and data dissemination for dense sensor arrays,
that is, for arrays whose
              sensors are so close that their measurements are highly correlated. One
              thesis
of this project is that the correlations in such arrays can be
              exploited in order to make the network
operate essentially as efficiently as a
              sparse sensor network, while having the additional advantages of
being
              resilient to sensor failures and permitting the attribute field to be measured
              adaptively or with
higher spatial resolution. Another thesis is that the data
              compression and dissemination issues for
such networks are deeply intertwined.
              Accordingly, the project focuses on the joint design of such.
For example, it
              seeks methodology for tailoring distributed data compression methods to
              partcular
dissemination strategies, and vice versa. In the process, it
              proposed to learn how the performance of
sensor networks depends on a variety
              of issues such as the number and placement of sensors.
