Title       : Causes and Remediation of the Predecisional Distortion of Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2002  
File        : a0112039

Award Number: 0112039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393441             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. E. Russo JER9@Cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              When people are committed to one side in an athletic contest, say an American
              versus a Russian figure skater in the Olympics, we frequently observe a biased
              interpretation of the events.  The opponent's small misstep is judged as fatal
              to her performance, while the same error by the athlete from one's own country
              is dismissed as insignificant.  Could this distortion of physical evidence
              occur not only when a preference for one side is long standing and deeply held,
              but also when it is tentative, private, and fully reversible?  The research
              undertaken in the present grant demonstrates that the same distortion that
              drives biased judgments in the case of strong beliefs seems to lead to
              substantial and unrecognized distortion of evidence in the case of newly
              developing preferences.  

Researchers at Cornell University are examining
              this phenomenon in the ordinary situation of purchase decisions.  They have
              labeled it "predecisional distortion," meaning the biased evaluation of new
              information to favor whichever product is currently (and tentatively) preferred
              while the decision is still in progress.  In a consumer choice, as soon as one
              brand is slightly favored, new product information tends to be distorted to
              seem more favorable to that tentatively leading brand than it should.  This, in
              turn, makes the currently leading option more likely to become the
              decision-maker's final choice.  The phenomenon extends beyond consumer choice,
              having been observed also in managerial decisions (both by public auditors and
              by salespersons), and in the verdicts of mock jurors.  Predecisional distortion
              of new information is also systematic, with distortion increasing as the
              commitment to the tentatively leading alternative increases.  Interestingly,
              individuals who are in a good mood are more subject to this bias.  

What
              causes and, therefore, makes individuals prone to this bias in situations where
              they are genuinely trying to think accurately?  The researchers propose that
              predecisional distortion is driven by the simple expectation that new
              information should be consistent with existing beliefs, combined with the lack
              of awareness that distortion is occurring.  That is, people expect coherence
              between new and old information, so much so that they actually distort new
              information to make it more "coherent" with existing beliefs. 

The Cornell
              researchers have investigated a number of methods for ameliorating the
              distortion of information, including accountability to others for the
              correctness of the decision, increasing the importance of the choice, and
              providing financial incentives for accuracy.  While these interventions
              sometimes help, none has reduced distortion by more than 50%.  So far, it has
              proved impossible to eradicate, although additional methods to eliminate it are
              being explored.  However, one major barrier to correcting the bias is that
              individuals seem unaware that they are engaging in predecisional distortion
              until after the fact.  It is difficult for people to fix a mistake if they
              can't recognize that it is happening.

