Title       : ITR/IM+AP(GEO)Collaborative Research:Creation of a Geospatial Data System for
               the Transition Between the Colorado Plateau and Basin and Range Provinces
               (Geoinformatics in Action)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0112960

Award Number: 0112960
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202122             (Estimated)
Investigator: J Ramon Arrowsmith ramon.arrowsmith@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew J. Fouch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Stefanov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1655,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0112960
Arrowsmith

This grant, supported through funds from the
              NSF/Information Technology Research - Small Grants Program, facilitates a joint
              effort between Arizona State University and the University of Texas at El Paso
              to construct an integrated data system focusing on the Transition zone between
              the Colorado plateau and the Basin and Range province primarily in Arizona and
              New Mexico. This region is important for the development of an integrated
              geological and spatially-referenced data system as it is of fundamental
              significance to the geologic evolution of southwestern North America.  In
              addition, such a system is timely as it can be used to address practical
              problems such as the effects of urbanization and dwindling water resources. 
              Construction of this data system will involve three main efforts: 1)
              compilation of many large, scattered and heterogeneous earth science data sets
              into verified, standardized, and documented data bases; 2) construction of
              web-based interfaces that allow any interested party to access these data,
              receive robust metadata describing the data and how best to use them, and
              receive information on how to add data to the system via structured protocols;
              and 3) the design and construction of an extensive collection of public domain
              software (a toolbox) that would empower users with the capability to use and
              update the data in a substantial way.  This project will leverage considerable
              support from several federal and state agencies including NASA, the U. S.
              Geological Survey, the National Imaging and Mapping Agency, and the Arizona
              Geological Survey. 
***


