Title       : Collective Reputation and Relational Contracts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a0112129

Award Number: 0112129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113199             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Levin jdlevin@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project studies the role of reputation and long-term relationships in
              overcoming the incentive problems that arise in many economic transactions. The
              first part of the project studies collective reputation. Just as individuals
              develop reputations for fair dealing or competence or ability, so do the firms,
              organizations, professional associations and other groups to which they belong.
              These groups are not unitary actors. Their reputations reflect the
              characteristics and behavior of their members. In turn, when individual members
              care about their own reputations, they will be concerned with and influenced by
              the group's reputation. I investigate how individual behavior, group
              reputation, and group composition co-evolve in a dynamic setting. Among the
              questions analyzed are why organizational and institutional reputations tend to
              persist over time, whether individuals will tend to self-select into groups
              solely on the basis of reputational concerns, and when groups will make
              collective decisions to employ mechanisms that ensure the underlying competence
              and good behavior of members. 

The second part of the project studies
              incentive provision in ongoing relationships. In earlier work, I developed a
              repeated game model of incentive contracting and showed that in a variety of
              settings optimal self-enforcing agreements (relational contracts) could take a
              simple stationary form that facilitated detailed characterization. The problem
              was motivated by an interest in problems of organizational design --- how firms
              might optimally structure relationships with employees, suppliers, customers
              and creditors taking into account that even well-conceived legally binding
              contracts might leave significant room for discretion. A continuation of this
              work considers relational contracting with multiple trading partners. A main
              question is whether the status of a firm's relationship with a given
              constituent (say, one set of employees) ought to be contingent on all aspects
              of the firm's behavior (say, its treatment of all other employees), or just
              those aspects that are directly relevant. The basic argument is that the while
              there is less temptation to renege on a multilateral contract, such contracts
              are costly in uncertain environments because even minor unanticipated shocks
              may necessitate large adjustment costs or cause a whole series of relationships
              to unravel.

