Title       : Collaborative Research: Children's Development of Economic Skills and
               Preferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0112157

Award Number: 0112157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339099             (Estimated)
Investigator: William T. Harbaugh harbaugh@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Children live in complex economic environments. They make choices about what
to
              consume and they earn money. Children save, exchange goods, make
decisions
              under uncertainty, and they share and bargain among themselves and
with their
              parents and other adults. There are two main reasons why it is
important to
              improve our understanding of these sorts of economic behavior
in children.
              First, a better understanding of the development of children's
economic
              behavior will lead to a better understanding of economic behavior
in adults.
              Many economic norms, habits, and preferences are acquired in
childhood and
              this study will improve our understanding of how these
develop. Second, many
              of the decisions children make have consequences for
the rest of their lives.
              We believe that an understanding of children's
behavior based on economics
              will make it possible for society to help
children make better decisions as
              children.

The first goal of our research is to determine whether economic
              models are
applicable to children. If so, at what age does economics become
              useful for
understanding which different aspects of children's behavior?
              Second, we
will use computer based economic experiments to construct a panel
              data set
that will provide basic information on how children's economic
              behaviors,
such as rationality, altruism, risk behaviors, and bargaining,
              develop with
age. Our third objective is to develop an understanding of how
              demographic
variables and family policies influence children's preferences and
              economic
skills. A very practical and important benefit of this research will
              be a
better understanding of how parents, schools, and society can better
              prepare
children for the complex economic environment they will face as
              adults.
Currently there is almost no research on how children acquire
              economic
skills. Parents rely on information from folklore, their own
              experience, and
advice from unscientific studies and reports. Schools do not
              explicitly
teach what we, as economists, would regard as some of the most
              important
economic skills. Children are left to acquire basic economic
              decision making
skills haphazardly. This research will provide some of the
              basic descriptive
information needed to improve this situation.




