Title       : U.S. Participation in the Development of a Transnational Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a0112101

Award Number: 0112101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Smeeding TMSMEED@MAXWELL.SYR.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) database project consists of comparable
              cross-sectional microdata on the composition of households and the structure of
              their incomes for 25 industrialized economies as of January 2001.  It has also
              added labor force survey data for 16 nations under another subtitle, the
              Luxembourg Employment Study (LES).  LIS is one of the (if not the) leading
              examples of an interdisciplinary, cross-national, cooperative data
              infrastructure which supports research that leads to important policy relevant
              insights. The plans for the next three years include several improvements in
              database management (more sophisticated electronic access system; better
              on-line documentation; fifth wave of data for 2000; new surveys of the labor
              force); in research (inequality, poverty, gender studies); in training (annual
              LIS workshops in the United States, in Europe and elsewhere); in continuing to
              set new international standards for income distribution statistics; and in
              developing purchasing power parities for income distribution studies; and in
              providing US users with more direct access to the other nations' LIS
              surveys.

Over the past 17 years, the LIS project has demonstrated its
              feasibility and usefulness as an internationally sponsored and researcher-lead
              database infrastructure project.  The vast majority of its support, and all of
              its "core" operations, are funded by an international consortium of 16 nations
              and 22 funders such as the U.S. National Science Foundation. Because electronic
              access to LIS is, by design and intent, free once a privacy pledge is signed,
              users treat it as a "public good" which provides benefits at little or no
              direct cost to them. Hence, "core" funding is always a crucial issue. And so
              this proposal for core funding from the United States, like the proposals to
              the other 15 nations, is vital to the continued future of the LIS project. 

