Title       : Statistical and Applied Mathematical Sciences Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0112069

Award Number: 0112069
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000000           (Estimated)
Investigator: James O. Berger berger@stat.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan F. Karr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Marron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Thomas Banks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SAMSI is a national institute that will deeply impact the future
of the
              statistical and mathematical sciences and, through them,
science in general,
              by catalyzing creation of the theory and
methodology necessary to confront the
              central data- and
model-driven scientific challenges of our time. SAMSI will
              focus
on new syntheses of the statistical sciences, applied mathematics
and
              disciplinary science.  To illustrate the vision, consider an
activity central
              to modern science and technology, and with which
SAMSI will be heavily
              engaged: numerical modeling of complex
physical processes.  Developing
              numerical models and evaluating
their fidelity to reality requires merging
              knowledge from
multiple disciplines. Applied mathematics builds on
              disciplinary
understanding to construct a fine-detail numerical
              representation
of the deterministic aspects of a process; probability
              provides
concepts and insight to characterize stochastic elements of
              the
process; and statistics provides the mechanisms to relate
              these
constructs to observational data on the real-world process.
              But,
despite a multiplicity of context-specific advances, there is
currently
              no general framework for combining these disciplines,
much less a formal
              system for simultaneously applying them. The
SAMSI efforts in this direction
              will focus on filling this gap,
by bringing together statisticians,
              mathematicians and modelers
from across the country (and beyond) to establish
              frameworks for
model development and validation, at a high level that
              spans
multiple application contexts.

To carry out this synthesis of the
              statistical sciences, applied
mathematical sciences and disciplinary sciences,
              SAMSI engages
established researchers - from academia, industry,
              national
laboratories and government - as well as young
              researchers
(postdoctoral fellows and graduate students) at the
              formative
stages of their careers. Each research program lasts from 6
months
              to one year, and involves a host of activities ranging
from research by
              intensive interdisciplinary working groups to
broad, energizing workshops.
              Outreach to undergraduate students,
high-school teachers and faculty from
              teaching institutions
extends SAMSI's impact on the essential development of
              the
national human resource base for science. To enable activities of
the
              breadth and depth necessary for the success of SAMSI, the
institute is a
              partnership between the National Science
Foundation and the consortium of Duke
              University, North Carolina
State University, the University of North Carolina
              at Chapel Hill
and the National Institute of Statistical Sciences. 
              These
partners provide a uniquely strong base for SAMSI's national
scope.
              Scientific input to SAMSI comes, in part, from a National
Advisory Council
              composed of eminent statistical and mathematical
scientists. Most important,
              SAMSI will engage the entire
nationwide statistical and mathematical sciences
              communities, by
means of widely publicized opportunities to bring problems
              to
SAMSI, or direct SAMSI's attention to them.

