Title       : A Crosslinguistic Study of Sign Language Classifiers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0112391

Award Number: 0112391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280915             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane Brentari brentari@omni.cc.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Diane Brentari will conduct three
              years of linguistic research on the classifier systems of nine sign languages
              from three different families. Such systems exist in all known sign languages,
              but in only some spoken languages. Classifiers refer to certain properties of
              noun arguments but may be expressed in a variety of grammatical units. For
              example, they may appear in noun phrases (e.g., "grain" in "a grain of sand" in
              English) or verb phrases expressing motion or location (e.g., "3-handshape +
              go_by" in American Sign Language; translation: "A bike is going by"). In sign
              languages, they are typically expressed as handshapes. This research will ask
              whether nine sign languages use similar handshapes to express similar meanings
              and how each system compares to the set of all languages that contain
              well-developed classifier systems, both spoken and signed. The relatively young
              Israeli Sign Language is included to compare to more mature classifier systems.
              Dr. Brentari and a linguist in each language community will collect the data.
              Elicitation tasks target specific semantic distinctions such as stative/active,
              agentive/non-agentive, and telic/atelic. Researchers will analyze how each sign
              language uses the components of the total handshape in its classifier system to
              express these distinctions. The Prosodic Model of sign language phonology will
              provide a theoretical framework within which to organize and analyze the
              data.

Three scientific questions motivate this study of sign language
              classifiers. First, this project will contribute to our knowledge of sign
              languages by providing cross-linguistic information about a fundamental
              structure that is not yet well understood. Second, this project will add to our
              knowledge of morphology and the way that it is expressed, since morphology in
              sign languages is expressed predominantly by simultaneously organized
              phonological units rather than by sequentially organized units. Finally, this
              research will contribute to our understanding of the range of classifier
              typology in natural languages.  In addition to its scientific merit, this
              project will recruit native-signing Deaf undergraduate students to help analyze
              data, and so provide an opportunity for these students to engage in first-hand
              scientific research on their native languages. 

