Title       : Topics in Economic Dynamics and Time Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0112359

Award Number: 0112359
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222024             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lars P. Hansen l-hansen@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      1155 E. 60th Street
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research will be completed on three different topics:
First, the project
              develops a new approach to characterizing nonlinearities in weakly dependent
              time series. Nonlinear principal component decompositions are used to represent
              the evolution of continuous-time Markov processes and to summarize the
              correlation structure. These decompositions help us understand better the
              evolution of relative prices across locations and the nonlinearities induced by
              transaction or transport costs. This work draws on three literatures:
              functional principal component analysis; quadratic-form modeling of Markov
              processes; and nonlinear, stochastic modeling of real exchange rates. Nonlinear
              models that are strongly dependent or nonstationary are also
              considered.

Second, the investigator continues his study of economies in
              which private agents and policy-makers confront model misspecification. The
              project explores and implements solution methods for nonlinear, stochastic
              equilibrium models.  It studies monetary models in which the misspecification
              concerns of macroeconomic policy makers differ from those of private agents. It
              builds from insights in the time-series econometrics literature on
              misspecification and filtering to investigate alternative formulations of
              robustness in the decision-making of private agents. Finally, the project
              studies connections between robustness, adaptive learning and information-
              based models of inertia.

Third, the project examines the observable
              implications of dynamic models under uncertainty with human capital and
              portfolio investment. Implications for time series and cross sections of asset
              returns are deduced and tested. The role of heterogeneity in the stochastic
              structure of labor income also is considered. Finally, the project investigates
              the role of financial market structures on the shadow valuation of human
              capital.

