Title       : Orographic Precipitation and Airmass Transformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0112354

Award Number: 0112354
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $790218             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald B. Smith ronald.smith@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              An improved understanding of, and the ability to model, orographic precipitation
              and air mass drying would contribute to solving a number of earth science
              problems involving: flash flood prediction, water resources, mountain glaciers,
              ice core interpretation, erosion, rain-shadow deserts and inter-ocean water
              transport.  Most current models either oversimplify or fail to resolve key
              moist orographic flow processes.  In this research, the Principal Investigator
              will test existing mesoscale models and develop new theories combining airflow
              dynamics and microphysics.

The highest priority is to compare existing model
              runs with data from the Mesoscale Alpine Programme (MAP).  This is the only
              detailed data set using new technologies that allows moist air flow over a
              major mountain range to be diagnosed.  Four MAP cases have been identified with
              differing characteristics.  For each case, output from three numerical models
              will be compared with conventional and aircraft data.  If the agreement is
              satisfactory, detailed interpretation of the output will follow.  Several
              theoretical questions will be addressed in the analysis: the relative role of
              moist ascent versus flow splitting and blocking; triggered convection; the
              accuracy of parcel trajectories; the effect of model resolution; the testing of
              the "threshold" theory of precipitation efficiency; sensitivity to
              microphysical algorithms; and the conservation of equivalent potential
              temperature in mixing flows. 

The second phase of the research will include
              data and publications from three contemporary medium scale experiments managed
              by other groups.  The results from these projects will be compared to put the
              MAP results into a broader context and allow cautious generalizations to be
              developed.

In the final phase of the project, applications of relevant
              orographic precipitation models to other geoscience disciplines (see items
              above) will be undertaken, broadening the impact of the work.  A scholarly
              survey of the field will be attempted.  Considerable influence on educational
              programs should be seen from this research activity.  Undergraduate and
              graduate students and post-docs will be involved in the field work and data
              analysis.
