Title       : FASEB Conference: Ciliate Molecular Biology, being held in Saxtons, Vermont on
               July 28-August 2, 2001.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a0112443

Award Number: 0112443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey M. Kapler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacek Gaertig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura F. Landweber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1112,1114,1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The meeting entitled "Eighth International Meeting on Ciliate Molecular
              Biology". will be held as a FASEB Conference at the Vermont Academy in Saxtons
              River, Vermont, July 28- August 2, 2001. The meeting will bring together
              researchers who employ molecular approaches for investigating diverse
              biological problems using ciliated protozoa as their model system. The great
              value of ciliates stems from their unusual genetic organization and extensive,
              developmentally-programmed reorganization of the genome. These features have
              provided remarkable insights into an array of fundamental chromosomal
              processes, including the discovery of self-splicing RNA, telomeres and
              telomerase, and chromatin remodeling by histone acetyltransferases. Recent
              advances, such as targeted gene replacement by homologous recombination and
              antisense ribosomes have been exploited to study a wide range of questions in
              cell and molecular biology, ranging from telomeres and telomerase, to regulated
              protein secretion, to tubulin modification during microtubule assembly. The
              pace of research has quickened due to the development and dissemination of new
              experimental methods. For this reason and others, the Ciliate Molecular Biology
              Meeting fills a critical niche that is otherwise lacking in other scientific
              meetings. The 1999 meeting included a workshop for assessing practical issues
              and justification for a Tetrahymena genome sequencing project. The Ciliate
              Molecular Biology meeting will be organized into nine platform sessions and two
              poster sessions.  Platform sessions will cover leading edge research topics
              including chromatin remodeling, telomeres and telomerase,  DNA rearrangement,
              DNA replication, signal transduction, the cytoskeleton, evolution and genome
              plasticity. 
