Title       : ITR: Digital Government: Communications Technology and Urban Governance Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0112899

Award Number: 0112899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence Brandt                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435479             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juliet A. Musso musso@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Weare  (Principal Investigator former)
              S. J. Ball-Rokeach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Genevieve Giuliano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1686,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA: 0112899
Christopher Weare
University of Southern California

Title:
              ITR/IM: Communications Technology and Urban Governance Reform

The project
              will analyze the effects of advanced telecommunications technologies on reform
              efforts seeking to decentralize democratic governance. Analysis will focus on
              technology use in the implementation of a formal neighborhood council system in
              the City of Los Angeles. This reform effort represents a significant and
              well-defined natural experiment in the political uses of information and
              communications technologies (ICTs). As such, it provides an opportunity to
              extend the technology and politics literature, which to date has focused on the
              national level and elections, to investigate effects on local governance, which
              is the primary sphere for civic engagement in policy making. The research will
              draw from theories in the area of political communication, organizational
              theory and urban political economy to develop hypotheses about the factors that
              influence the successful integration of ICTs in the creation of neighborhood
              council systems, their effects on patterns of political communication, and the
              effects of communications networks on political outcomes and attitudes among
              stakeholders at the local level. 

The implementation of neighborhood
              councils in Los Angeles is currently in the planning process and will proceed
              beginning June 2001. The current plan calls for the creation of 100 to 200
              advisory councils at the community level, and the implementation of an
              Internet-based early notification system intended to provide councils early
              input into city policy making processes. In addition, councils are required to
              create systems for communication with community stakeholders. The City in turn
              is mandated to provide councils with a communication system linking all
              neighborhood councils and training and material support for communications.
              This reform represents an unprecedented urban experiment with political
              communication, and is particularly important given the size, ethnic diversity,
              and global economic position of the City of Los Angeles. The research will
              employ multiple methods to elucidate the complex linkages between
              implementation inputs, communication networks, political processes, and policy
              and attitudinal outcomes. The methods employed will include (1) case study
              analysis of the design, implementation, and diffusion of neighborhood councils
              and communications technology; (2) analysis of the vertical communications
              promulgated and received by elected officials as a part of the mandated early
              notification system; (3) network analysis of the dynamics of communications
              within and between neighborhood councils and city government; and (4)
              preliminary analysis of the political effects of vertical and horizontal
              communications.

Data collection will include archival and field research,
              interviews, and two panel surveys. These data will be employed in diffusion
              analyses and network analyses producing sociograms of linkages and cliques
              developing among members of city government and neighborhood councils. The
              network analysis provides a systematic framework for conceptualizing and
              analyzing the effects of ICTs on communication patterns and the manner in which
              changing communication patterns influence democratic outcomes.
This analysis
              will illuminate the effects of ICTs on the distribution of information and
              political communications and the resulting effects of changing communication
              patterns on citizen participation and the responsiveness of political
              institutions. The research is expected to improve understanding of the
              technological factors that impede or promote political participation by
              traditionally underrepresented groups and provide a more detailed understanding
              of socio-economic and communicative characteristics of citizens impede them
              from taking advantage of technology-based reforms. This knowledge will help
              policy makers develop methods by which these differences may be bridged.

