Title       : Implantation in the Domestic Ferret (Mustela Putorius)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0112263

Award Number: 0112263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice M. Bahr j-bahr@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to understand better the process by which embryos
              implant in the uterus in ferrets. Ferrets are classified in the Arctoideae that
              also includes other weasels, bears, raccoons, seals and walruses. A remarkable
              characteristic of many arctoidean species is tight control of the timing of
              implantation.  In the black bear, for example, embryo implantation occurs
              months after fertilization.  Unfortunately, many arctoidean species, such as
              the giant panda and the black-footed ferret are threatened or endangered. It is
              important to gain a better understanding of reproduction in these species,
              including the process of embryo implantation, in order to improve captive
              breeding techniques.  
Domestic ferrets are an excellent model for the study
              of embryo implantation in arctoidean carnivores because they are abundant and
              domesticated. Preliminary data indicate that the protein glucose-6-phosphate
              isomerase (GPI), produced by the ovary, is crucial for embryo implantation in
              ferrets.  It is already known that GPI has multiple functions. The protein is
              necessary to convert sugars to energy, and it stimulates nerve cell growth. 
              GPI also stimulates movement and invasion by tumor cells. This action is
              probably similar to its effect on the embryo, which must move and invade the
              uterus to implant there.  Therefore, by studying how GPI functions in embryo
              implantation, insights may be gained about GPI function in tumor cells, thus
              furthering knowledge of cancer biology. 
To determine the role of GPI in
              embryo implantation, we will pursue 5 specific aims:
1) Is GPI required for
              implantation in the ferret?  We will use two experiments to answer this
              question. In the first, ovaries will be surgically removed from pregnant
              ferrets. These ferrets will then be injected with GPI to determine whether GPI
              can trigger implantation.  In the second experiment, pregnant ferrets will be
              given an antibody that blocks GPI to determine whether implantation can occur
              without GPI.
2) What is the pattern of expression of GPI by the pregnant
              ferret ovary? We will remove ovaries from ferrets at different stages of
              pregnancy to determine whether the ovaries make GPI in preparation for
              implantation. We will use PCR to determine expression levels of the GPI gene as
              mRNA, and western blotting to determine how much GPI protein is being made.
3)
              Is GPI secreted from the ovary during pregnancy?   We will take blood samples
              from ferrets at different stages of pregnancy to determine how much GPI is
              being secreted into the blood, where it can be carried to the uterus. The
              amount of GPI can be measured by measuring its enzyme activity. 
4) What are
              the target tissues for luteal GPI?  To determine where GPI is acting, we will
              remove the uterus and embryos at various stages of pregnancy, and look for the
              GPI receptor mRNA and protein. We will also label GPI, and add it to uterine
              samples and observe where it binds. 
5) Is prolactin required for the
              expression of luteal GPI?  The pituitary hormone prolactin is needed for embryo
              implantation in ferrets. Therefore, it may be signaling the ovaries to make
              GPI. To test this, we will treat pregnant ferrets with the drug bromocriptine,
              which blocks prolactin. We will then determine whether the ferret ovaries still
              make GPI protein and mRNA.
These studies will improve present knowledge of
              reproduction in ferrets and related species, and increase understanding of
              aspects of cancer biology.

