Title       : Collaborative Research: Human Capital Accumulation and Aggregate Labor Supply
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0112078

Award Number: 0112078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry E. Jones lej@atlas.socsci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

In the last fifty years there has been a dramatic change in the level and
              composition of worker hours allocated to market production. The largest change
              is the increase in market hours of married females. This has been accompanied
              by relative stability in the number of hours worked by single male and females,
              and by married males. In addition to the change in hours, there is a
              distinctive pattern of decreased fertility, especially among highly educated
              women, and increase in the proportion of births after age thirty. To understand
              the events that may have caused these substantial changes, this research
              constructs dynamic general equilibrium models of the macroeconomy  in which
              households choose labor supplies, consumption and investment in both human and
              physical capital. Both market and non-market consumption enter utility and
              require both quality-adjusted time and physical capital to be produced. In our
              models, a household can either be a married couple or single individuals living
              alone. All the economic agents, single, married, male, or female; interact in
              aggregate markets for labor, capital, investment and market consumption. A
              major objective of the research is to determine what factors could explain 
              observed gender-based wage differentials. The  research will consider the
              impact of several types of technological change including, increased
              productivity of household durables,   changes in the marriage market, and
              shocks to the costs of acquiring human capital.

