Title       : DNA Rearrangements and Macronuclear Development in Cilated Protozoa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0112260

Award Number: 0112260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $640008             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Forney forney@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Genome remodeling occurs throughout the eukaryotic kingdom and includes well
              known examples such as mating type switching in yeast and recombination of
              immunoglobulin genes in mammals. The ciliated protozoa present an extreme
              example in which large amounts of DNA are eliminated and rearranged to form the
              transcriptionally active macronucleus as a normal part of sexual reproduction.
              In Paramecium tetraurelia, an estimated 50,000 short DNA elements called
              internal eliminated elements (IESs) are removed from the genome via site
              specific recombination. Previous research led to the hypothesis that Paramecium
              IESs are related to transposable elements. This project will define the regions
              of a 28 bp Paramecium IES that are required for accurate DNA splicing and
              compare these regions with those critical for excision of transposable
              elements. One series of experiments will involve the construction of specific
              mutations in the cloned IES. Each mutant IESs will be tested for accurate
              splicing by injection into cells that are undergoing macronuclear development.
              A second approach will involve sequencing several examples of evolutionarily
              related IESs from different Paramecium strains. Comparison of these sequences
              will identify conserved nucleotides that are presumed to be important due to
              their evolutionary conservation. This assumption will be tested by constructing
              appropriate mutations in the IES. Investigations in the related ciliate
              Tetrahymena thermophila will focus on a recently identified developmentally
              regulated translation elongation factor-2. Gene disruption and replacement
              experiments will determine whether this gene and its corresponding protein are
              involved in a translational control mechanism that is required for the genome
              remodeling process. The research will contribute to a broader understanding of
              the relationship between ciliate DNA elimination and transposable element
              insertion-excision, and perhaps reveal novel biochemical features of DNA
              splicing in this organism. The study of a developmentally regulated elongation
              factor 2 may reveal a novel mechanism for the control of protein synthesis in
              eukaryotes.  


