Title       : A Biomechanical Approach to Xylem Structure and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0112213

Award Number: 0112213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Sperry sperry@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0112213  Sperry

A major constraint on plant productivity is the need to
              transport water to the foliage. This vital function is performed by the xylem
              tissue (wood) of the plant. The proposed research will quantify the design
              constraints of xylem in relation to water transport using state-of-the-art
              finite element methods developed for applications in fluid and solid mechanics.
              Advances in high performance computing make it feasible to apply these methods
              to the complex geometries of biological materials, including the conducting
              tubes (conduits) of the xylem. The result of the research will be quantitative
              links between the microscopic and macroscopic structure of xylem in relation to
              water transport and mechanical properties. Knowledge of the functional
              significance of wood's structural properties will have a number of broader
              implications ranging from the bioengineering of timber, to the interpretation
              of the climatic record of tree rings, and the analysis of evolutionary and
              ecological trends in xylem structure. The work will be interdisciplinary,
              involving graduate students and collaboration across three departments of the
              host institution (biology, math, and mechanical engineering). Hypotheses of
              structure-function linkages generated by computational analysis will be tested
              by direct experiment and with a comparative data set including xylem from
              different organs (root-stem-leaf), species from distantly related vascular
              plant groups (e.g., conifers vs. flowering plants), and plants of different
              growth types (vines vs. trees).  

The research has four specific objectives.
              The first objective is to quantify the relationship between conduit wall
              structure and reinforcement against the extremely negative water pressures
              required for xylem transport. The hypothesis is that conduit reinforcement will
              scale with operating pressure so as to minimize investment in wall material.
              This hypothesis is supported by preliminary work showing a strong
              proportionality between the ratio of conduit wall thickness to lumen diameter
              and a proxy of operating pressure across 12 species of conifers and 37 species
              of flowering plants. When scaled to the tissue level, this predicts that wood
              density must increase with more negative operating pressures, as was observed.
              The implication is that wood strength may be more related to conduit
              reinforcement than to support of the plant against gravity or wind loading. The
              present research will extend these results by using sophisticated finite
              element packages to analyze conduit and tissue stresses, allowing us to factor
              in the structure of the interconduit pits and surrounding tissue. The second
              objective is to quantify the mechanics of the valve function of interconduit
              pits and their role in causing transport failure by the air-seeding of
              cavitation (vaporizing of water under negative pressure). Preliminary work
              indicates that air seeding occurs at a constant wall stress across species. The
              hypothesis is that air seeding will also occur at an approximately constant pit
              membrane stress, meaning that cavitation resistance will be determined by pit
              membrane material properties, and especially by pit geometry. The third
              objective is to quantify the link between xylem structure and its conducting
              capacity. Here we will use advanced methods in fluid mechanics to solve the
              complex problem of flow through the irregular shapes of xylem conduits and
              their interconnecting pits. The fourth objective will bring together the
              individual structure-function relationships quantified in the first three
              objectives to evaluate the extent to which xylem design of diverse species
              maximizes conducting capacity while meeting constraints related to conduit
              support and prevention of cavitation. 

