Title       : CSEDI: Collaborative Res: Toward Mapping 3D Variations in Temperature and
               Chemical Composition in the Upper Mantle through a Mineral Physics-Based
               Inversion of Seismic Waveforms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0112409

Award Number: 0112409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Romanowicz barbara@seismo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Romanowicz 
Karato 

This is a collaborative study between seismologists at
              UC Berkeley and mineral physicists at Yale University, to explore the
              feasibility of inverting seismic long period waveform data directly for 3D
              variations in effective temperature and major element chemistry in the upper
              mantle. Effective temperature will include the effects of temperature and water
              content, which cannot be easily separated from seismic data alone. Water
              content is likely to have large effects on rheology and therefore has
              significant influence on the dynamics of the Earth's mantle. They will use the
              mineral physics framework to  delineate contributions from these various
              factors and provide estimates of relevant partial derivatives. Effects of major
              element chemistry can be distinguished from that of water, because water has a
              large influence on anelasticity whereas major element chemistry does not. On
              the other hand anelasticity is more strongly dependent on temperature than
              seismic velocity. 

At the heart of this study is the conjecture, supported
              by theoretical considerations, that the one step inversion of seismic waveforms
              for physical parameters such as composition C and (effective) temperature T*,
              should yield more stable results than the standard approach of first inverting
              for velocity and Q structure and then interpreting the obtained maps in terms
              of physical parameters. The latter is currently inhibited by the poor
              resolution in 3D upper mantle Q, due to contamination of amplitudes by largely
              unmodelled, but significant, effects of focusing and scattering. In the one
              step inversion the effects of C and T* are coupled in the inversion matrix
              elements, whereas in the standard approach, only the amplitudes depend on
              anelastic terms, while both phase and amplitudes depend on the elastic ones,
              leading to strong biases in the distribution of Q inferred. The coupled
              character of the equations in the one step approach, combined with the strong
              sensitivity of amplitudes to T* (through anelastic terms) should offset the
              approximate character of the available mineral physics partial derivatives and
              the errors due to inadequate theoretical treatment of focusing.
