Title       : C-RUI: Molecular Mechanisms of Mechanical Diversity in Spider Silks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0112165

Award Number: 0112165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $849971             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne M. Moore amoore@uop.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig Vierra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Lawrence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of the Pacific
	      3601 Pacific Avenue
	      Stockton, CA  952110110    209/946-2011

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1091,9178,9183,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative research project will involve undergraduate students in the
              study of the mechanical properties and the molecular mechanisms that give rise
              to the functional specificity in spider silks. It is significant to biology
              because the diversity of silk types seems to have radiated with the diversity
              of spiders. This study will compare silks from the black widow cobweb weaver
              Latrodectus, the funnel web weaver Hololena sp., the cobweb building house
              spider, Pholcus sp., and a tarantula, Grammostola rosea. These species each
              represent one of four major clades of the spiders (Arenae). By including this
              broad array of spiders, this project will explore the mechanical diversity of
              spider silk as a function of phylogenetic relationships. The study is also
              significant to materials science because spider silks display an extensive
              range of material properties from a small range of molecular differences. Thus,
              they represent an ideal system for correlating molecular structure and material
              properties.

These spider silks will be studied on three levels: 1. Primary
              structure using microarray technology and gene sequencing, 2. Secondary
              structure from NMR spectroscopy, and 3. Mechanical properties from materials
              testing. The material properties will be correlated with the secondary
              structure and the primary sequence of the silk proteins in order to construct
              models of each silk on a molecular level. By exploring a variety of silks
              through multidisciplinary undergraduate research, this project will enable the
              correlation of the molecular differences with mechanical differences in spider
              silk. In addition to its research activities, the project will also include
              workshops for high school teachers and, consequently, will have a significant
              impact on high school education.

