Title       : ITR/AP (ENG) Simulation of Multiphase Chemical Reactors using Multi-Fluid Models
               with Interphase Mass Transport and Complex Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a0112571

Award Number: 0112571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399030             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney O. Fox rofox@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI: Rodney O. Fox 
Institution: Iowa State University 
Proposal
              Number: 0112571

Major advances in the application of information technology
              to engineering simulation can be expected at a number of levels.  The ultimate
              impact of such advances on industrial practice in the chemical process industry
              (CPI) will depend on their successful implementation for chemical process
              design and optimization.  In particular, progress in the field of multiphase
              chemical reactors will depend on the development and validation of scalable
              subgrid-scale models that integrate transport and chemical processes with
              widely different temporal and spatial scales into macroscopic transport models
              based on computational fluid dynamics (CFD).  The computational cost of solving
              multi-fluid CFD models is very high and modeling efforts for complex multiphase
              systems have been limited by the available computing resources and numerical
              algorithms.  Multiprocessor computers now have sufficient memory, bandwidth,
              and processor speed to permit more detailed physics and chemistry of
              micro/mesoscale phenomena to be included in multiphase CFD simulations.  

In
              this project, multi-fluid CFD codes will be optimized for an Alpha cluster in
              order to run fully-resolved simulations of canonical flows.  These
              high-resolution simulations will include new models for inter/intraphase mass
              transfer and efficient algorithms for complex chemistry.  The results will then
              be employed to develop "macroscopic" CFD models based on Reynolds-averaged
              multi-fluid models that will be applicable to full-scale chemical reactors. 
              Code optimization will be carried out in collaboration with computer scientists
              at the Scalable Computing Laboratory at Ames Laboratory on the Iowa Sate
              university campus.  This laboratory has experience in the application of
              cluster computers to the numerical simulation of scientific and engineering
              problems.  As part of the Vision 2020 initiative, the CPI has identified CFD as
              an important tool for advanced chemical reactor design and optimization.  This
              project directly addresses shortcoming of existing CFD models that were
              identified in the 1999 DOE report Chemical Industry of the Future: Technology
              Roadmap for Computational Fluid Dynamics.  The project results will thus have a
              direct impact on industrially-relevant issues related to multiphase reactor
              design and optimization.  

