Title       : The Ecological Physiology of a Supercooled Vertebrate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a0112283

Award Number: 0112283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary C. Packard packard@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary J. Packard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This is a proposal to investigate the ecological physiology of overwintering
              hatchlings of the North American painted turtle (Chrysemys picta).  This
              widely-distributed and abundant species has become a model organism for studies
              on the ecology and evolution of freshwater chelonians.  The natural history of
              painted turtles differs from that of most other species in an important
              respect, however.  Whereas neonates of other aquatic turtles usually emerge
              from their nest in late summer or autumn and move to a nearby marsh, lake, or
              stream to spend their first winter, hatchling painted turtles typically remain
              inside their shallow, subterranean nest throughout their first winter and do
              not come above ground until the following spring.  This behavior commonly
              causes neonatal painted turtles at northern localities to be exposed during
              winter to ice and cold with temperatures in some nests going below -10oC.  Many
              hatchlings withstand such exposure and emerge from their nest when the ground
              finally thaws in the spring.

Hatchlings tolerate the cold of mid-winter by
              becoming supercooled (i.e., they remain unfrozen at temperatures below the
              equilibrium freezing point for their bodily fluids).  Although this "adaptive
              strategy" has many benefits for neonatal turtles, the strategy also has
              important consequences  one of the more important of which is a shutdown of the
              circulation at temperatures near -10oC.  The proposed investigation will focus
              on the use of energy reserves by liver, heart, and brain in animals subjected
              to the stagnant anoxia that results from shutdown of the circulation, and on
              the patterns of accumulation by different organs of the lactic acid that is
              produced in anaerobic respiration.  The work will yield important new insights
              concerning the physiology of neonatal turtles and also may identify new methods
              for storing transplantable organs for use in human and/or veterinary
              medicine.

