Title       : ITR/AP: Interactive Spatial Physics: Computational Foundations and Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0112758

Award Number: 0112758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vadim Shapiro vshapiro@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1658,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is  to develop an interactive geometric approach  to
              creating, editing, transforming, and computing with models of spatially
              distributed physical phenomena. The funded effort  will involve fleshing out
              sound theoretical foundations, developing appropriate data structures and 
              algorithms, as well as implementing a prototype system for interactive physical
              modeling.  At the heart of the proposal is  a novel use of tools from algebraic
              topology and geometric algebra to describe, classify, and unify physical 
              phenomena.  The prototype system  will allow users to create models of physical
              phenomena through an  interactive geometric interface designed in terms of
              familiar and intuitive control  elements.  The created models may be
              interactively transformed, modified, combined, visualized, and instantiated. 
              

The successful outcome of the proposed research should have broad 
              technological, economic, educational, and social impact. The physics editor
              will allow users to create, visualize,  test, and experiment with new models of
              physical phenomena quickly and effortlessly. It could greatly enhance the 
              ability to efficiently create and modify scientific software that is modular,
              reusable, and consistent across the  disciplinary boundaries. Engineers may
              discover a practical tool that will allow them to communicate  with
              computer-aided design systems in a visual intuitive language that does not
              require deep  mathematical knowledge and unifies a multitude of theories and
              special cases. And perhaps most importantly, the proposed  research could open
              doors of computational sciences to college and high school students and others
              who  may have been discouraged or intimidated by traditional methods of
              mathematical physics and scientific  computing.   

