Title       : Economic Influences on Migration Decisions of Young Workers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0112288

Award Number: 0112288
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285387             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Kennan   (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The extent to which Americans move from one part of the country to another is
              remarkable when compared with data for other countries.  The research analyzes
              the relevance of geographical differences in income from the point of view of
              young people who must decide whether to accept the opportunities available in
              their current location, or move elsewhere in search of better opportunities. 
              There are in fact large geographical differences in wages, despite large
              migration flows that might be expected to eliminate such differences.  There
              are also large geographical differences in welfare benefits, and policy-makers
              express concerns that these differences might create "welfare magnets" in some
              locations.  Thus there is reason to believe that differences in expected income
              may help explain migration decisions.  A more detailed understanding of the
              relationship between income and migration will be useful in many applications. 
              For example, it will lead toward better forecasts of how quickly regional
              differences in income and poverty are likely to dissipate; and it will greatly
              improve our ability to analyze the effects of changes in the welfare system.
 
                 We build an economic model of individual migration decisions, and we fit it
              to individual histories, using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of
              Youth (NLSY).  Individual decisions to migrate are modeled as a job search
              problem in which welfare benefits or other alternative sources of income act as
              a floor, insuring workers against bad job search outcomes.  A worker can draw a
              wage only by visiting a location, thereby incurring a moving cost.  Locations
              are distinguished by known differences in mean wages, amenity values and
              alternative income sources.  A worker starts the life-cycle in some home
              location and chooses an optimal sequence of moves before settling down.  There
              is a two-dimensional ranking of locations, ex ante: some places have high
              wages, and others have attractive fallback options (both adjusted for amenity
              values). 
      The decision problem is too complicated to be solved
              analytically, so we proceed by using a discrete approximation that can be
              solved numerically.  State data on welfare benefits and Census data on wages
              are used to estimate the parameters describing the menu of choices available to
              individuals, and preference parameter values are selected so as to maximize the
              likelihood of the migration decisions seen in the NLSY data.  The result of the
              project will be a structural explanation of migration behavior, that can be
              used to say what would have happened if the same individuals had been
              confronted with a different menu of choices.  In particular, the results will
              be used to assess the extent to which migration decisions are driven by
              geographical wage differentials, and by welfare magnets.  Preliminary empirical
              results indicate that a useful structural model of welfare migration is within
              reach, and it is likely that this can be extended to obtain a broader
              characterization of migration decisions of young workers.  It will than be
              possible to analyze behavioral responses to situations not seen in the data,
              such as the implementation of new policies affecting the labor market.

