Title       : Econometric Methods for Structural Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0112095

Award Number: 0112095
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115326             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack R. Porter jporter@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This proposal contains projects that develop statistical econometric methods
              for certain economic models of interest. The econometric issues considered
              include estimation in dynamic auctions, optimal estimation of procurement
              auction and job search models, and estimation of certain kinds of economic
              shifts or breaks. A substantial empirical project on daily auctions in the
              deregulated electric utility market in England and Wales applies some of the
              econometric tools. Our estimates are used to determine profitability and
              examine the incentives to invest in new capacity. Our model and estimates could
              also be used to consider outcomes associated with alternative auction designs
              or to analyze possible collusion among suppliers in this market
     For the
              empirical project on multi-unit electricity auctions, we have obtained a
              license to use the actual software used by the auctioneer  to determine price
              and quantity outcomes (given bids), and we are also obtaining the three most
              recent years of data. With software and data in hand, we use an equilibrium
              model of firm supplier behavior to estimate start-up and fixed costs for each
              generator. These costs will then be used to examine profits and investment
              incentives. We will also incorporate a cost of capital approach to maintenance
              and availability decisions.

The estimation method to be used in the
              empirical electricity auction project is developed in detail due to its more
              general applicability in a variety of auction settings. Similar in spirit to an
              Euler equation approach, our econometric method uses the first order conditions
              as the basis for moments of estimation. This approach avoids the computational
              difficulty associated with numerically solving for optimal bidding strategies.
              The technique extends the approach of Berry and Pakes (2000), which was
              designed for estimation of oligopolistic models, to work in dynamic auctions. A
              key challenge to a first order condition approach in auctions is the inherent
              discontinuity in the firm profit function. This discontinuity leads to a
              nondifferentiability that  makes approximation of the first order condition
              difficult. We overcome this difficulty with a semiparametric smoothing
              technique and obtain parameter estimates at a nonparametric rate.
      Next,
              we consider parameter-dependent support models which include certain auction
              models as well as production frontier models, and some search models. While
              estimation in these models has been studied broadly, we examine what estimators
              are most efficient. We use LeCam's theory of statistical experiments to show
              that the maximum likelihood estimators are not asymptotically efficient in such
              nonregular models, while Bayes' estimators are.
      In another project,
              efficient estimation in structural break models is studied. Again a limit of
              experiments approach will be used to explore efficiency and other issues in
              traditional unknown change point models. Another  project considers estimation
              of breaks in a nonparametric regression curve model. Such estimates are useful
              in certain regression discontinuity settings.

