Title       : ITR/IM: Labscape: Ubiquitous Computing for Experiment Capture in the Biology
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0112997

Award Number: 0112997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349219             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gaetano Borriello gaetano@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence F. Arnstein  (Principal Investigator former)
              B. Robert Franza  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1657,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of Labscape is to enable individual lab workers to contribute to a
              fine-grained formal representation of ongoing lab activities i.e., to build the
              database by doing the work, without having to stop and write things down in a
              notebook or to enter information into a computer. By eliminating the redundancy
              of doing the work and then recording it, accuracy and completeness will be
              improved. And, by capturing information at a finer detail than possible for
              manual entry systems, varied and novel applications can be supported. This
              research supports the development of both an effective scientific working
              environment and an effective scientific learning environment but supporting
              better artifacts arising from the work or learning.. There are two primary
              research thrusts of this proposal. The first is the highly domain specific
              question of how and what data should be captured in the physical context of
              performing an experiment -- this is both a data representation and a
              human-computer interaction problem. The required domain expertise is derived
              from close cooperation with the University of Washington's Cell Systems
              Initiative (CSI) and its corporate and academic affiliates. The second question
              is how to obtain good system properties in distributed laboratory environments
              characterized by high degrees of device and personal mobility. For this
              application, security, reliability, and functional extensibility are some of
              the most important properties. These issues will be investigated in concert
              with UW's Portolano program whose objective is to develop general device,
              networking, middleware, and programming technologies for ubiquitous computing
              applications.
