Title       : Evaluating the Role of Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) in Axonal Outgrowth Using
               AChE Knockout Mice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0112111

Award Number: 0112111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46800              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Jett djett@jhsph.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1228,9138,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0112111
Jett

Abstract

The morphology of neurons is a primary determinant
              of connectivity patterns in the adult nervous system, and the formation of
              functional neural circuits depends upon precise regulation of the outgrowth of
              axons from neurons during development of the nervous system.  It is clear that
              developing neurons use specific environmental cues to regulate the growth of
              axons in space and time.  One cue that is emerging as a potentially important
              factor in controlling axonal growth is acetylcholinesterase (AChE). While AChE
              is best known as the enzyme that metabolizes the neurotransmitter
              acetylcholine, recent evidence suggests that AChE also promotes axon outgrowth.
              Thus, the spatiotemporal expression of AChE in some neuronal cell types is
              consistent with its proposed role in axonal outgrowth.  Functional studies
              using pharmacological inhibitors of AChE or genetic manipulations of AChE
              levels in cultured cells further support the hypothesis that AChE promotes
              axonal outgrowth, and suggest that the morphogenic activity of AChE is not
              dependent on its catalytic activity.  It has been proposed that AChE promotes
              axonal growth via adhesive mechanisms since analyses of its structure indicate
              significant homology with cell adhesion molecules known to function in neuronal
              morphogenesis.  However the relevance of these observations to regulation of
              axonal outgrowth in laboratory animals has yet to be directly tested. Dr. Jett
              and co-workers will address this by examining axonal morphology in the
              developing central and peripheral nervous systems of the recently described
              transgenic mouse that lacks the gene for AChE.  Dr. Jett  will: (1) Determine
              if the targeted disruption of the AChE gene alters axonal growth patterns in
              the nervous system of mice; and (2) Determine if aberrations in axonal
              morphology can be rescued by addition of exogenous AChE.  The first specific
              aim will be accomplished by comparing spatial and temporal patterns of axonal
              growth of neurons in AChE knockout mice to those in wild-type mice.  Axonal
              outgrowth will be visualized using specific labeling dyes and
              immunocytochemical localization.  The gain-of-function studies proposed in the
              second specific aim will be performed by adding recombinant AChE to cultures of
              DRG neurons derived from AChE knockout mice.  Axonal morphology will be
              quantified with respect to number, length and branching using computerized
              morphometric analyses of neuronal cultures immunostained for neurofilaments. 
              It is anticipated that results from these studies will further our
              understanding of the basic mechanisms that control neuronal connectivity in the
              developing nervous system.


