Title       : Better Safe than Sorry: Precautionary Reasoning, Utility Reversals, and the
               Creation of Dominance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0112005

Award Number: 0112005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. DeKay dekay@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Fischbeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT for GENERAL PUBLIC'

Better Safe than Sorry:
Precautionary
              Reasoning, Utility Reversals, and the Creation of Dominance

How do people
              evaluate the possible outcomes of risky situations? Do these evaluations of
              possible outcomes guide people's decision-making in such circumstances?
              According to most theories of "rational" decision making, people's choices
              should be based on what they think might happen, how desirable or undesirable
              those possible outcomes are, and how likely they think those outcomes are. In
              other words, people should think about the possible outcomes before making
              decisions, so that they can make better decisions.

Sometimes, however,
              people may "jump to conclusions" before considering all of the possible
              outcomes. This seems particularly likely when one of the possible outcomes is
              very bad (for example, when people are killed as the result of a dam failure
              because a warning was not issued soon enough). Also, it appears that jumping to
              a conclusion about the preferred course of action (issuing a dam-failure
              warning, in this case) can affect the way that people think about the other
              possible outcomes (for example, issuing a warning that leads to an unnecessary
              evaluation because the dam does not fail). When people think about the possible
              outcomes only after they decide what to do, the decisions that they make may
              not be as good as possible. In particular, jumping to conclusions can lead
              people to indicate that one alternative is always better than the other (for
              example, that warning "dominates" not warning) when this is not really the
              case. Our research is designed to assess when and how people evaluate possible
              outcomes after rather than before decisions, and to assess the role of
              "precautionary reasoning" in such situations.

We propose to study these
              issues in three computer-based experiments using members of the general public.
              Experiment I is designed to discover whether putting a person in the role of
              decision maker (as opposed to a more uninvolved evaluator) increases the
              chances of jumping to conclusions and evaluating some outcomes after decisions
              are made. Experiment 2 is designed to explore the mental processes that people
              use when they jump to conclusions. Specifically, the experiment will assess how
              participants seek information about possible outcomes, how participants form
              their initial preferences among decision alternatives, and how these emerging
              preferences affect participants' evaluations and use of additional information.
              Experiment 3 will focus on the effect of uncertainty about the possible
              outcomes and the effect of ambiguity about the likelihood of the event in
              question.

The results of this research will broaden the literature on
              decision-making processes and should have important implications for the
              assessment of possible outcomes in public and private decision making. In
              addition, these studies will be among the first to address the relationship
              between the recently popularized "precautionary principle" and more traditional
              decision-making methods.

