Title       : Acquisition of A Gas Source Mass Spectrometer For Earth Sciences Research,
               University Of California, Berkeley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0112113

Award Number: 0112113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188600             (Estimated)
Investigator: B Lynn Ingram ingram@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt M. Cuffey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Manga  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0112113
Ingram

This NSF grant provides partial support for the purchase of a
              gas source isotope ratio mass spectrometer with peripheral sample preparation
              attachments, to be housed in the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences at
              the University of California, Berkeley. The equipment includes an automated
              water and carbonate preparation system and an elemental analyzer.  The
              instrumentation will be primarily used by the research groups of the three
              Principal Investigators B. Lynn Ingram, Michael Manga, and Kurt Cuffey.  The
              Department of Earth and Planetary Science has recently provided newly upgraded
              space to house the requested equipment. The requested package will greatly
              enhance the research capabilities of students, postdoctoral fellows, and
              faculty in the Departments of Earth and Planetary Science and Geography, and on
              the U.C. Berkeley campus in general.  Research areas include the use of carbon,
              oxygen, and hydrogen isotopes in paleoclimatological and paleoenvironmental
              reconstructions using estuarine, wetland, lacustrine, and coastal marine
              sediments and corals (Dr. Ingram, Earth and Planetary Science Department), the
              use of oxygen and hydrogen isotopes as tracers in hydrogeologic systems (Dr.
              Manga, Department of Earth and Planetary Science), and the use of oxygen and
              deuterium isotopic ratios of water and ice in glaciologic research (Dr. Cuffey,
              Department of Geography).  Other users of the proposed mass spectrometer
              facility from the Department of Earth and Planetary Science include James
              Kirchner (watershed hydrology and biogeochemistry, and surface process
              geomorphology), Walter Alvarez (asteroid impacts, tectonics of the
              Mediterranean region, stratigraphy of pelagic limestones), Dr. George Brimhall
              (mineral resources, low temperature geochemistry, soil geochemistry), and Dr.
              William Berry (global climate change and paleogeographic, oceanographic and
              life changes in the Paleozoic). Another potential user from the Department of
              Geography is Roger Byrne (historical biogeography, paleoenvironments of
              California and Mexico, and pollen analysis). 
***

