Title       : A Feasible Uniform Standard for Deep Citation of Social Science Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0112072

Award Number: 0112072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $805102             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Alt jalt@latte.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Political Science Infrastructure project creates a uniform citation
              standard for social science data sources.  Analogous to the impact of standards
              for citing textual sources, this facilitates connections between research and
              researchers.   It thereby improves the scientific process and advances the
              accumulation of knowledge.  The use of standard data source citations expands
              replication efforts and eases these efforts, increasing researcher productivity
              and allowing more resources to be devoted to new research.   Science progresses
              as scientists create more links with other scientists.  Text references are
              done so often that they are taken for granted for how fundamentally important
              they have become.  In the last 50 years, quantitative work has become roughly
              half of what journals publish and we there is no comparable citation standard
              for data.   This project builds a simple yet critical piece of infrastructure,
              a uniform standard for deep citation of data, offers startling and significant
              savings of time and resources and consequent gains in research
              productivity.

One might conclude that the explosive growth of electronic
              press and of electronic data dissemination would solve the problem of linkages
              between cited and source data.   The amount and rate of knowledge in
              circulation certainly has increased dramatically, yet in the absence of uniform
              standards for citing data the problem is being exacerbated, not resolved. 
              Given the short average duration of URLs on the web, the growing citation of
              online data sets is a problem, or possibly an opportunity, but definitely not
              an answer.   It is obvious that an online source cited in a manuscript printed
              out today may note be the same source available at the web address even
              tomorrow, let alone when the manuscript is published or at some future date. 
              Citations to sources that cannot be retrieved are useless.

Deep citation of
              text means that one text source can unambiguously reference another source or
              any portion of that source in a manner such that the source can be retrieved by
              another reader years or decades hence.   For books, the author, title,
              publisher, and page number is enough to retrieve any specific phrase
              referenced.   Deep citation of data means the same, but involves new
              technological issues, issues that are addressed in this project.  Readers need
              to be able to retrieve the original data set, in the same version, identify the
              same variables, use the same recodes, and in some instances be able to conduct
              the same analysis.   To facilitate this process, the investigators develop
              uniform citation standards for social science publishing and create a test-bed
              or prototype tools for electronic linkage of data citations and source
              data.

Political science as a discipline has been in the forefront
              historically in the building of social science infrastructure, including
              creation of the world's largest archive of social science data (the ICPSR),
              development of the first general-purpose commercial statistical packages
              (SPSS), and the ongoing data dissemination developments at the Virtual Data
              Center.  Each development originated from within political science, and greatly
              benefited political science research.  But each also represents the
              discipline's continuing contribution to the infrastructure of scientific
              research well beyond the disciplines own intellectual boundaries.   This
              project will have implications as broad.

The investigators proceed on two
              fronts, first in the development of a standardized digital signature for cited
              data, second to create tools to electronically connect and to retrieve data
              from source data.  In order to establish uniform data citation standards and
              create new tools for electronic linkage of data citations and sources the
              researchers capitalize on the digital library work already in progress at the
              Harvard-MIT Data Center for development of a virtual data center (VDC).  This
              project can seamlessly extend the VDC platform at low marginal cost and adds
              substantial value to the VDC system as a public good in perpetuity.  In this
              project the VDC is extended to an area where it was not originallydesigned but
              for which it proves to be a very powerful tool.






