Title       : ITR/IM: Collaborative Research: Development of a Western North American Volcanic
               and Intrusive Rock Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0112738

Award Number: 0112738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68487              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen F. Glazner afg@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1655,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0112738
Glazner

This grant is supported through funds from both the NSF
              Information Technology Research Program and the Department of Defense, China
              Lake Naval Air Weapons Center, Geothermal Program.  In a collaborative effort
              between the Universities of Kansas, Colorado, North Carolina and the Carnegie
              Institution of Washington, with assistance from the USGS-Reston, the PI's will
              compile existing age, chemical, and isotopic data from Late Cretaceous to
              Holocene extrusive and intrusive igneous rocks from the western U.S., British
              Columbia, and northern Mexico into a web-accessible electronic database. The
              resultant product, the Western North America Volcanic and Intrusive Rock
              Database (NAVDAT), will be integrated into a geographic information system
              (GIS) to allow visualization of complex age-compositional patterns in volcanism
              throughout the study region. Ultimately, they will also develop any necessary
              relational and graphical tools to allow users of the database to address a wide
              variety of issues concerning the geologic evolution and present volcanic state
              of the western U.S.  Data entry will be undertaken at "nodes" established by
              each PI at their home institutions-each PI will be responsible for data
              compilation from literature, University, and DOE sources and for the creation
              of metadata for igneous rocks in the geographic areas of their expertise. Dr.
              Jeff Grossman (USGS, Reston) will be contracted to compile igneous rock age and
              data for NAVDAT from USGS sources. The central hub location for NAVDAT will be
              the University of Kansas. Here NAVDAT will be created and maintained, and a
              toolbox generated of geochemical and GIS routines. The basic NAVDAT IT
              architecture will use a combination of an Oracle relational database server,
              housed in the Kansas Geological Survey (KGS) at KU, in communication with a
              server housing the web server, the toolbox, a web development environment, and
              an Internet Map Server. The KGS will work in cooperation with the KU PIs to
              develop, update, and maintain the relational database component of NAVDAT on
              the DBMS servers at KGS.  The entire database will be accessible by researchers
              around the world with a currently available, minimal web browser. 
***

