Title       : Acquisition of a Scanning Probe Microscope for Undergraduate Nanoscience
               Education and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0112217

Award Number: 0112217
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy W. Hanks Tim.Hanks@FURMAN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura L. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey T. Petty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Furman University
	      3300 Poinsett Highway
	      Greenville, SC  29613    864/294-3468

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a joint award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program in
              DMR and the Major Research Instrumentation program to Furman University. The
              award is for the acquisition of a scanning probe microscope for the
              characterization and manipulation of nanometer size materials. The study of
              materials in the nanometer  regime is of fundamental importance to a host of
              emerging technologies. SPM is by far the most important tool for resolving
              nanometer size features of materials as well as for investigating material
              properties that are significant over that distance scale. The purchase of a
              Dimension 3001 SPM will allow Furman University to introduce the concepts
              central to nanoscience in various undergraduate courses as well as to enhance
              ongoing nanoscience research effort. Ongoing projects that will be directly
              impacted by this acquisition include: The characterization of nanostructures on
              the surfaces of electronically conducting polymers; Investigation of the
              formation and structure of nanoporous organic crystals and thin films; The
              design and operation of biosensors; The self-assembly of platinum complexes
              into monolayers; Dynamic studies of additive migration in polymer films, as
              well as several others.

This is a joint award from the Instrumentation for
              Materials Research program in DMR and the Major Research Instrumentation
              program to Furman University. The award is for the acquisition of a scanning
              probe microscope (SPM) for the characterization and manipulation of nanometer
              size materials.  The announcement of the National Nanotechnology Initiative
              (www.nano.gov) illustrated the growing importance of nanometer-sized structures
              to the scientific and technological infrastructure of the United States. The
              SPM will enhance undergraduate education and research in the field of
              nanoscience. The instrument will be used both to expose students to the unique
              features of matter in this size regime and to investigate questions ranging
              from the interaction of molecules with DNA to the design of materials for
              optical computing. In addition to generating scientifically significant
              results, this instrument will be used to produce educational materials for the
              undergraduate educational community and to prepare students for graduate work
              in nanoscience and technology.


 


