Title       : ITR: Static Timing of Interrupt-Driven Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0112628

Award Number: 0112628
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $432900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jens Palsberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1667,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Proposal #01122628
Purdue Research 
Palsberg,Jens

Static Timing
              of Interrupt-driven Software

Real-time, reactive and embedded systems are
              widely and increasingly used throughout  society  (e.g.,  flight  control, 
              railway  signaling,  vehicle management systems, medical devices).  This trend
              is likely to continue, as applications  that  would  have been unthinkable only
              a few short years ago come  into  the  reach  of  ever  more  complex 
              processors.    Many   such applications  are long lived, interact with their
              environment continuously, and are under important real-time constraints.  As
              these  reactive  systems permeate  our lives, bringing us everything from
              intelligent pace-makers to tiny freshness-tracking devices in groceries, the
              need for  cost-effective, confidence-inspiring  software validation techniques
              grows proportionately.  This project focuses on building new tools for checking
              a  common  class  of reactive real-time systems known as interrupt-driven
              systems.  This proposed research has four facets that complement and support
              each other.  The first continues  our   preliminary  work  on  analyzing  seven
               commercial microcontrollers to identify a static timing analysis that is 
              sufficiently precise for a single interrupt handler.  Second, ways of
              specifying and checking timing properties for multiple interrupt  handlers are
              being investigated.  Third, a typed assembly language is being developed with
              time bounds in which timing properties can be specified in a modular way, one
              handler at a time.  Fourth, a timed interrupt-handler calculus is being
              designed that will embody our results in a language-independent way and make it
               tractable  to  prove key  properties.   The  new  tools will automatically
              derive a model of the software by static analysis and type checking, and submit
              the result  to  a model  checker.   The  tools  can  lead  to  significantly 
              reduced testing requirements, and provide support for  maintenance  throughout 
              the  system
life-cycle.

