Title       : ITR/IM+AP(GEO)Collaborative Project-Creation of a Geospatial Data System for the
               Transition Zone Between the Colorado Plateau and Basin & Range Provinces
               (Geoinformatics in Action)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0112968

Award Number: 0112968
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199496             (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Keller keller@geo.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann Q. Gates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vladik Y. Kreinovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1655,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0112968
Keller

This grant, supported through funds from the NSF/Information
              Technology Research - Small Grants Program, facilitates a joint effort between
              Arizona State University and the University of Texas at El Paso to construct an
              integrated data system focusing on the Transition zone between the Colorado
              plateau and the Basin and Range province primarily in Arizona and New Mexico.
              This region is important for the development of an integrated geological and
              spatially-referenced data system as it is of fundamental significance to the
              geologic evolution of southwestern North America.  In addition, such a system
              is timely as it can be used to address practical problems such as the effects
              of urbanization and dwindling water resources.  Construction of this data
              system will involve three main efforts: 1) compilation of many large, scattered
              and heterogeneous earth science data sets into verified, standardized, and
              documented data bases; 2) construction of web-based interfaces that allow any
              interested party to access these data, receive robust metadata describing the
              data and how best to use them, and receive information on how to add data to
              the system via structured protocols; and 3) the design and construction of an
              extensive collection of public domain software (a toolbox) that would empower
              users with the capability to use and update the data in a substantial way. 
              This project will leverage considerable support from several federal and state
              agencies including NASA, the U. S. Geological Survey, the National Imaging and
              Mapping Agency, and the Arizona Geological Survey. 
***


