Title       : Identifying Cost-Effective Environmental Policies That Address Distributional
               Concerns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0112102

Award Number: 0112102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177491             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence H. Goulder goulder@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Some pollution-abatement policies (including typical pollution taxes and
              auctioned tradeable permits) have the attraction of cost-effectiveness but
              impose a very large share of the economy-wide cost of regulation on the
              regulated firms, causing substantial losses of profit in the regulated
              industries. Other policies (such as systems of grandfathered tradeable permits)
              manage to avoid imposing such large costs on the regulated firms, but
              accomplishing this involves a very large sacrifice of cost-effectiveness, that
              is, a very large increase in the regulatory cost to the economy as a whole. The
              inability to avoid placing a large economic burden on key industries without
              significantly increasing the overall economic cost has seriously hampered the
              broader use of incentive-based and other policies that promise efficiency
              improvements.  This project analyzes and evaluates the efficiency costs of
              addressing significant distributional concerns in environmental policy. In
              particular, the project examines the cost of "insulating" producers that have
              an especially large stake in the economic outcomes of pollution policy, and
              explores how efficiency costs change as the "insulation net" becomes broader to
              protect a wider group of industrial stakeholders. It considers a wide range of
              potential instruments with the aim of identifying relatively cost-effective
              pollution-control policies that provide a reasonable degree of compensation or
              insulation to key stakeholders - thus enhancing the prospects for political
              feasibility. Policies to be considered include those involving inframarginal
              exemptions to pollution taxes, partial grandfathering of pollution permits, and
              (in the case of downstream firms) industry-specific corporate tax cuts or tax
              credits.

The research employs both analytically solved and numerical general
              equilibrium models to delineate the circumstances under which the cost of
              insulating key sectors is small. It considers the costs of avoiding serious
              impacts both on "upstream" suppliers of polluting fuels and on "downstream"
              firms that utilize such fuels intensively. The first major component of the
              project focuses on C02-abatement policies. The second component generalizes the
              analysis so that it can be applied to other pollutants such as NO2 and S02. The
              third component - to be performed in tandem with the first two - involves
              empirical work to improve key parameters of the theoretical and numerical
              models and to introduce important "bottom-up" details into the energy system of
              the numerical model.

