Title       : Functional Analysis of the Forkhead Associated Domain in Arabidopsis Thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0112278

Award Number: 0112278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Walker WalkerJ@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven R. VanDoren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

The goal of this project is to attain a better understanding of signal
              transduction pathways in plants.  These studies will focus on proteins from
              Arabidopsis thaliana that contain a novel phosphoprotein binding module known
              as the forkhead associated (FHA) domain.  The FHA domain is found in many
              signaling proteins and mediates phosphorylation-dependent assembly of signaling
              complexes.  In plants, a type 2C protein phosphatase, kinase associated protein
              phosphatase (KAPP), interacts with phosphorylated receptor-like protein kinases
              (RLKs) via an FHA domain.  RLKs are the largest class of cell surface receptors
              in plants and regulated a myriad of cellular functions.  KAPP is a negative
              regulator of RLK function and recent studies indicate kapp mutants
              developmentally arrest as seedlings.  The specific aims of the project are to
              investigate the function of KAPP in control of plant growth and development and
              to identify other components in KAPP-mediated signaling pathways.  In addition,
              because FHA domains are found in a wide variety of proteins involved in many
              different cellular processes other FHA domain-containing proteins from
              Arabidopsis thaliana will be analyzed.   This research, which will use a
              combination of molecular genetics, cell biology, and biochemistry, will
              contribute significantly to a broader understanding of cellular communication.
              

