Title       : The Cognitive Basis of Stereotype Susceptibility: A Multi-Component ERP
               Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0112541

Award Number: 0112541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435909             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nalini Ambady na@wjh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia J. Deldin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The categories that people use to organize their social world are known as
              stereotypes. Research over the past 50 years has shown that stereotypes can
              have a powerful influence on cognition and behavior. Even the subtle activation
              of a person's gender or ethnic identity can produce reliable cognitive and
              behavioral effects. When negative or unfavorable stereotypes are activated in
              memory, performance can be hindered on a variety of behavioral and cognitive
              tasks. In contrast, the activation of positive or favorable stereotypes can
              improve performance. This effect is termed "stereotype susceptibility."
              Although these effects have been clearly documented, not much is known about
              the mechanisms underlying them. This project is designed to test key
              theoretical propositions regarding possible mediators of the relationship
              between stereotype susceptibility and behavioral effects. It is proposed that
              stereotype activation alters flexible aspects of cognitive processing,
              especially attentional resources, task orientation, and working memory. To test
              these propositions, psychophysiological correlates manifested in tasks
              involving attention, expectations, working memory and orienting to particular
              stimuli will be examined with regard to their potential roles in stereotype
              susceptibility. Several ERP components, obtained by averaging the EEG activity
              across repeated presentations of a particular stimulus type, will be analyzed.
              The main objective is to integrate current social psychology and
              psychophysiology theory and research to gain insight into the cognitive
              processes that may mediate the relationship between stereotype susceptibility
              and behavior. The research should have important practical consequences and
              applications in the areas of education and public policy.


