Title       : Influence of Ocean Surface Conditions on Regional Climate of the Northern North
               Atlantic.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2001      
File        : a0112486

Award Number: 0112486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295327             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Bromwich bromwich@polarmet1.mps.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey C. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1079,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research will carry out a modeling and observationally-based
              investigation of the impact of northern Atlantic sea surface temperature
              anomalies (SSTAs) on the climate and atmo-spheric circulation variability over
              a region extending from Baffin Island to the Norwegian Sea.  Mesoscale model
              simulations are to be performed of known, high persistent, negative SSTAs that
              occurred from October 1982 to September 1984 to the west of Greenland and from
              October 1967 to September 1969 east of Greenland.  Each of these events, which
              are potentially associated with decadal-period ocean SSTAs, will use a modeling
              approach to evaluate the oceanic impact on regional temperatures, precipitation
              and atmospheric circulation variability including storm track shifts. The model
              results will be compared with SSTA sensitivity experiments in which the ocean
              has a positive warm anomaly during the same periods.  A third model sensitivity
              study will employ month-long simulations for winter and summer to investigate
              the roles of SSTAs on the movement of storms across the Norwegian Sea and into
              the Arctic, and the simultaneous tendency for the subpolar low to lie far east
              of Iceland.  Accompanying observational analyses will focus on evaluating the
              climatic impacts of a decadally varying warm SST pool in the northern Atlantic,
              especially from 1920-1940, as well as other cold events prior to 1970.  By
              examining the effects of the anomalies in regions east of Greenland and near
              Labrador, the research hopes to determine whether the previously identified
              extremely persistent anomalies in Davis Strait are unique or common.  Rotated
              principal component analyses will be used in an effort to determine links
              dur-ing all seasons between northern Atlantic SSTAs and Atlantic storm tracks. 
              Storm track data will be used to further evaluate links between the North
              Atlantic and Arctic oscillations, as well as to assess how eastward storm track
              shifts impact sea ice transport.  The end result is planned to be a
              comprehensive evaluation of the SST impact on Atlantic Arctic climate and
              circulation variability and an assessment of the dominant Atlantic storm tracks
              that impact the Atlantic and Arctic basins.  The research will also allow an
              estimate of the predictability of cyclone activity anoma-lies in the northern
              North Atlantic. These results will contribute to our understanding of high
              lati-tude climate and ocean-atmosphere interactions within the context of the
              large changes that are at present impacting the northern Atlantic and Arctic
              regions.
