Title       : Information and Equilibrium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0112018

Award Number: 0112018
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230724             (Estimated)
Investigator: Drew Fudenberg dfudenberg@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This grant  supports research on four topics  in microeconomic theory. The
              first two projects questions investigate aspects of "learning in games."  This
              theory is based on the idea that equilibrium in games arises as the result of
              repeated observations leading players to have common forecasts of opponents'
              play; it is  one of the primary justifications for the widespread use of
              game-theoretic equilibrium concepts in analyzing economic problems.  Most past
              work on learning in games has assumed that at the end of each round of play,
              all players observe everyone's actions, which means for examples that bidders
              in a sealed-bid auction get to see all of the bids, and not just the winning
              one. The first project relaxes this assumption, and studies the possible
              long-run outcomes of learning processes in games when  players get less
              information about what the other players have been doing.  A  second, and
              related, project studies the interpretation of games of incomplete information
              from the "learning in games" viewpoint.   A particular focus of the project is
              to question the plausibility of the solution concept "Nash equilibrium without
              a common prior," which has been used in an increasing number of economic
              analyzes in recent years. 
 
The third  project uses equilibrium analysis to
              study the conditions under which two competing auction houses for the same
              goods can both survive, as seems to be the case with Christie's and Sotheby's,
              and when the larger market will squeeze out the smaller one, as some conjecture
              that Ebay will do to its rivals.  A preliminary insight is that buyers may be
              willing to patronize a market where prices tend to be higher if the variance of
              the price is higher as well. The fourth project studies the equilibria of 
              infinitely repeated games with private but almost-public information and
              communication.  Simpler models of infinitely repeated games,  such as the
              repeated version of the "prisoner's dilemma" are widely used in economics and
              other social sciences, the project will extend this analysis to some cases
              where players only get imperfect and private signals of one another's actions-
              for example a firm might get evidence of a rival's secret price cuts from an
              unexpected  loss of orders. 


