Title       : ABR: The Measurement of 20th Century U. S. Economic Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0112265

Award Number: 0112265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166139             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Gordon rjg@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              During the twentieth century the U. S. economy experienced sharp accelerations
              and decelerations in the growth of multi-factor productivity (MFP) over
              medium-term intervals. This pattern of acceleration, deceleration, and
              reacceleration has been the point of departure for numerous hypotheses about
              the sources of growth earlier in the century, about the post-1972 productivity
              growth slowdown, and about the post-1995 productivity growth revival.

This
              project aims to carry out measurement projects that question the magnitude and
              timing of long-term changes in MFP growth in the U. S. since the late
              nineteenth century. There are two separate parts to the research plan. (1)
              Standard MFP data prior to World War II are not consistent with official
              postwar government series, have not been adjusted for the changing quality of
              inputs, and require further adjustment for problems in the measurement of
              capital input. (2) In what the investigator called the "Hulten-Bruegel
              Paradox," a factual inconsistency plagues any attempt to extrapolate backward
              an upward price index bias of the magnitude reported by the 1996 Boskin
              commission. Such backward extrapolation implies implausibly low levels of real
              consumption if one goes back far enough, e.g., two centuries. The paradox
              raises the possibility that for some time intervals, price indexes for major
              products may have had a zero or even downward bias.

Research on topic (1)
              has now been completed with striking conclusions. New measures of MFP show much
              less of a peak in growth during 1928-50, the period of rapid growth extends
              back further to 1891, and the puzzling previous behavior of the output-capital
              ratio is resolved. The main emphasis in the project now turns to price
              measurement. Bias in government price indexes is normally assumed to be upward,
              that is, overstating inflation. The novelty in this project is to explore the
              possibility that inflation may have been understated (or overstated by
              substantially less) in earlier decades. This possibility, which has not
              heretofore been systematically investigated, implies that MFP growth may have
              been overstated in the golden era when measured productivity growth was rapid. 
              Shelter services (both rent and homeownership) are the central focus of the
              proposed research, the aim of which is to develop new indexes of price and
              quality change for shelter over the full period from World War I to date.
              Several sources of data have been uncovered that suggest that the official CPI
              for residential rent, which is the basis for the deflation of home ownership in
              the national income accounts, may substantially understate inflation in
              quality-adjusted rents, particularly between 1925 and 1975. A useful byproduct
              of the research on the quality of residential shelter will be to provide new
              information to reassess the puzzle of negative productivity growth in the
              construction industry over the past three decades. The proposal also provides
              evidence that the CPI may understate the historic inflation rate for apparel,
              another important component of consumer expenditure. Comparisons of average
              prices paid and hedonic indexes with matched-model indexes from the same data
              source suggest the possibility of a much more rapid rate of apparel inflation
              than in the matched-model indexes or in the CPI.

