Title       : Collaborative Research: Role of Glia during Postembryonic Formation of the CNS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0112272

Award Number: 0112272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292770             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. Mesce mesce001@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1054,1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative Research: Mesce and Fahrbach 

Insect metamorphosis is
              accompanied by extensive reorganization of the central nervous system.  These
              changes are regulated by steroid hormones, and during metamorphosis insect
              neurons and glia express nuclear steroid hormone receptors.  A notable feature
              of metamorphosis in the nervous system of moths and butterflies is the
              formation of compound ganglia from individual segmental ganglia.  In the moth
              Manduca sexta, a large species easily reared in the laboratory, compound
              ganglia form shortly after the caterpillar pupates.  This collaborative project
              will test a model of compound ganglion formation in which two classes of glial
              cells are the primary steroid targets.  In this model, the giant glial cells of
              the interganglionic connectives move clusters of neurons by changes in their
              cytoarchitecture while the perineurial glial cells that wrap the central
              nervous system alter their adhesive properties to permit the neurons to move
              freely.  Experiments to be conducted at the University of Minnesota in Dr.
              Mesce's laboratory will describe the motility of giant glial cells during the
              formation of compound ganglia and will study how damage to the giant glial
              cells affects ganglionic migration and fusion.  These experiments are
              facilitated as a result of the recent discovery that a form of fasciclin II, a
              protein expressed on the surface of insect cells, can be used as a marker for
              the giant glial cells.  Experiments to be conducted in Dr. Fahrbach's
              laboratory at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign will determine the
              timing of perineurial glial cell proliferation during metamorphosis and study
              the effects of ablation of this cell population on ganglionic migration and
              fusion.  In addition, antibodies targeted to specific isoforms of the insect
              steroid hormone receptor (the ecdysone receptor, EcR) will be used to determine
              which form of the receptor is expressed by glial cells.  This is envisioned as
              a first step toward identifying steroid-regulated genes involved in regulation
              of the glial cytoskeleton and glial cell adhesion molecules.

Previous
              studies of metamorphosis of the insect nervous system have focused exclusively
              on neurons.  This project will provide new information about the developmental
              modulation of glial cell cytoarchitecture and glial cell adhesivity during the
              postembryonic life of insects.  The results are likely to generalize to all
              arthropods and, because the regulation of cell "stickiness" and cell shape are
              fundamental attributes of all multicellular organisms, to other animals as
              well.

