Title       : ITR/AP: A Live-Data Simulation with Application to Bridge Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0112930

Award Number: 0112930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $451343             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiao-Chuan Cai cai@schwarz.cs.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yunping Xi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop a new generation of numerical simulation systems using
              advanced parallel computers, mathematical models, and real-time data. Modern
              sensor technology and the Internet have made it possible to monitor closely the
              performance of structures such as highway bridges. However, there are often
              limits on the possible number of embedded sensors, and accurate prediction the
              overall structural performance therefore requires other technologies, such as
              computer modeling, at the same time. This project will merge the two
              technologies, creating a computer modeling system that incorporates the live
              data in the numerical simulation.

Using measured data as an integrated part
              of a numerical simulation is a challenging research project. Because data
              collected by the sensors must be moved continuously into the numerical
              simulation, the traditional paradigm of reading control parameters at the start
              of the computation is not possible. Instead, this project will use the ALICE
              memory snooper from Argonne National Laboratory to allow the constant
              interruption introduced by the transmission of the measured data. This will in
              turn allow a parallel computer to exchange information with remote sites
              without going through slow disk I/O. To fully integrate the sensor data with
              the computation, the project will develop new numerical schemes based on
              classical multigrid methods, but using the measured data to build the coarse
              space. The measured data will also be used as a basis for calibrating and
              validating the parameters in the mathematical model.

The new simulation
              system will be used in a high cycle fatigue test of bridge decks, which will be
              conducted in the Structures Laboratory at the University of Colorado at
              Boulder. Field tests will also be scheduled on new bridges to be constructed
              with a variety of installed sensors. These tests are part of ongoing projects
              sponsored by other agencies. The synergy of these projects will help develop
              and validate the proposed simulation system.


