Title       : Doctoral Research in Political Science: Executive Reorganizations and the
               Structure of U.S. State Legislative Committee Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a0112405

Award Number: 0112405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7250               (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Hamm hamm@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support investigation examines whether state
              legislatures organize themselves such that they achieve a parallel structure
              with the state executive branch's administrative agencies.   The purpose for
              such organizational change is to increase policy expertise, encourage more
              efficient oversight, or minimize power asymmetries between the branches. The
              importance of this question lies in the observation that both legislative and
              executive reorganizations are empirical regularities in state government, and
              yet there is a dearth of literature explaining why such reorganizations occur.
              In fact, the majority of the literature on state executive reorganizations
              concludes that these reorganizations do not meet stated goals, or, basically,
              that they do not work. What the literature on both legislative and executive
              reorganizations has missed is the relationship between the two branches of
              government. That which happens in one branch of government will affect the
              actions of the other. 

This research will demonstrate that legislatures
              react to reorganizations in the executive branch by concomitantly changing
              their own structures, and, further, that they do so in order to maintain a
              parallel structure with the executive. Thus, at its conclusion, this research
              will fill the gap in the literature regarding the rationale for government
              reorganizations.  The tests of this theory require an examination of the
              changes in the structure of committee systems and the structure of executive
              agencies.  Data concerning institutional changes in U.S. state legislative
              committee systems and U.S. state executive agencies will be collected from
              1900-1960.



