Title       : Voting, Assignment and Matching Under Dichotomous Preferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0112032

Award Number: 0112032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herve Moulin moulin@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mechanisms to select a public decision (voting), or to assign agents to objects,
              or to match a set of men and women in pairs, can not satisfy all of the basic
              requirements of desirable social choice when preferences allow indifferences
              between the indivisible decisions, or objects, or mates.  As a first step
              toward a full treatment of complete and transitive preferences in probabilistic
              voting, assignment and matching, this project explores the simple yet basic
              domain of dichotomous preferences, namely those where feasible allocations fall
              in at most two indifferent classes, good and bad, acceptable or not, utility of
              zero or utility of one.   A very appealing feature of the dichotomous domain is
              that, unlike the strict preference domain, the three requirements of
              efficiency, incentive-compatibility and fairness are compatible.   Approval
              Voting (AV) is the most natural voting mechanism in the dichotomous domain. 
              There is a finite set of outcomes - public decisions - among which one must be
              chosen.  Under AV, each agent reports a certain subset of outcomes that he or
              she approves of and the outcome that is approved by the largest number of
              voters is elected; ties are resolved by a lottery in which all winners have
              equal probability.  This project uses an axiomatic characterization of approval
              voting to determine the conditions under which a fair, efficient and group
              strategyproof (i.e., immune to misreports by any coalition at all profiles)
              voting method exists.  Time-sharing of a public facility is a rich source of
              examples where dichotomous preferences are plausible.  This project examines
              mathematical models that balance the utilitarian, i.e., choose what is desired
              by the largest number of users, and the egalitarian, i.e., guarantee a minimal
              level of satisfaction for every user.    Under the fair share requirement, the
              existence of an efficient and strategyproof rule is determined.   The project
              also addresses the more challenging question of whether or not group
              strategyproofness is within the reach of efficient and minimally fair rules
              (for instance AV does not meet this property).

The second and third models
              of the project are respectively the assignment and the bilateral matching
              problem.  Both models are formally similar and most axioms, Consistency,
              Strategy-proofness, Fair Share Guarantee, are easily adapted from the
              probabilistic voting model. One important new fact can be borrowed from the
              mathematical literature on matching: all efficient (deterministic) assignments
              (or matching) have the same number of agents receiving a good object (the same
              number of mutually acceptable pairs). Accordingly the uniform average of all
              efficient assignments (matching) is efficient among all probabilistic
              mechanisms.   A reasonable conjecture is that this solution is characterized,
              like AV, by Consistency, efficiency and symmetric treatment of agents.  Other
              interesting efficient solutions emerge as well: one can order the agents
              randomly and find the allocation maximizing lexicographically the utilities in
              that order; we could equalize as much as possible the (ex ante) utilities,
              which turns out to be the same thing as maximizing their Nash product, or as
              applying the old idea of competitive equilibrium with equal incomes. These and
              other rules are systematically analyzed in the light of their fairness and
              strategy-proofness properties.

