Title       : ITR/SI(SPIII): An Information Theoretic Approach to Secret Key Generation for
               Encrypted Communication in a Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0112560

Award Number: 0112560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $371049             (Estimated)
Investigator: Prakash Narayan prakash@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Information security is an issue of critical importance in communication
              networks. We propose a novel approach for achieving integrity,authentication
              and privacy among the nodes of a network. The principal challenge that we
              address concerns the generation and establishment of secret keys in such a
              network for subsequent secure encrypted communication among the nodes. Our
              approach, which is based on information theory, provides new insights into the
              problem of  secret key generation, and holds promise for the development of
              novel techniques and algorithms in the design of cryptosystems.

     An
              important strength of our approach, which is based on recent theoretical
              developments, lies in its ability to assure an enhanced level of information
              security. It uses a stringent notion of information theoretic secrecy or
              security rather than the notions of computational security and
              complexity-theoretic security on which all currently used cryptosystems are
              based.  The statistical notion of information theoretic secrecy guarantees that
              legitimate messages and secret keys are, in effect, concealed from an adversary
              who is assumed to possess wiretapping and eavesdropping capabilities, and is,
              furthermore, not limited in terms of computational resources. This is in
              contrast with the existing notion of security which relies on the difficulty
              currently faced in solving certain underlying computational problems; recent
              advances in factorization into primes and quantum computing point to the
              potential vulnerability of cryptosystems based on this notion of security.  A
              second important strength of our approach is that it enables a systematic study
              of secret key generation, at the outset and in layers, with different layers of
              secret keys being assigned to different subsets of nodes in the network. This
              feature is particularly relevant for guaranteeing information security in
              networks with changing topologies, particularly when some nodes are either
              disabled or cease to be authorized and reliable. In such situations, the
              surviving or remaining authorized nodes can switch from one layer of secret
              keys to another so as to maintain information security among themselves.

   
               The proposed program of research addresses several important issues associated
              with with the aforementioned generation of secret keys in a network. A prime
              objective is the establishment of secret keys by means of exchanges of
              "correlated" information over insecure public channels, and through the
              extraction of "common randomness" from noisy but secure channels; such keys
              must be concealed from an adversary who can eavesdrop on the public channels,
              and may possess additional wiretapping capabilities. Explicit \lq\lq rate
              constraints" will be imposed on exchanges between the nodes, depicting
              bandwidth limitations associated with the use of shared public channels, e.g.,
              in a wireless environment. An innovative feature, and a useful technical
              device, involves the introduction of a \lq\lq helper" node (e.g., a centralized
              or trusted server in a key establishment protocol)which, when appropriate, can
              serve to facilitate secret key generation by the nodes by furnishing them
              additional correlated information or computational resources.  In another
              significant departure from current practice, secret keys will be generated
              using randomization methods and drawing on techniques from the multi-user
              information theory of source coding and channel coding.

     Our proposed
              research is expected to lead to several significant and innovative
              contributions. Firstly, our information theoretic framework will provide new
              and valuable theoretical insights into the problem of secret key generation in
              a network of nodes,while complementing the current approach based on 
              computational complexity. Second, our use of techniques for data compression
              and channel coding in the
design of secret keys will lead to an exploration of
              novel practical techniques and algorithms for secret
key generation in layers.
               Third, our proposed framework will afford a means for a quantitative and
              comparative assessment of the extent of information theoretic security provided
              by existing secret key cryptosystems, thereby buttressing or weakening current
              claims of security.  An important component of the proposed work is the
              development of new algorithms and accompanying software for the layered
              generation of secret keys in a network. Finally, the proposed work will lead to
              potential advances in information theory through the introduction of new models
              and techniques.



