Title       : Seeking Protection and the Origin of the State: An Investigation Using
               Agent-Based Computational Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0112109

Award Number: 0112109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30465              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen W. Wilhite wilhitea@email.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9168,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Consider a simple world populated with two kinds of individuals; those who work
              and create wealth (peasants) and those who survive by taking the property of
              others (bandits). The presence of bandits creates an incentive for peasants to
              seek protection and defend their property. But protection is costly; it
              consumes resources and interferes with an individual's ability to create
              wealth. This study investigates how individuals, peasants and bandits, might
              make decisions in such circumstances and how those decisions aggregate into
              societal characteristics.

This project studies the origins and existence of
              social institutions by creating and simulating alternative environments using
              an agent-based computational economic (ACE) system. ACE is a methodology that
              grew out of the artificial life paradigm. In ACE simulations virtual worlds
              containing decentralized, autonomous, interacting agents are created and those
              agents are observed as they wrestle with the economic problem at hand. ACE
              researchers are interested in the equilibrium or steady-state characteristics
              of the system, the dynamic path leading to the steady state, and, in
              particular, the spontaneous emergence of an unplanned coordination or
              organization of these agents.   This project starts with a simple world
              populated with two kinds of individuals;  those who work and create wealth
              (peasants) and those who survive by taking the property of others (bandits).
              The presence of bandits creates an incentive for peasants to seek protection
              and defend their property.  But protection is costly; it consumes resources and
              interferes with an individual's ability to create wealth. This study
              investigates how individuals, peasants and bandits, might make decisions in
              such circumstances and how those decisions aggregate into societal
              characteristics.  The ultimate decision of the agents is greatly affected by a
              variety of environmental factors introduced to their virtual world. When there
              is little structure to constrain their activities, these societies usually
              evolve into anarchy, although small populations appear to organize and invest
              in some social protection. Such a result suggests that primitive societies
              could emerge in which groups cooperate-a state may arise-but those societies
              are likely to be quite small.

A series of alternative structures and
              constraints are introduced to this world and the resulting societies are
              compared. For example, a spatial dimension is added so that location matters.
              Neighborhood effects are introduced, i.e., agents are influenced by the
              decisions of other, nearby agents. In some models individuals find the ability
              to coerce others to contribute to social protection. Comparing the different
              social structures, their economic proficiency, and the dynamics of these
              alternative worlds yield insight into the attributes that influence cooperation
              among self-interested individuals.

