Title       : CSEDI: Collaborative Res.: Composition and Seismic Structure of the Mantle
               Transition Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0112376

Award Number: 0112376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128608             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay D. Bass j-bass@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bass 
Grand 

The investigators propose a collaborative effort between a
              mineral physicist (J Bass, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign) and a
              seismologist (S. Grand, University of Texas, Austin) aimed at elucidating the
              seismic structure and mineralogy of the Earth's transition zone, from 300-1000
              km in depth. The seismic structure will be determined in several regions with
              unprecedented resolution of the velocity jumps across transition zone
              discontinuities and the seismic velocity gradients between the jumps. The
              available mineral elasticity data and phase relations for relevant mineral
              systems will be used to calculate the compositions and proportions of
              individual phases, and the properties of candidate mantle assemblages as a
              function of depth for a range of bulk compositions. Two key experiments on the
              high temperature and pressure elasticity of beta phase and aluminous perovskite
              will be done to fill in the most pressing gaps in the elasticity data base. A
              new waveform inversion code will be used to determine acceptable fits of
              mineralogic models directly to the seismic data within certain imposed
              constraints. For example, with the percent olivine component and size of
              discontinuities fixed, they can search for allowable models of gradients that
              satisfy seismic constraints. Other initial conditions will be tried as well. In
              this way the investigators propose to define both the structure of the
              transition zone and the range of mineralogical models which are compatible with
              the seismic data in a more formal quantitative way than has been done before.
              This research will involve one student working on mineral physics aspects of
              the project at UIUC, and a student working on the seismological aspects at UTA.
              

