Title       : The Political Participation of Women Factory Workers in Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a0112077

Award Number: 0112077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7838               (Estimated)
Investigator: Beth Reingold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support investigation examines how women
              workers' participation in civic and political life differs from that of their
              male counterparts.  A related issue is the connection between workforce
              participation and participation in public life and whether these are the same
              for women and men workers.

In this proposal, it is hypothesized that womens'
              means to and types of political mobilization differ from that of men, and that
              women engaged with NGOs are more likely than other women workers to find the
              resources, rationales and opportunities to mobilize politically.  In order to
              investigate these concerns, a random sample of female and male factory workers
              in Tijuana and Puebla, Mexico will be surveyed. A smaller category of women
              workers, NGO leaders and factory managers will be interviewed.  Given the
              continued growth of foreign direct investment in Latin America, the Caribbean,
              Asia, Africa and the Middle East in similar assembly and manufacturing
              operations, the Mexican experience may well be an indicator of future
              developments in other regions around the globe. 

This project seeks to
              further understanding of the levels and types of political participation
              engaged in by women and men in the manufacturing economy of developing nations.
              It is designed to illuminate the means by which such workers become politically
              mobilized, the role that NGOs (religious and secular) may play in furthering
              democratic participation, and the contribution of such political activity to
              democratization.


