Title       : ITR/IM: A National Earth Science Knowledge Node for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0112655

Award Number: 0112655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dogan Seber ds51@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Muawia Barazangi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1655,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0112655
Seber

As part of this Information Technology Research project, the
              PIs will design and develop a US Earth Science Knowledge Node that is composed
              of diversified, regional scale, reviewed, high quality earth science data sets,
              and related web-accessible information retrieval and knowledge extraction
              tools.  This system will assist (1) earth scientists in their research, (2)
              educators in their classrooms and curriculum development, (3) students in their
              learning and self discovery process, (4) the public at large in their curiosity
              driven life-long learning efforts related to earth science phenomena that
              affect their daily lives, and (5) decision makers in their case evaluations and
              assessments. The organized knowledge node will grow to become a persistent node
              to larger scale, information technology driven research efforts undertaken to
              build distributed, interoperable, multidisciplinary data and information
              networking by various groups, such as the NSF's National Science Digital
              Library (NSDL), Digital Library for Earth System Education (DLESE), the earth
              science research initiative of Geoinformatics, and the broader efforts of
              building a Digital Earth. Data and information management has always been a
              major obstacle in sharing and accessing data.  High quality, organized, and
              ready-to-be-used data sets in the planned knowledge node will eliminate
              problems and help researchers save time and to effectively communicate
              generated and available knowledge. However, the maximum benefit of this
              knowledge system will come from its ability to enable multidisciplinary earth
              science research by providing data sets and data manipulation/analysis tools
              that will be used to understand complex earth system dynamics. The repository
              will include data sets from those researchers who do not wish to manage their
              data for longer terms. In addition, the PIs will develop a web-based mapping
              and analysis interface that will allow seamless access to data sets of interest
              and help users retrieve information fast and efficiently. 
***


