Title       : Dissertation Research: Cook Island Settlement Archaeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1992      
File        : a9217532

Award Number: 9217532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11979              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie M. Endicott  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Patrick Kirch, MS Julie Endicott, a                 
              graduate student at the University of California, Berkeley, will               
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Working in conjunction             
              with her advisor she will conduct archaeological excavations on                
              Mangaia, one of the Cook Islands. Excavation to date indicates that            
              Mangaia was settled by Polynesian peoples and developed a chieftan             
              level of society. To date however no villages have been excavated              
              and little is known about how households and larger settlement                 
              units were organized. MS Endicott will conduct large areal                     
              excavations of open terraces which contain habitation sites. Work              
              will involve the removal of overburden and careful exposure of                 
              habitation floors. The spatial distribution of artifacts and                   
              features will be recorded and artifactual, faunal and floral                   
              materials recovered will be returned to Berkeley for analysis.                 
              Sediment samples will be taken to provide information about                    
              depositional processes. Through this work MS Endicott hopes to                 
              elucidate the structural context within which household activities             
              took place, identify individual activities and note variation from             
              household to household.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Polynesian peoples have been the focus of intensive anthropological            
              study because of the extreme variation in social organization which            
              has been noted among different groups. Within a relatively short               
              time span Polynesians expanded from a Southeast Asian point of                 
              origin and populated many of the islands of the Pacific.                       
              Anthropologists believe that through comparison across island                  
              groups one can gain insight into the underlying processes of                   
              cultural adaptation and change. However to accomplish this goal one            
              must set present day groups into a broader historical context and              
              MS Endicott's work is directed towards this end. Very little is                
              known about prehistoric organization at the important household                
              level and this work will help to fill the gap.                                 
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our                  
              understanding of how cultural diversity originates and is                      
              maintained. It will also assist in the training of a promising                 
              young scientist.
