Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Estimation and Inference for Noisy Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1995       
File        : a9217866

Award Number: 9217866
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119876             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas W. Nychka   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen P. Ellner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. Ronald Gallant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One important property of a system that changes over time, such  as an economy
              or an ecosystem, is the extent to which its future  behavior can be predicted.
              This work will develop statistical  methods for quantifying predictability, and
              apply these methods  to address some open questions in ecology, epidemiology
              and  macroeconomics.  The result of this work will be an understanding  of how
              a complex system's dynamics can be divided in two parts: a  part that is a
              possibly complex function of the previous history  of the system and a random
              component that is unrelated to the  system's past behavior.  The ability to
              make predictions depends  on both of these components; moreover, knowing the
              relative  contributions of the components is necessary for understanding  how
              the system responds to external shocks.  In the past 20 years there has been
              much interest in the use of  nonlinear models to explain seemingly
              unpredictable or random  phenomena.  Most techniques for analyzing data from a
              nonlinear  dynamic system have been based on large data sets and properties  of
              deterministic models.  Such methods are not useful for  biological and economic
              systems that are subject to random  perturbations and observed over a limited
              amount of time.   Statistical methods will be developed that address these 
              situations by combining techniques of nonparametric regression  and time series
              analysis.  These statistical techniques will  enable researchers to reliably
              estimate the rules governing a  system's evolution over time (law of motion)
              and the average  response of the system to small perturbations (Lyapunov 
              exponent).  Also, at a more theoretical level, the properties of  artificial
              neural networks for approximating systems of many  variables will be studied. 
              The methods will be applied to  empirical, substantive time series in ecology
              and epidemiology in  order to quantify the predictability of the systems from
              past  history and to identify the system's response to exogenous (e.g. 
              environmental) shocks.   These methods, coupled with general  equilibrium
              economic models, will provide new evidence for  resolving a longstanding
              controversy in macroeconomics: Are  extreme fluctuations in financial markets
              natural phenomena or  are they aberrations requiring government regulation?
