Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Comparative Econometric Studies of Industrial
               Productivity and its Factors at the Firm Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1993      
File        : a9217489

Award Number: 9217489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zvi Griliches grilic@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bronwyn H. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 5918,
Abstract    :
              9217489  Griliches    This three-year award supports ongoing U.S.-France
              cooperative  research on the topic of industrial productivity.  The project's 
              investigators are Zvi Griliches, the National Bureau of Economic  Research
              (NBER), Bronwyn Hall, University of California,  Berkeley, and Jacques
              Mairesse, Ecole des Hautes Etudes en  Sciences Sociales and Institute National
              de la Statistique et des  Etudes Economiques.  The National Bureau of Economic
              Research,  under the direction of Dr. Griliches, has been conducting a major 
              study in this area for the last several years with support from  NSF.    Joint
              research to date between the U.S. and French investigators  has concentrated on
              three major topics:  comparative studies of  productivity growth; econometric
              issues in the analysis of panel  data; and the effect of output-input factor
              decisions on the  sources of productivity growth at the firm and industry
              level,  particularly in the service sector.  The investigators will  continue
              their work on econometric methods on panel data,  emphasizing those which allow
              for unbalanced panels.  Their  comparative studies of productivity growth will
              also be extended  in several directions and include factors for capacity 
              utilization, product-line diversification and the development of  firm-level
              price indices.  They also plan more detailed studies  of the contribution of
              research and development to productivity  and growth, using newly available
              French data on innovation and  patents.  Both French and U.S. investigators are
              highly regarded  experts in this field.  The project addresses important
              questions  for national economic policy in both countries.  It takes  advantage
              of U.S. and French complementary expertise and provides  access to large data
              sets in France.  Results will advance our  understanding of the influence of
              technological change and other  factors on productivity growth.  ***
