Title       : U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Science Program: Fracture Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1993     
File        : a9217543

Award Number: 9217543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emily B. Rudin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29371              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugo A. Ernst hernst@GTme.courier.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 5911,
Abstract    :
              This US-Argentina Cooperative Science award                                    
              supports the collaboration of Hugo Ernst of the                                
              Georgia Institute of Technology and Eduardo                                    
              Asta of the National Technological University                                  
              in Argentina.  The project aims to better                                      
              understand the phenomenon of crack growth in                                   
              the presence of extensive plasticity, using                                    
              nonlinear fracture mechanics methods.                                          
                                                                                             
              The researchers seek to improve methods of                                     
              fracture toughness tests, study proposed                                       
              parameters for toughness characterization and                                  
              their limitations, assess effects of specimen                                  
              size and constraint, describe fracture past the                                
              fracture mechanics regime, and determine                                       
              relations between microstructural                                              
              characteristics and mechanical properties.  The                                
              project will be comprised of testing, analysis                                 
              of experimental data, and analytical studies.                                  
              Two Argentine groups besides Asta's will                                       
              participate:  one led by Dario Jinchuk of the                                  
              Institute for Nondestructive Evaluation, the                                   
              other by Juan Perez Ipina of the University of                                 
              Comahue.  The Argentine side will benefit from                                 
              exchange with US researchers working at the                                    
              frontier of fracture mechanics methodology.                                    
              The US side will gain knowledge about the                                      
              application of fracture mechanics methods and                                  
              access to large experimental data banks that                                   
              are increasingly expensive to obtain in the US.                                
              Both sides will accrue expertise in structural                                 
              reliability under severe                                                       
              loadings, causing crack growth under elastic                                   
              plastic conditions.
