Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: The Gaseous Component of Pre-Planetary Disks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1993      
File        : a9217912

Award Number: 9217912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Strom   (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen M. Strom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald L. Snell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzan Edwards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Skrutskie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Five Colleges Inc
	      97 Sprint Street
	      Amherst, MA  010022324    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              10        Physical Sciences                       
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 5921,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports a two-year collaborative research project                  
              between Professor Stephen E. Strom and four other astronomers from             
              the Five College Astronomy Department, University of Massachusetts             
              at Amherst, and Professor Yasuo Fukui of Nagoya University.  The               
              investigators will carry out molecular line observations of                    
              circumstellar disks associated with solar-type stars spanning a                
              range in ages from t - 1 Myr to t - 50 Myr.  The goals are to                  
              determine the physical and chemical properties of circumstellar                
              disks associated with young solar-type stars and evolutionary                  
              changes in the disk gas mass from the time solar-type stars first              
              become visible to the time when all circumstellar gas has been                 
              accreted by the star, dispersed or accreted onto rocky cores to                
              form giant, gas-rich planets.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The project combines sensitive molecular line observations obtained            
              using both U.S. and Japanese mm-wave telescopes, with infrared and             
              mm-continuum measurements obtained at the NASA Infrared Telescope              
              Facility (ITRF) and the Cal Tech Sub-Millimeter Observatory (CSO).             
              The ultimate success of the project depends on using the world's               
              largest mm-wave antenna -- the 45-m Nobeyama Radio Observatory                 
              telescope -- and the Nobeyama Millimeter Wave Interferometer to                
              measure gas emission from circumstellar disks at ultra high                    
              sensitivity.  A total of nine astronomers, five from the United                
              States and four from Japan, are participating in this project.
