Title       : Fast Hierarchical Aggregation and Decomposition Algorithms for Optimal Routing
               in Data Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1996  
File        : a9217407

Award Number: 9217407
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tatsuya Suda                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Garng M. Huang huang@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Optimal routing is essential for efficient operations of                  
              computer networks over a large geographical area.  If there is a               
              sudden large disturbance to the network, severe congestion can                 
              occur, and as a result, the best existing optimal routing algorithm            
              may take a large number of iterations to steer the routing to a                
              reasonable delay level.  The aggregation based gradient projection             
              algorithm studied in this project has demonstrated speed-up ratios             
              over the existing best routing algorithm ranging from infinity to              
              3300% - 700%.  This kind of speed-up result is worthy of further               
              investigation for possible eventual implementation in large real               
              networks.  The idea of exploiting hierarchical aggregation and                 
              disaggregation-decomposition (HAD) is the cornerstone of the                   
              project.  Fast computation usually comes from imitating how nature             
              solves its own difficult computation problems.. For example,                   
              several lines of anatomical and physiological evidence suggest that            
              information processing in the cortex is fundamentally hierarchical             
              in nature.  Intimately related to the concept of hierarchy are the             
              concepts of good organization, aggregation (or summarized                      
              computation, an almost necessary mechanism for solving large                   
              problems) disaggregation (for accurate solution, details are                   
              needed), and decomposition (the classical idea of                              
              divide-and-conquer).  The HAD algorithm is the result of                       
              integrating the related concepts into a generic computational                  
              system.  The project aims to develop the HAD based algorithms                  
              for both conventional packet switching and ATM networks, to                    
              simulate the developed algorithms in a realistic network                       
              environment and to exploit the speed advantage to the fullest                  
              extent, and to establish the theoretical speed-up complexity for               
              the HAD algorithm.  This project is a joint project with Wei K.                
              Tsai of the University of California, Irvine.
