Title       : Nonlinear Optics in Single Crystal Waveguides of Organic Second and Third Order
               Optical Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1994       
File        : a9217630

Award Number: 9217630
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179798             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mrinal Thakur mthakur@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this grant are: (i)                                           
              preparation of single crystal films and                                        
              waveguide microstructures of specific                                          
              organic second and third order optical                                         
              materials, ii) studies of the off-nonlinear                                    
              optical studies will include phase matched                                     
              second order optical waveguides and time                                       
              and wavelength resolved nonlinear                                              
              refractive index measurements for the third                                    
              order optical waveguides.  The role of two                                     
              photon excitation in the enhancement of                                        
              the third order nonlinearities will be                                         
              investigated in detail.  Specific conjugated                                   
              polymers such as polydiacetylenes are                                          
              known to have extremely large nonlinear                                        
              refrafctive indices along with low                                             
              absorption coefficients in the off-resonant                                    
              domain.  Such large nonlinearities are                                         
              obtained only if the polymer chains are                                        
              organized as a single crystal.  Specific                                       
              organic molecular crystals such as                                             
              nitroanilines have very large and stable                                       
              second order nonlinearities which can be                                       
              utilized in many applications, (e.g., SHG of                                   
              infrared diode lasers), if single crystal films                                
              and waveguides can be prepared.  A                                             
              method (shear method) that we have                                           
              recently established will be utilized for the                                  
              preparation of single crystal films of these                                   
              optical materials.  Subsequently specific                                      
              waveguide microstructures will be                                              
              prepared from the films.  The nonlinear                                        
              optical measurements in the films and                                          
              waveguides will be performed using                                             
              established procedures.  As recent                                             
              measurements have shown, single crystal                                        
              polydiacetylene waveguides are highly                                          
              promising for applications in all-optical                                      
              switches and logic gates that will operate                                     
              at the subpicosecond time scale.  Similarly                                    
              various other applications are expected of                                     
              single crystal waveguides of organic                                           
              second order optical materials.  The                                           
              research as proposed is important for                                          
              fundamental understanding of the                                               
              mechanisms of the nonlinearities and                                           
              realizing practical applications of these                                      
              materials.
