Title       : Spectroscopic Studies of Blue Copper and Iron Sulfur Electron Transfer Active
               Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1995    
File        : a9217628

Award Number: 9217628
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward I. Solomon Edward.Solomon@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Professor Solomon of Stanford University will conduct                     
              studies designed to elucidate the spectroscopy of certain                      
              metalloproteins under support from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic                 
              and Organometallic Program.  The proteins of interest are those                
              that contain Blue Copper and Iron Sulfur sites, and the                        
              information to be obtained is a more detailed description of                   
              their electronic structures and the contributions of electronic                
              structure to the electron-transfer reactivity of these active                  
              sites.  Spectral methods to be used include polarized                          
              absorption, variable-temperature magnetic circular dichroism,                  
              single crystal multifrequency EPR, resonance Raman, variable                   
              energy PES, and X-ray absorption.  These experimental methods                  
              will be combined with ligand field and SCF-Xalpha-SW                           
              calculations. These techniques will be applied in studies of                   
              simple coordination complexes of Fe(II), Fe(III), Cu(I) and                    
              Cu(II). The information obtained from these studies will then                  
              allow evaluation of the influence of electronic structure on                   
              the unusual reduction potentials and rapid rates of electron                   
              transfer of the real proteins.  In addition, an analogous set                  
              of experiments will be conducted on a variety of mutant and                    
              modified blue copper proteins in order to test the deductions                  
              derived from the model studies.                                                
              %%%                                                                            
              A diverse array of sophisticated spectroscopic techniques will                 
              be used in order to learn about the bonding at the active sites                
              of two classes of metal-containing proteins.  These proteins                   
              contain either copper-sulfur or iron-sulfur centers, are found                 
              in most organisms, and function in the physiological electron                  
              transport chains.  The approach to be taken will entail                        
              detailed experimental and theoretical study of simple models of                
              the active sites, as well as experimental study of a series of                 
              modified copper proteins.  The information obtained will lead                  
              to an understanding of how the bonding at the metal sites                      
              controls the rates and energetics of reactions of these                        
              proteins.
