Title       : Dynamic and Nonequilibrium Aspects of Polymer Adsorption
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9217644

Award Number: 9217644
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225081             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Durning cjd2@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas J. Turro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The adsorption of macromolecules at interfaces of materials                    
              plays a key role in many of today's critical technologies.                     
              Many advanced materials rely heavily on the effects of polymer                 
              adsorption.  For example. impact resistant polymer blends for                  
              automotive applications and multilayer film laminates for                      
              "smart" barriers and imaging technologies enjoy dramatically                   
              improved performance and/or processibility when the                            
              interfacial regions are modified by polymer adsorption.                        
              Materials technologies relying on colloidal suspensions (e.g.                  
              coating processes and "slip-casting" for ceramics manufacture)                 
              utilize polymer adsorption for crucial improvement in                          
              suspensions properties.  Polymer adsorption also plays a key                   
              role in biomedicine.  For example, the adsorption of blood                     
              proteins is a key issue in developing protheses, blood-                        
              contacting devices and drug-delivery systems.  In the                          
              separations field, adsorption chromatography, which relies on                  
              competitive adsorption, is the most effective means of                         
              separating subtly different macromolecules.                                    
                                                                                             
              The dynamic and nonequilibrium aspects of polymer adsorption                   
              are largely unexplored.  The principal goal of this work is to                 
              study these aspects in model materials (linear homopolymers                    
              and diblock copolymers on dielectric and metal surfaces) using                 
              a quartz microbalance, ESR, and fluorescence spectroscopies                    
              and pattern photobleacing.  These methods will probe                           
              elementary dynamic phenomenal in adsorbed layers and will                      
              clarify the mechanisms of adsorption.  The results will                        
              provide a basis for controlling adsorption processes crucial                   
              in application.  The project involves close collaboration                      
              between the Department of Chemical Engineering and Chemistry                   
              at Columbia University.
