Title       : Massively Parallel Algorithms for Modeling the Structure of Liquids and
               Liquid-Solid Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1993      
File        : a9217287

Award Number: 9217287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495600             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Chelikowsky jrc@msi.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yousef Saad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 1765,9176,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides support for a collaborative research project               
              between materials science and computer science to develop and                  
              implement massively parallel algorithms for modeling the structure             
              of liquids and liquid-solid interfaces.  The grant is funded                   
              equally by the Divisions of Materials Research and Advanced                    
              Scientific Computing through the Computational Approaches to Real              
              Materials program which itself is part of the High Performance                 
              Computing and Communications Initiative.                                       
                                                                                             
              The development of novel, massively parallel computers has opened              
              new avenues for the application of electronic structure codes to               
              complex materials systems.  New codes will be implemented which                
              will take full advantage of parallel machines to examine the                   
              structure and electronic properties of liquids and liquid-solid                
              interfaces.  Currently, these systems, in particular the liquid-               
              solid interface, are not accessible to ab initio methods.  The                 
              research will employ molecular dynamics simulations using quantum              
              forces determined from ab initio pseudopotentials.  Our first                  
              effort will focus on liquids involving tetrahedral semiconductors.             
              We will calculate the electronic, structural and dynamical                     
              properties of the elemental liquids such as silicon and simple                 
              compounds such as gallium arsenide.  With respect to the liquid-               
              solid interface, we will examine the structural and dynamical                  
              properties of the interface during the melting process.                        
              %%%                                                                            
              This research will develop and implement computer programs for the             
              new generation of parallel computers in order to study the                     
              structure and electronic properties of liquid semiconductors and               
              their interface with solid semiconductors.  This work has important            
              ramifications in the processing of semiconducting materials, in                
              addition to its fundamental physical interest.  The work will also             
              develop new computer algorithms which will have importance in many             
              fields of science.  The research is funded jointly by the Divisions            
              of Materials Research and Advanced Scientific Computing through the            
              High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative.
