Title       : U.S. France Cooperative Research: Numerical Methods and Parallel Algorithms for
               Advanced Applications in Materials Preparation Process Modelling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1993  
File        : a9217212

Award Number: 9217212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12400              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Iwan D. Alexander iwan@uahtitan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              21        Mathematics                             
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5918,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This two-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research                  
              in numerical methods and parallel algorithms in materials                      
              processing.  The investigators are J. Iwan D. Alexander of the                 
              University of Alabama, Patrick Bontoux and Jalil Ouazzani of the               
              Institute for Fluid Mechanics in Marseille, France.  The objective             
              of the research is to integrate parallel computing strategies with             
              computational problems in materials processing.  The                           
              investigators will identify and develop techniques and algorithms              
              with which to solve materials processing models.  Then they will               
              apply the methods to crystal growth and transport processes in                 
              other fluid systems.  The research focuses on developing new                   
              predictive models. Current numerical methods and models are                    
              limited and large computation times are required to produce                    
              meaningful solutions.  The results of this research will advance               
              predictive capabilities in materials processing, in particular, for            
              highly complex processing situations.                                          
                                                                                             
              Dr. Alexander brings to this collaboration his expertise with                  
              materials process modeling and techniques.  The code                           
              development requirements will be significantly strengthened by                 
              the considerable expertise of the French investigators in this area            
              and in fluid dynamics. The investigators complementary expertise               
              provides a sound basis for the collaboration.
