Title       : Acquisition of a Phosphorimager
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1993     
File        : a9217589

Award Number: 9217589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel D. Richter   (Principal Investigator current)
              Earl F. Baril  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hagan A. Bayley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard B. Vallee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thoru Pederson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Fdn Biomed Res
	      222 Maple Avenue
	      Shrewsbury, MA  015452732    508/842-8921

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Six faculty members of the Worcester Foundation for                            
              Experimental Biology request funds to purchase a                               
              phosphorimager. Use of this instrument would obviate the                       
              need for prolonged autoradiographic exposure and                               
              quantitation by scanning densitometry or gel slicing and                       
              scintillation spectrometry currently necessary for several                     
              of the projects discussed herein. One project (Richter)                        
              deals with translational control during early development.                     
              Cis sequences and trans binding proteins that control                          
              translation have been identified and their isolation and                       
              cloning would be facilitated by the phosphorimager. Another                    
              project (Baril) examines the factors involved with DNA                         
              replication in human cells. Detailed analysis of the                           
              enzymatic activities of the many factors involved in                           
              replication         requires the sensitivity of a                              
              phosphorimager. The goal of a third project      (Vallee) is                   
              to understand how the mechanochemical protein dynamin                          
              produces the force required for organelle movement. Recent                     
              evidence suggests that phosphorylation plays an important                      
              role in this process and the         phosphorimager would be                   
              critical for examining this posttranslational                                  
              modification. A fourth project (Witman) deals with the                         
              generation and         control of flagellar motility in                        
              sperm and Chlamydomonas. Phosphorylation         of dynein                     
              and other proteins appears to be necessary for cell                            
              motility, whose study would be enhanced with a                                 
              phosphorimager. RNA processing is studied in the fifth                         
              project (Pederson). The activity of some proteins in  the                      
              splicing apparatus is regulated by phosphorylation, which                      
              would be analyzed more reliably and with greater speed with                    
              a phosphorimager. The sixth project deals with how protein                     
              kinase activity in Alvsia neurons affects channel function.                    
              Analysis of this function would be facilitated with a                          
              phosphorimager.
