Title       : Non-Equilibrium Phenomena in Nematic Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1994  
File        : a9217290

Award Number: 9217290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Pelcovits pelcovits@physics.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George B. Loriot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9162,9176,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Large-scale molecular dynamics simulations will be carried out on              
              a model liquid crystal system to study a variety of non-equilibrium            
              phenomena.  The phase ordering dynamics of a quenched nematic                  
              liquid crystal will be investigated with a special emphasis on the             
              role of the topological defects in the equilibration process.  A               
              very rapid quench of a nematic below its crystallization point will            
              be undertaken in an effort to create and study an anisotropic                  
              glassy system.  Algorithms will be developed so that the                       
              simulations can run efficiently on massively parallel machines.  If            
              successful, this work will further the understanding of non-                   
              equilibrium phenomena in complex fluids and anisotropic systems, as            
              well as providing the first numerical simulations of topological               
              defects in fluid systems.  It will also further develop the                    
              computational approach required to efficiently run molecular                   
              dynamics simulations on massively parallel machines.  This research            
              is jointly supported by the Divisions of Materials Research and                
              Advanced Scientific Computing as part of the Computational                     
              Approaches to Real Materials Initiative which is a component of the            
              High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative.                      
              %%%                                                                            
              This computational research will focus on understanding the                    
              properties of liquid crystals, such as are used in video displays,             
              when they are rapidly cooled.  During the cooling process various              
              defects are frozen into the liquid crystal and affect its                      
              properties.  This cooling process is too complex to be modeled                 
              analytically and is only amenable to computational analysis.  Thus,            
              this project, which is jointly funded by the Divisions of Materials            
              Research and Advancd Scientific Computing, involves both condensed             
              matter physicists and computer scientists.  The computational work             
              will be implemented on the emerging parallel computers.  The                   
              research is supported through the Computational Approaches to Real             
              Materials program within the High Performance Computing and                    
              Communication Initiative.
