Title       : U.S.-Ethiopia Dissertation Improvement Research on Petrologic and Geochemical
               Investigation of Volcanism in theMain Ethopian Rift-Afar Transition Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1992      
File        : a9217656

Award Number: 9217656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frances Li                              
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6950               (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Hart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 5928      AFRICA AND ASIA,OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1557,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              An Ethiopian national, Tadiwos Chernet, (Ph.D.                                 
              candidate under the supervision of the PI),                                    
              will perform field work in Ethiopia to                                         
              complement initial field studies conducted by                                  
              the PI and the graduate student during 1990.                                   
              The goal of the research is to establish the                                   
              geochronologic, geochemical, and petrologic                                    
              framework from which important details bearing                                 
              on the tectonic and magmatic evolution of the                                  
              transition zone between the Main Ethiopian Rift                                
              (MER) and Afar can be elucidated.  The                                         
              elemental and Sr isotope geochemistry will be                                  
              performed in-house by T. Chernet; the Nd and Pb                                
              isotope work will be done by the PI, using the                                 
              facilities of the Department of Terrestrial                                    
              Magnetism, Carnegie Institution of Washington.                                 
                                                                                             
              This type of geochemical and geochronologic                                    
              study is of great interest to the cooperating                                  
              institution, the Ethiopian Institute of                                        
              Geological Surveys, particularly from the                                      
              standpoints of gaining a clearer understanding                                 
              of the duration and thermal evolution of major                                 
              silicic volcanic centers and of gaining                                        
              valuable age and chemical information to aid in                                
              ongoing geologic mapping projects.  Thus, the                                  
              information derived will assist their ongoing                                  
              efforts to harness the geothermal potential                                    
              associated with many of northern MER and Afar                                  
              silicic complexes.  It is envisioned that                                      
              collaboration between the PI and the                                           
              cooperating institution in Ethiopia will                                       
              continue well beyond this particular research                                  
              effort.  This project is relevant to the                                       
              objectives of the Science in Developing                                        
              Countries (SDC) Program with regard to                                         
              strengthening scientific and engineering                                       
              infrastructure in developing countries and                                     
              increasing cooperation between U.S. scientists                                 
              and engineers and their counterparts in                                        
              developing countries.
