Title       : SGER: Ecosystem Recovery Following Three Centuries of Livestock Grazing in
               Central New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1992   
File        : a9217599

Award Number: 9217599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25245              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Parmenter parmentr@sevilleta.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Lightfoot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Sevilleta LTER study site has become a regional focal point in a               
              debate centered on whether total release from grazing (a refuge)               
              is detrimental to diversity and primary productivity.  While                   
              detailed studies are occurring on the Sevilleta, there are few                 
              comparative studies on adjoining grazed land or land recently                  
              released from grazing pressure.  The current Sevilleta LTER                    
              Program is being conducted on a site that may itself be undergoing             
              successional changes following release from over three centuries               
              of intensive livestock grazing.  It is imperative to isolate and               
              understand the post-grazing changes on the Sevilleta landscape in              
              order to identify future sources of long-term ecosystem changes;               
              without a separation of grazing influences, efforts to                         
              attribute observable ecosystem changes to other causes, such as                
              climate change or anthropogenic factors, will be confounded.                   
                                                                                             
              The Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge was established in 1973,                
              and livestock exclusion fences were erected in that year.  The                 
              summer of 1972, one year prior to livestock removal, was an                    
              unusually wet period, and was followed by a strong El Nino during              
              the winter-spring of 1972-73.  The combination of a very wet                   
              summer followed by a wet spring may have only a 20 year frequency              
              pattern.  In view of the importance of moisture regimes on arid                
              ecosystem functioning, the antecedent conditions on the Sevilleta              
              in 1973 may have fostered an unusual "successional trajectory"                 
              that would be difficult, if not impossible, to simulate                        
              experimentally in the field.                                                   
                                                                                             
              However, an opportunity to perform just such an experiment has                 
              arisen as a result of the unusually wet weather patterns that have             
              occurred in central New Mexico in 1991-92.  The Sevilleta                      
              experienced an extremely wet summer in 1991.  The Sevilleta is                 
              presently in the midst of a strong El Nino that is producing late              
              winter and spring moisture.  The current weather conditions have               
              set the stage for studies that could simulate the transition that              
              occurred on the Sevilleta after 1973.  This combination of                     
              climatological events may occur only rarely (once every few                    
              decades) and it is important to initiate studies immediately                   
              to take advantage of these unusual circumstances.                              
                                                                                             
              This SGER project is based on (1) the fundamental need for site-               
              specific information on ecosystem effects of livestock removal,                
              coupled with (2) the coincidental occurrence of weather conditions             
              that are very similar to those of nearly 20 years ago.
