Title       : RUI: Collaborative Research: Role of Localized Material RNAs in Embryonic
               Patterning in Xenopus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1994      
File        : a9217637

Award Number: 9217637
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carey R. Phillips cphillip@bowdoin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The amphibian egg is axially symmetric before fertilization: its               
              contents are polarized along one dimension, the animal-vegetal                 
              axis. The earliest step in the establishment of the embryo's                   
              bilaterally symmetric body plan, dorsal-ventral axis                           
              specification, occurs after fertilization, but before the onset                
              of zygotic gene expression. Thus, all the components necessary                 
              for this patterning event are already present at fertilization,                
              and become asymmetrically localized or modified during dorsal-                 
              ventral axis specification. This project proposes to identify                  
              such components, determine the mechanisms of their localization,               
              and assess their roles in dorsal-ventral patterning in the frog                
              Xenopus laevis. Two cDNA libraries enriched for either dorsal or               
              ventral transcripts in embryos were recently constructed. Several              
              clones representing regionally enriched maternal transcripts have              
              been isolated. Digoxigenin labelled antisense RNA probes are                   
              presently being used for in situ hybridization analysis to learn               
              the details of localization of the corresponding RNAs during                   
              oogenesis and early development. The spatial, temporal, and                    
              quantitative changes in expressions of specific RNAs will be                   
              compared with the final morphology of embryos subjected to                     
              centrifugation, UV irradiation, and over expression of injected                
              maternal mRNAs. These analyses will be used to ascertain which                 
              transcripts are involved in the initiation of early pattern                    
              events. By providing new information on the relationships between              
              the spatial localization of some maternal transcripts relative to              
              the regulation of specific zygotic transcripts, these experiments              
              will lead to a better understanding of the relationship between                
              egg organization and embryonic patterning.
