Title       : SGER: Ontogeny of GnRH Expression Vertebrate Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1992    
File        : a9217837

Award Number: 9217837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45355              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew H. Bass ahb3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is a decapeptide that was                
              isolated from brain in 1971.  With the development of sophisticated            
              antibody technology, the GnRH neuronal network was demonstrated to             
              be a complex, heterogenous system, comprising three or more                    
              discrete neuronal groups and spanning vastly different regions of              
              the brain, including the ganglion of the terminal nerve within the             
              olfactory bulb and nerve, the basal forebrain including the                    
              preoptic area, and the caudal diencephalon or midbrain region.                 
              Moreover, GnRH neurons project to targets within and outside the               
              brain and serves as both a hormone and a neurotransmitter.  It is              
              implicated in controlling the expression and maintenance of                    
              neuroendocrinological traits underlying behavioral reproductive                
              mechanisms.  This Small Grant for Exploratory Research award to Dr.            
              Bass will facilitate the development of sensitive and specific                 
              molecular tools which will be instrumental in providing new                    
              insights into the cellular and molecular bases for hormonal control            
              of sexual differentiation of brain and behavior.  He will complete             
              the sequence analysis and sequence comparisons of cDNAs for GnRH               
              in a specific species that serves as a model to examine intrasexual            
              dimorphisms in brain and behavior.  Dr. Bass will use the antisense            
              ribonucleic acid transcripts generated from the cloned cDNAs and               
              in situ hybridization histochemistry to identify the expression                
              patterns and quantitate levels of novel GnRH transcripts in the                
              brain of juvenile and adult animals with distinct reproductive                 
              phenotypes.  The development of these new sensitive molecular tools            
              will open up new avenues into this emerging research area.  The                
              research will lead to a better understanding of the role that GnRH             
              plays in basic mechanisms underlying reproducive maturation,                   
              physiology and species-typical behaviors.
