Title       : Architictures for Digital Multimedia On-Demand Services in Integrated Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1995     
File        : a9217260

Award Number: 9217260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tatsuya Suda                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252026             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkat Rangan venkat@cs.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Further advances in networking coupled with rapid advances in             
              storage technologies will make it feasible to build multimedia                 
              on-demand servers capable of providing services similar to those of            
              a neighborhood videotape rental store on a metropolitan-area                   
              network.  In this research we investigate architectures for                    
              multimedia servers that can permit multiple subscribers to                     
              interactively record and playback multimedia objects over                      
              integrated computer networks.  We address two main requirements in             
              the development of such a multi-subscriber multimedia server: (1)              
              Continuity of playback of each media constituting a multimedia                 
              object, and (2) mutual synchrony of playback of the different media            
              constituting a multimedia object.  In order to address the                     
              continuity requirement, we develop admission control algorithms                
              with which a multimedia server can satisfy the maximum number of               
              subscribers simultaneously without violating continuity of playback            
              for any of them.  One such algorithm is a quality proportional                 
              scheme that retrieves media units at a rate proportional on an                 
              average to their respective playback rates, but uses a staggered               
              toggling technique by which successive numbers of media blocks                 
              retrieved are fine tuned individually to admit and service an                  
              optimal number of subscribers simultaneously.  Initial performance             
              estimation shows that the quality proportional policy is an order              
              of magnitude more scalable compared to straightforward admission               
              control policies such as servicing one subscriber per disk head and            
              round robin servicing of subscribers.  During retrieval of a                   
              multimedia object, mediaphones that playback the different media               
              components of the object may have recording and playback rate                  
              mismatches.  Furthermore, emerging integrated networks such as ATM             
              are expected to introduce jitter that can nevertheless be bounded              
              in the transport of media units from servers to mediaphones.  In               
              order to ensure synchronous playback of multimedia objects, we                 
              study  a feedback technique in which a multimedia server uses                  
              lightweight messages called feedback units generated by mediaphones            
              and transmitted back to the server to detect asynchronies during               
              playback.   We study various resynchronization policies such                   
              as aggressive, conservative, and probabilistic and compare their               
              performance for video/audio playback.  Initial performance                     
              estimation shows that whereas aggressive policies are expected to              
              perform best only at lower playback rates, conservative policies               
              are expected to perform best only at higher playback rates.  In                
              contrast, probabilistic policies have the potential to perform                 
              uniformly well at all playback rates.  The policies and algorithms             
              developed in this project form the basis for a prototype multimedia            
              server being developed at the UCSD Multimedia Laboratory.
