Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Qualitative Properties inDynamics and
               Mathematical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1993     
File        : a9217469

Award Number: 9217469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack K. Hale HALE@MATH.GATECH.EDU.  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evans M. Harrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey S. Geronimo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonid Bunimovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Konstantin M. Mischaikow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 5918,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research                
              in applied mathematics.  The proposal involves two research                    
              groups in the U.S. and France led by Jack Hale of the Georgia                  
              Institute of Technology and Genevieve Raugel of the University                 
              of Paris, South (Orsay).  The investigators propose to study the               
              qualitative properties of infinite dimensional dynamical, physical             
              systems.  Such systems are usually described by partial                        
              differential equations (PDE) or by infinite systems of ordinary                
              differential equations (ODE) or by maps of some infinite                       
              dimensional sets.  Utilizing these methods and others related to               
              mathematical physics and quantum systems, the investigators will               
              investigate some concrete problems:  (1) the properties of flows               
              as defined by dissipative PDE; (2) notions of turbulence (space-               
              time chaos), coherent structures, and intermittency in extended                
              dynamical systems; and (3) relationships between the properties                
              of diffusion in phase space and between the spectrum of the                    
              Schrodinger operator and repellers of dynamical systems.                       
                                                                                             
              The Georgia Tech group approaches problems of dynamical                        
              systems through the study of ordinary differential equations and               
              maps. They bring to this collaboration expertise in functional                 
              analysis and mathematical physics.   The Orsay group consists of               
              specialists in partial differential equations as applied to problems           
              in dynamical systems.  They are well versed in operator theory                 
              and C*-algebras.  Their combined efforts will extend the theory                
              of dynamical systems to partial differential equations.
