Title       : Towards Nebraska's Statewide Electronic Library: Planning the Future
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1994   
File        : a9453060

Award Number: 9453060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur W. St. George                    
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan Giesecke joang@unllib.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Busch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9453060  Giesecke    This planning grant, submitted by the University of
              Nebraska and the Nebraska Library  Commission, addresses two key barriers to
              implementing an electronic library in Nebraska as  identified in two recent
              statewide conferences: compatibility of network systems and training for  end
              users.  The project will also identify content that should be available through
              the network  system.  Participants will include key stakeholders and agencies
              currently involved in electronic  delivery of information.  The results will be
              incorporated into ongoing planning efforts.    The project goal is to advance
              planning for the electronic library in the state by providing a  structure to
              identify content, training and software that will enable libraries and
              information  centers throughout the state, including those with special
              resources in law, medicine, and science  education, to contribute to the
              Nebraska Electronic Library.  These issues have not been  addressed in the
              current planning efforts in the state.  The objectives of the plan are to: (1) 
              develop recommendations on types of information resources that need to be
              available  electronically for the citizens of Nebraska; (2) identify training
              needs and develop model training  programs to meet citizen needs; (3) test and
              evaluate options for advancing network access  through ATM technology, through
              use of the z39.50 protocol, and through client/server  technology in the
              medical area, and; (4) develop implementation, assessment, and evaluation 
              strategies for the recommendations and facilitate transferability of these
              proposals to efforts by  other states.  This planning process will build on
              planning activities already in place in  Nebraska, and a recently funded
              Corporation for Public Broadcasting grant to create pilot  Community Wide
              Education and Information services.    Methodologies for development of
              recommendations and for the testing of software/hardware  pilots include: (1)
              electronic survey of library and information centers to  solicit input on
              content  and training; (2) a planning retreat of key stakeholders to formulate
              recommendations based on  input from the survey and from site visits to select
              states working on electronic library issues;  (3) testing of user acceptance of
              software options through user surveys and obtrusive  observation, and by
              evaluating predetermined search question results, and; (4) testing hardware 
              options through time trials and reliability tests.    By completing a statewide
              plan for the content of an electronic library system and for a model  training
              program, the libraries will ensure that future development is compatible with
              existing  efforts and meets the information needs of Nebraskans.  The model
              developed as part of this  plan will be applicable to other states.
