Title       : MPWG: Women's Retention and Leadership Development in Science, Engineering and
               Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1995  
File        : a9453680

Award Number: 9453680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lola E. Rogers                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98046              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karan L. Watson watson@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sara Alpern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela R. Matthews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramona L. Paetzold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453680  Watson    Texas A&M University will develop a model program in science,
              engineering and mathematics  (SEM) for women undergraduate and graduate
              students, with courses and activities, including  mentoring, to encourage them
              to complete degrees in SEM fields, and consider careers in  research.  The
              courses will be connected with special team training activities for women in 
              SEM.  Seminars on gender issues, as they relate to students in these fields,
              will be planned and  facilitated by students for their peers, faculty,
              employers, and public school educators.  The  project will involve students,
              faculty, and staff in the planning and presentation of Faculty  Workshops
              relative to the classroom, laboratory and general environment for women in SEM.
                The overall goal is to improve the retention of women in these fields by
              enhancing their sense  of belonging and acceptance, and to begin to change the
              faculty/staff who have created the  environment contributing to women's lack of
              retention in SEM.  Particular attention will be  given to issues which concern
              women who also must deal with professional barriers to  development or added
              burdens imposed by society.    To effect retention of women in SEM, courses
              which apply toward degree credit will be  developed at the freshman, junior,
              and graduate level.  The freshman course will cover the  history of women in
              science, engineering and mathematics, and fulfill a three-hour humanities 
              requirement for any curriculum on campus.  The course will have a weekly
              laboratory  component which will be linked to the achievements of one or more
              of the women studied in  class.  The junior course will cover the Sociology of
              Women in non-traditional fields, especially  science, engineering, and
              mathematics, and will fulfill an upper level social science requirement  in any
              curriculum on campus.  It will cover topics such as:  social structure of
              gender and  knowledge, the law, access and opportunities, and politics and
              unwritten policies.  The intent  is to he lp develop professional and personal
              skills which can enhance careers in SEM.  The  graduate courses, two one-hour
              seminars, will discuss procedures and politics, as well as make  suggestions
              for excellence in university research and teaching careers.  Course materials,
              (texts,  instructor manuals, and laboratory manuals) will be prepared for
              dissemination of the courses  to other campuses.  ***
