Title       : Physics Education in the Two-Year Colleges: A Neglected Resource
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a9453180

Award Number: 9453180
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385680             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Neuschatz mneuscha@aip.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geneva Blake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Inst of Physics
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403842    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Michael Neuchatz                                                                
                           DUE 9453180  American Inst. of Physics                            
                                                      FY95 $199,988  College Park, MD  20740 
                                                                                   FY96
              $93,000                                                                        
                                     FY97 $92,692    Two-year colleges have the potential to
              provide education programs which will produce a technically sophisticated
              workforce able to  respond to the changing needs of the U.S. economy. In
              addition, there have been calls to reform and update the science and 
              technology programs at these institutions.  Yet, surprisingly little is known
              about existing programs or the faculty who lead them. In  order to assess the
              success of the reforms that are being proposed, it is essential to have an
              understanding of current conditions in  these programs.    There are several
              reasons to examine physics in detail at the two-year college level: 1) The
              existence of detailed information about  physics education at both the high
              school and four-year college level will allow physics education at the two-year
              college level to be  placed in a broader context; 2) Physics courses are among
              the core requirements for most technology-based programs at two-year  colleges,
              and thus help define the overall quality of these programs; and 3) Since
              physics is relatively well-defined as a discipline and its  two-year college
              faculty small in number, the study will serve as a model that can be applied to
              other disciplines.    The primary vehicle for studying physics education at
              two-year colleges will be a survey of all full-time and part-time faculty who
              teach  physics. A two-stage approach will be employed to define this
              population. Academic deans and directors of vocational programming at  each
              two-year college will be asked to identify relevant department chairs, who will
              then be asked to indicate all fu ll- and part-time  faculty who teach physics. 
              The project design anticipates a high response rate from both groups.    All
              faculty identified by the chairs will receive a detailed questionnaire seeking
              information about their workloads, education and  employment backgrounds, the
              facilities and resources available to them, opportunities for professional
              development, teaching methods  and instructional materials used, the nature of
              articulation agreements with nearby high schools and four-year colleges, and
              other key  indicators of their work environment. In addition to the survey,
              face-to-face interviews with chairs and faculty (both full- and part-time) 
              will be conducted at twelve two-year colleges, chosen to reflect the variation
              in institutional size and control, academic orientation, and  geographic
              region. The interviews will provide an opportunity to probe issues which are
              not easily captured in a self-administered  format. In addition, 6 to 8
              students at each institution will participate in a student focus group. The
              students' perspectives on the  quality and difficulty of their physics courses,
              their interactions with the physics faculty, their reasons for taking physics,
              and their  educational goals will enhance the information gained through the
              faculty survey and interviews.    The results of this research will be
              coordinated with other higher education studies and disseminated to
              representatives of local  industries, department chairs and faculty at two-year
              colleges, high schools, and four-year colleges, and other professional
              organizations  active at the two-year college level. The investigators will
              actively collaborate with two-year college groups to provide relevant and 
              timely information to current and proposed regional two-year college
              development programs.
