Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9453369

Award Number: 9453369
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher N. Bowman bowmanc@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,9296,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              CTS-9453369  Christopher N. Bowman/University of Colorado @ Boulder     
              ABSTRACT      Highly crosslinked polymers produced from photopolymerizations of
              multifunctional monomers are suitable for applications as optical lenses,
              optical fiber coatings, second harmonic generation materials, and dental
              materials.  These types of materials have excellent thermal and dimensional
              stability, but their application has been limited by certain aspects of the
              polymerization reaction.  The highly crosslinked structure of the polymer
              networks and the associated low mobilities lead to the formation of a
              heterogeneous polymer network, autoacceleration kinetics, and reaction
              diffusion controlled termination.  The heterogeneous nature of these
              polymerizations may cause up to a 500 fold decrease in the mechanical strength,
              and thus, understanding the relationship between reaction conditions and
              polymer structure is of the utmost importance in developing improved materials.
                 This work focuses on a fundamental characterization of these
              polymerizations, as well as the development of materials for applications such
              as second harmonic generating materials.  Polymerization reactions of
              multimethacrylates, multiacrylates, and other multivinyl compounds will be
              studied to determine how reaction conditions affect the polymer structural
              evolution.  The structural evolution will be characterized by a variety of
              techniques including dielectric spectroscopy, transmission electron microscopy,
              and electron spin resonance spectroscopy.  These standard techniques will be
              used along with two novel techniques that we have recently applied to
              polymerizing systems:  photochromism and second harmonic generation.  These
              techniques are capable of probing the microscopic structure so that
              quantitative information regarding the heterogeneity and free volume
              distribution can be obtained.  The experimental results from these techniques
              will be coupled with theoretical predictions from kinetic gelation simulations
              to obtain a complete pictu re of how reaction conditions such as temperature,
              initiator concentration, and monomer type affect the heterogeneity and
              mechanical properties of the crosslinked polymer.
