Title       : Articulate Virtual Laboratories for Science and Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9453078

Award Number: 9453078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $901079             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Forbus forbus@ils.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453078  Forbus    The goal of this project is to develop articulate virtual 
              laboratories (AVLs) that teach science and engineering principles  by
              scaffolding and coaching students in conceptual design tasks.   The educational
              conjecture we are testing is that articulate  virtual laboratories will enable
              students to (a) learn fundamental  principles radically be better than they
              would otherwise be unable  to perform.  To test these conjectures, our
              prototype laboratories  will be used by engineering undergraduates from
              Northwestern  University and Oxford University as part of their course work,
              and  by high school students from Evanston Township High School.    We believe
              that articulate virtual laboratories could dramatically  improve engineering
              and science education. Design experience is  essential to engineering
              education, and provides a powerful  motivating context for learning fundamental
              physical principles:  One cannot design a jet engine, refrigerator, or power
              plant  without using a broad range of physical principles. Design  environments
              that scaffold students, allowing them to focus on  fundamentals, could prove
              invaluable for instruction in basic  science as well as engineering, and could
              better motivate interest  in science learning. Design experiences are difficult
              to provide in  typical classroom settings, because many interesting physical 
              artifacts (such as power plants, jet engines, and refrigerators)  are expensive
              or dangerous to build and experiment with. Articulate  virtual laboratories
              will address these problems by enabling  students to design, analyze, and test
              artifacts in a simulated  environment, cheaply and safely. They will provide
              coaching for  students, in order to help them understand fundamental
              principles,  to help them practice the skills needed to model, analyze, and 
              design physical systems, and to provide the kind of supervision  that a good
              laboratory assistant provides by way of minimizing  unenlightening aspects of
              student explorations.    Creating art iculate virtual laboratories requires
              synthesizing  advances involving several AI technologies. Qualitative physics 
              provides formal representations for the tacit knowledge of  scientists and
              engineers that connects their professional knowledge  to their experience-based
              intuitions, enabling software to use  methods and concepts similar to those
              deemed natural by domain  experts.  Compositional modeling provides
              representations and  reasoning techniques for computer-assisted modeling (e.g.,
              how to  apply professional knowledge of a domain to modeling real-world 
              situations so that they can be formally analyzed). Truth-  maintenance systems
              provide reasoning services and the raw material  for constructing explanations
              of the system's results and reasoning  in terms that help students understand
              the domain of study.  Symbolic algebra and constraint propagation provide
              mathematical  solutions. Analogical processing techniques provide the ability
              to  retrieve and apply results from libraries of worked out designs and 
              examples to notel situations, in order to coach students.    We are developing
              two prototype articulate virtual laboratories, in  collaboration with
              engineering faculty at Northwestern University  and at Oxford University who
              are willing to use them with their  students. The first concerns thermodynamic
              cycles, an idealization  used in the conceptual design of power plants,
              propulsion systems,  refrigeration systems, and heat pumps. To master the
              design and  analysis of thermodynamic cycles requires a deep understanding of 
              a substantial body of thermodynamic. The second concerns feedback  controllers.
              The concepts of feedback and control theory permeate  modern science and
              engineering.  While mathematical analyses are  required to design optimal
              controllers, we believe that many of the  important concepts of feedback could
              be grasped by high school  students, given appropriate scaffolding.  ***
