Title       : MPWG: The Association for Women in Science Mentoring Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1995  
File        : a9453754

Award Number: 9453754
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lola E. Rogers                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98380              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda H. Mantel imantel@williamette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy M. Tooney  (Principal Investigator former)
              Nina M. Roscher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine J. Didion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc Women in Sci, Inc.
	      1522 K St NW
	      Washington, DC  20005    202/408-0742

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453754  Tooney    The Association for women in Science (AWIS) recently
              completed (1993) a three-year,  mentoring project with support from the Alfred
              P. Sloan Foundation.  The program which  included one-on-one mentoring, small
              group discussion meetings, large workshops with  prominent speakers, scientific
              poster sessions, laboratory experience, and exposure to scientific 
              conferences, was designed to encourage and retain undergraduate and graduate
              women in the  sciences.  The project has been an outstanding success, with a
              deluge of requests from  institutions of higher education and professional
              societies on information for implementing a  mentoring program, and the
              publications from the program receiving excellent reviews.  AWIS  proposes to
              use the Sloan project as a foundation to implement community-based mentoring 
              programs at ten sites nationwide.  The sites were selected based on geographic,
              ethnic and racial  considerations, as well as recognition of rural and urban
              environments.  Based on the research  from the Sloan project, this program will
              focus on the top five topics selected by undergraduate  and graduate students
              as being the most important:  career opportunities and options; selection  of
              academic course work; research opportunities; professional contacts and
              networking; self-  image and self-confidence; and balancing work and family. 
              In addition, the mentoring will  occur in small groups, facilitating peer
              mentoring as well as student to mentor interaction.    At each of the selected
              sites a minimum of three scientific organizations, such as the American 
              Chemical Society and the Society of Women Engineers, have agreed to work with
              their local  chapters to implement this mentoring program.  The community-based
              program allows for a  greater opportunity to institutionalize mentoring
              programs within each local chapter, as well as  facilitate further programs in
              each scientific society.  At present eight societies have expressed  an
              interest in participating as well as dissemina ting the materials, including a
              summary document  with information on developing mentoring programs.  AWIS,
              through the Sloan project, has:   extensive knowledge of strategies to
              implement in mentoring programs; evaluation and  assessment tolls field-tested
              in the Sloan project; and a cadre of women scientists experienced  as mentors. 
              ***
