Title       : GET REAL! Science Strand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1994  
File        : a9453046

Award Number: 9453046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197852             (Estimated)
Investigator: Owen S. Hoitomt owen.hoitomt@mail.admin.wis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Steinbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              94-53046  Hoitomt  ABSTRACT    Wisconsin Public Broadcast will incorporate a
              science strand in "Get Real!," their television series for children 8-12 year
              olds in Wisconsin.  The series presents positive images of children involved
              in, and succeeding at, a variety of areas.  The Wisconsin-based stories are
              field-produced; and kids are involved on-screen and off as hosts, reporters,
              subjects of stories, as interns during production, and as sources of story
              ideas.  The series is broadcast on both public and commercial stations in
              Wisconsin and receives multiple repeats.      The science and technology
              strand:    . connects science concepts to children's known experiences and
              activities and tells stories about kids involved in science-related activities;
                 . models and reinforces positive attitudes towards, and involvement in
              science and technology and affirms the value of children's ideas, and the
              importance of asking why?; and    . reinforces viewers' active connection to
              the science content by making suggestions for projects to get involved with,
              and by encouraging children to discuss and question their knowledge of science
              and the world around them.    The series is an important element integrated
              into both informal and formal education throughout Wisconsin.  It is supported
              by teacher materials and science video segments that are sent to every
              elementary school in Wisconsin.  In season two, material also will be created
              for parents and children to use at home.  A "Get Real!" kids club helps kids
              feel ownership of the series.  Members receive a newsletter that includes
              suggested at-home science activities, book lists related to the series,
              features about the show, places for families to visit, and behind-the-scenes
              articles about kids in the series.  Every elementary school library and public
              library in the state also received "Get Real!" materials including a poster and
              display items.     James Steinback, the creator, original producer, and
              executive producer of "Newton's Apple," will be the  co-PI with overall
              responsibility for the project.  Kathy Bissen will be executive producer of
              "Get Real!" and David Wallach will be series producer.  The series is produced
              in the three Wisconsin Public Television studios -- in Madison, Green Bay, and
              Menomonie -- and, therefore, can find and produce statewide stories.
