Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a9453382

Award Number: 9453382
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lars A. Stole lars.stole@gsb.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9296,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453382  STOLE  This award provides support to Dr. Lars Stole under the National
               Science Foundation's Presidential Faculty Fellows (PFF) Program.   The PFF
              Program was established at the request of the President  of the United States
              to recognize and support the scholarly  activities of some of the Nation's most
              outstanding science and  engineering faculty members early in their careers. 
              Awards are  intended to allow Fellows to undertake self-designed, innovative 
              research and teaching projects, to establish research and  teaching programs,
              and to pursue other academic related  activities.    This award will allow the
              investigator to pursue his research  agenda of understanding incentives within
              and between economic  organizations.  Two separate fields of inquiry, the
              economic  theory of contracts and the economics of industrial  organizations,
              contribute to our present understanding of  internal and external organization
              (and the nexus of interactions  between them).  Dr. Stole will bring both of
              these literatures  together to bear upon the problem of economic organization. 
              In  particular, he will construct new theories to understand the  incentive and
              welfare implications of (1) competitive  externalities across bilateral agency
              relationships; and (2) the  internal multilateral organization of the firm.  In
              the first,  the goal is to extend the design paradigm of contract theory to 
              multiple principal settings, and then use the methodology to  understand
              competitive environments.  In the second, the goal is  to determine incentive
              effects of organizational design and  intrafirm input markets.    This research
              addresses important issues relating to contractual  interactions within
              organizations and between as well as  insider/outsider theories of
              unemployment.  As an economist in  the School of Business, Dr. Stole has been
              very successful in  imparting the insights of microeconomics to MBA students,
              making  economics accessible and useful for practicing professionals, as  well
              as in training  doctoral students in economics.  This five  year award will
              enable him to continue his important research as  well as to train students in
              his interdisciplinary work spanning  economics, business, law, and political
              science.
