Title       : Chinook: A National Traveling Exhibit on Salmon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1998   
File        : a9453036

Award Number: 9453036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barry A. Van Deman                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $516900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda G. Kulik lkulik@calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      Golden Gate Park
	      San Francisco, CA  941184599    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              50        Engineering                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453036  Kulik    The California Academy of Science will develop "Chinook: A
              National  Traveling Exhibit on Salmon."  The main components will be a 3500 
              sq. ft. and a 5000 sq. ft. version of an exhibit about salmon  ecology and
              biology, genetic diversity, and the science of species  preservation.  Futher,
              components of the exhibit will be reproduced  for a 500 sq. ft. exhibit for the
              new public visitors center at the  Bodega Marine Laboratory.    The exhibit
              will focus on the Sacramento River winter-run Chinook  salmon.  Several themes
              from the California Science Frameworks and  Benchmarks for Science Literacy
              serve as the foundation for the  interpretation.  Benchmarks theme of evolution
              and the Framework  theme of patterns of change are woven throughout the exhibit
              and  are illustrated by salmon life cycles, genetic diversity, and  physical
              adaptations.  Benchmarks theme of systems and interactions  as well as the
              Frameworks theme of scale and structure are also  incorporated in the
              interpretive material.    The exhibit will be developed by the ichthyologists,
              educators, and  exhibit designers of the California Academy of Science and
              genetic  researcher from the Bodega Marine Laboratory of the University of 
              California at Davis.  Thirteen individuals have been selected as  project
              advisors.  They bring a diversity of perspectives including  expert knowledge
              of the science concerns (salmon and habitats  issues, anthropology) to the
              educational interests (both formal and  informal).  The various evaluation
              studies will be carried by CAS  staff member Lisa Mackinney.    The
              complementary materials linking the exhibit with formal  education that will be
              developed are a Teachers Resource Kit and a  Chinook Curriculum Guide.  The
              Teachers Resource Kit, available to  each host site, will include a slide show,
              a video tracing the  story of salmon fisheries, a special issue of the CAS
              educator  newsletter, sample of fish scales and otoliths, a compilation of 
              resources from government agencies and env ironmental organizations,  and a
              bibliography produced by the CAS Biodiversity Resource  Center.  The Curriculum
              Guide will include sixteen hands-on  activities using readily available
              materials to reinforce the  educational objectives.  A Chinook Family Activity
              Guide targeted  at families with children between the ages of five and ten,
              will  provide parents with specific steps to facilitate discussion what  at the
              exhibit and to suggest follow-up activities to do at home.
