Title       : Teaching Excellence Advancing Math and Science (TEAMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  1994  
File        : a9453604

Award Number: 9453604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret L. Niess niessm@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth S. Krane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9103,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Teaching Excellence Advancing Math and Science  This project will develop a
              needs a needs assessment for the State of Oregon for K-16 science and
              mathematics education through the participation of a broad representation of
              stakeholders in a collaborative effort.  This effort will deal with curricular
              and pedagogical changes needed in both K-12 science and mathematics education
              as well as undergraduate science and math courses that serve pre-service
              teachers.  These issues will ultimately impact formal teacher preparation
              programs at both the undergraduate and graduate levels.  Three workshops will
              be held at geographically dispersed locations across the State of Oregon. 
              These three sites will allow for maximum involvement of stakeholders from
              through the State-- community college, college, and university faculty in
              science, mathematics, and science and mathematics education; K-12 teachers and
              administrators; state and local government leaders; representatives of informal
              science education centers such as museums and aquariums; and leaders from
              business and industry.  Particular attention will be paid to involving
              representatives of diverse populations that are traditionally underrepresented
              in science and mathematics education, such as women and minorities.  Specific
              efforts will made to include representatives from rural Oregon communities tat
              serve large Hispanic and American Indian populations.  Each workshop will
              produce a document summarizing its findings and recommendations.  Following the
              three workshops, the three documents will be distributed to all stakeholders,
              including workshop participants and other statewide leaders in education. 
              Through one or more sessions on an educational television network, a
              opportunity will be provided for a statewide discussion that will move toward
              convergence on the needs assessment and a corresponding identification of the
              major problems that must be addressed in preparing science and math teachers. 
              This process will establish on-going communication  among stakeholders in the
              State of Oregon and lead to continuing dialogs, especially between K-12
              teachers and college and university faculty, concerning the organization of
              programs and resources and the commitment to solutions at all levels in the
              education system.
