Title       : CRCM "ACCESS"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9453903

Award Number: 9453903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Betty Ruth Jones                        
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jewel P. Cobb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-3481

NSF Program : 1548      COMP REGIONAL CENTERS FOR MINO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9249,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9453903  Cal State University  Los Angeles, CA  Cobb, Jewel    "Southern
              California Science and Engineering Access Center &  Network"    The ACCESS
              Center has made significant progress since 1989 in  addressing the
              under-representation of minority students in the  Science, Engineering,
              Mathematics (SEM) Pipeline in the Greater Los  Angeles Basin.  To that end,
              ACCESS has provided programs that are  coordinated, providing continuity and
              smooth passage through the  pipeline using strategies centered on teacher
              enhancement and  direct student intervention.  This 6th year Continuation
              Grant,  continues the work of the ACCESS Center and especially examines the 
              programs and practices of the past five years to identify those  that were
              successful for future replication.    The major thrust of ACCESS during this
              6th year will be to engage  in a three pronged approach that includes
              reflective evaluation,  direct student intervention and teacher enhancement. 
              ACCESS has  identified two primary goals:  1) To determine what works by 
              evaluating a sample of ACCESS sponsored programs;  2) To strengthen  programs
              at existing sites by focusing resources on our most  successful programs.    To
              accomplish this first goal, ACCESS will convene an outside  evaluation
              committee that will be responsible for providing a  "snap-shot" of model
              programs as they have evolved over time.  In  addition to general demographic
              data, questions relating to direct  student intervention and teacher
              enhancement will be included.  MOS  data, school records, test scores,
              interviews and other sources  will be utilized in the evaluation plan that will
              be developed by  the implementation evaluation team.    Direct student
              intervention will continue with the College Prep  program.  ACCESS will be
              working with three spin-off site  replicated from the Lincoln High School model
              program in years 4  and 5.  This program targets students entering high school
              who are  under-represented minorities and are "B" or "C" students.  This 
              program  is a classroom based direct intervention program that  focuses on
              rigorous academic work with tutoring support, enrichment  activities, and
              parental involvement.    The third major activity will be to continue our
              Teacher  Enhancement programs in math and science for middle school  teachers. 
              Teacher enhancement directly supports our direct student  intervention efforts.
               Included in our Teacher Enhancement program  is the Robert Moses Algebra
              Project, that is evolving as a national  model for systemic reform as evidenced
              by the Chicago and  Mississippi Delta Projects.  Participating teachers will
              receive  training with specific curriculum along with follow-up support  during
              classroom implementation.  Additionally, middle school  teachers will receive
              training in hands-on science through our  joint venture with CalTech called the
              Teacher Summer Science   Academy which will be funded from external sources.   
              During Year 6, there will be increased interaction with the Long  Beach Unified
              School District, which has shown a high level of  interest in the Algebra
              Project as part of their systemic reform  efforts.  Additionally, ACCESS will
              be working with the Inglewood  School District and collaborating with the Urban
              Systemic  Initiative (USI) if funded in Los Angeles.  ***
