Title       : EPWG: Eliminating Discrimination by Gender in Education: Project EDGE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1997     
File        : a9453088

Award Number: 9453088
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $681469             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia Pitkin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan M. Rogers  (Principal Investigator former)
              Laura E. Tubbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1201,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453088  Rogers    Project EDGE--Eliminating Discrimination by Gender in
              Education -- is an experimental, multi-  level mentoring project that targets
              young women at key educational transition points, along with  pre-college
              teachers, counselors, and university faculty.  The overall goal is to encourage
              and  support the interest in, and the retention of more young women in science,
              engineering, and  mathematics (SEM) by increasing the frequency, consistency,
              and coherence of positive  experiences and messages about participation in
              these fields.  To accomplish this goal, the  Rochester Institute of Technology
              (RIT) proposes a tiered approach to address several issues that  have been
              identified by research as key events that discourage young women in SEM fields.
                Project EDGE focuses on these issues by making systemic changes in
              instructional styles of  teachers, connecting young women's learning about SEM
              fields with real-life career experiences,  and sharing resources and data with
              others.    Project EDGE recognizes current research which identified teachers
              as the "first line of attack"  for addressing the problems of classroom equity.
               The project seeks to sensitize the secondary  teachers, counselors and
              university faculty, who interact so closely with young women, to the 
              pedagogical practices that promote gender equity, provide collaborative
              learning opportunities,  and expand their interface with the current
              professional SEM world.  The project provides  ongoing mentoring and support to
              provide role-modeling and exposure to successful professional  SEM women for
              young women in high school and the first year of college.  Mentoring 
              relationships are developed with:  professional women working in SEM careers
              with regard to  career information and life style choices; teachers, who are
              involved in instructional development  and support groups; and, peers and other
              students involved in the project.  Throughout the  project, students have many
              opportunities to communicate informally with women  in SEM  careers through a
              series of face-to-face activities complementing on-going communication taking 
              place via distance learning technologies and data networks.  Thus, based upon
              RIT's encouraging  experience with a pilot program of this type, the proposal
              expands the concept to reach more  young women and develops a comprehensive,
              longitudinal study to explore the pedagogical,  institutional, and support
              issues involved in promoting women's participation in SEM fields.   The project
              also seeks to share results and processes through information networking and 
              dissemination designed to encourage replication of the project in other
              communities.  ***
