Title       : National Forum on Critical Issues in Environmental Technology Programs at
               Two-Year Colleges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1994   
File        : a9453181

Award Number: 9453181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83202              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen J. Kabat Lensch ekabat@eiccd.cc.ia.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Senew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janice N. Friedel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hazardous materials Traini
	      ATEEC
	      Bettendorf, IA  527226804    563/441-4090

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A two day invitational workshop is being held to examine critical issues
              relating to  environmental technology education.  The workshop involves
              postsecondary educators  in the fields of mathematics, science, environmental
              education, and technology as well  as employers, secondary school educators,
              and government representatives.  Forum  participants, working in one of six
              technical groups, are identifying and prioritizing  issues and developing
              recommendations concerning Environmental Technology  education at two-year
              colleges.  Each working group is being directed by a technical  working group
              chair recognized as an expert in a particular area.  The working groups  are
              addressing issues in the professionalization of environmental technician
              education;  curriculum and program development and implementation; preparation,
              credentials,  professional advancement, and continuing education of faculty;
              human resources  including recruitment, retention, and placement of students;
              current and future  employment needs for environmental technicians; and
              preparation of secondary school  students for successful entry into
              postsecondary environmental technical education  programs.    The workshop
              report is being distributed to academic institutions and the private sector  as
              well as local and federal government staff interested in environmental
              technology  education.  Planning and implementation of the forum is a
              cooperative effort involving  the NSF Advanced Technology Environmental
              Education Center (ATEEC), the  Hazardous Materials Training and Research
              Institute (HMTRI), the American  Association of Community Colleges (AACC), and
              the National Science Foundation  (NSF).
