Title       : "The Consortium and Reform of K-12 Science and Math Education"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1996    
File        : a9453182

Award Number: 9453182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan K. McAdams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453182  McAdams    The primary hypothesis of this Policy Study is that access
              to  networked resources, such as those available through the Internet,  is
              essential to reform of science and math education.  From  participation at
              recent conferences on the National Information  Infrastructure (NII), the
              Principal Investigator (PI) has concluded  that schemes being seriously
              considered for pricing the Internet  could effectively foreclose the Internet
              as a resource to the K-12  community.  On the other hand, little attention has
              been given in  policy circles to the consortium and asymmetric pricing (a
              "price"  of zero to the users; e.g., K-12 educators and students; and a 
              positive price to the producers, sufficient to get the good or  service
              produced, and to keep the producers in business).  The  consortium can permit
              asymmetric pricing of goods with the  characteristics of economic public goods
              (see below).    In Part One of the Study the PI proposes a collaborative
              analysis  to be undertaken jointly with Staff Members from NSF;s Education  and
              Human Resources (EHR) Program.  The objective is to gather  evidence to test
              the primary hypothesis; it is to be an overall  review of the likely
              effectiveness of the resources committed to  reform of K-12 Math and Science
              Education, given the economic  market structures faced in this arena.  It will
              involve an  assessment of those projects that have been highly successful, and 
              those that have not lived up to their promise.  Special emphasis  will be given
              to the role of networked resources in each instance.    In Part Two of the
              Study, the PI proposes to make an evaluation of  the consortium as a tool to
              create, and/or permit asymmetric  pricing for innovative products and services,
              including, but not  limited to, the internet.  The working hypothesis is that
              consortia  represent a mechanism through which pricing schemes appropriate to 
              K-12 can be implemented, while assuring that required goods and  services are
              produced.  The consortium has not been w ell studied,  however; nor is it well
              understood.  Part Two of the study is  focused on several important consortia,
              each case with its own  history and approach.  Such case studies are required
              as a step  toward understanding the capabilities and limitations of the 
              consortium as an institution of efficient resource allocation.    In Part Three
              the PI will prepare policy papers relating to pricing  schemes appropriate to
              the economic market situation faced by K--12  and by suppliers to this and
              similar markets that approximate the  characteristics of economic public goods.
               An economic public good  is neither depletable nor excludable:  its use by one
              party does  not diminish its availability to others; its availability to one, 
              means that it is available to all.  These characteristics imply  that there is
              no cost to society for supplying the good to the next  user; in economic terms,
              its marginal cost is zero.  Efficient  resource allocation requires price to
              equal marginal cost; price to  the user must be zero.  But to get the good
              produced requires a  price equal to cost, including a "normal return" on
              investment.   This requires asymmetric pricing:  zero price to the user;
              positive  price to the producer.  In turn, this suggests the use of  consortia.
               ***
