Title       : MPWG: Girls' Opportunities in Engineering and Science (GOES)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1996  
File        : a9453683

Award Number: 9453683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lola E. Rogers                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Banu Onaral onaral@cbis.ece.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Claire Welty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dorothy Ball  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda S. Schadler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Koczak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret A. Wheatley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaowei Sherry He  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 9177,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453683  Onaral    Under the leadership of the Women in Engineering Committee
              and the Women in Engineering  Program, the College of Engineering at Drexel
              University proposes to launch an outreach effort  to motivate larger numbers of
              girls to consider engineering as a viable career option.  The  outreach effort
              will be in the form of an engineering education workshop called GOES (Girls 
              Opportunities in Engineering and Science) for middle and junior high schools
              that are more than  one hour away from Drexel University.  Eight trips are
              scheduled during the one-year funding  period.  The effort builds upon Drexel's
              successful on-campus engineering career days where  girls are given an
              opportunity to participate in hands-on engineering experiments while 
              informally interacting with engineering college faculty and students, as well
              as practicing female  engineers.  GOES will take the "career day" to middle
              schools.  Teacher and parent participation  will be encouraged.  This
              intervention program is for pre-high school students in grades 6 to 9,  to help
              make them aware of opportunities offered by the engineering profession, and to 
              encourage them to take college-track math and science courses which would
              prepare them for  possible careers in science and engineering.  The purpose of
              the hands-on laboratories is to  convey the excitement and fun of engineering
              through practical experience.    The project will be "fine-tuned" with input
              from a systematic evaluation procedure.  Results of  the project will be widely
              shared regionally and nationally, according to a comprehensive  dissemination
              plan.  After the project funding period, GOES will be institutionalized as part
              of  the outreach effort of the College of Engineering.  University resources
              will be used to maintain  a minimum of 10 trips per year.  If additional funds
              are available, the program will be  diversified to reach out to populations of
              younger learners, and organizations for girls.  ***
