Title       : PMSA: "STEP: Student and Teacher Excellence Program"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9453838

Award Number: 9453838
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ahmad Nurriddin                         
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne D. Lett wlett@sbo.nn.k12.va.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dianne Q. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomasena Woods  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Newport News Public School
	      12465 Warwick Road
	      Newport News, VA  236063041    804/591-4513

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PMSA-9453838  Newport News Public Schools  Newport News, VA  Woods, Thomasena
              and Dianne Robinson    "STEP:  Student and Teacher Excellence Program"    STEP
              (Student Teacher Excellence Program) brings an urban school  district and a
              broad-based partnership of community organizations  and federal labs to develop
              a model of comprehensive Pre-K-12  science and math education to boost minority
              achievement and  significantly increase minority representation in the
              college-bound  SEM pipeline.  STEP is collaborative venture of partners newport
               News Public Schools, NASA-Langley Research Center, CEBAF (the  Department of
              Energy funded Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator  Facility), Hampton
              University, CHROME (Cooperating Hampton Roads  Organizations for Minorities in
              Engineering), and the Virginia  Living Museum, working with universities,
              exceptional informal  science organizations and high-tech industry.  STEP will
              produce a  model that incorporates the tremendous expertise and creativity of 
              the unique concentration of resources in this area and that can be  replicated
              by communities not so fortunate as to have such  resources nearby.    Newport
              News is a minority-majority urban system in Southeast  Virginia.  About 55% of
              the students are minorities, most African-  American.  STEP will address
              current inequities:  African-American  students, on average, score well below
              white students on  standardized tests of math and science achievement and are
              much  less likely to take advanced math and science courses.  The STEP  program
              is closely tied to the School Board's priorities of  reducing racial
              disparities in achievement, channeling more  minority students into advanced
              classes, and ensuring that all  graduates complete Algebra.  STEP also is
              directly linked to the  City's economic growth strategy focusing on high and
              applied tech  industries.  STEP is a system-wide initiative and will involve
              all  30,800 students in the city's 29 elementary schools, 7 middle  schools, 4
              high schools, and Governor's  School for Science and  Technology.  Consistent
              with PMSA goals, the emphasis will be on  minority students, but ultimately all
              students will benefit from  the accelerated standards, enriched education
              program, and upgraded  teacher skills.
