Title       : Mid-Atlantic Center for Advanced Technological Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1994      
File        : a9453250

Award Number: 9453250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: O. Robert Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edgel E. Sereno  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judy E. Ackerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leigh Feagans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montgomery Col Rockville
	      51 Mannakee Street
	      Rockville, MD  208501101    301/279-5000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Brown                                                9453250  The work during
              the planning year is the preparation of a  comprehensive proposal detailing the
              establishment and operation of  a regional center for developing, promoting and
              maintaining  excellence in advanced technological education.  The Mid-Atlantic 
              Center for Advanced Technological Education (MCATE) will include  design input
              from major regional and local leaders in business,  government and education. 
              The plan will delineate a modern Center  where leaders and innovators in
              technological education assemble to  devote their combined talents to creating
              new academic models,  enhancing partnerships, testing new prototypes,
              researching and  sharing results to transform technological education in the 
              Mid-Atlantic region. The senior personnel, supported by additional  College
              resources, will determine appropriate MCATE activities to  provide the
              development of new curricula,improvement of faculty  competence, and provision
              of a clearinghouse for informAtion,  methods, and materials affecting
              technological education, starting  from basic mathematics and science core
              courses and addressing  student development plus expanded opportunities and 
              experiences.   Activities will build from and develop partnerships with leaders
               from public and private schools, colleges and universities,  business,
              industry, and government agencies.  The standard for the  determination of the
              Center's activities will be the ultimate  impact upon the education of students
              in the region as they select  and prepare for careers in the science and
              engineering  technologies.  Each potential activity listed will be ranked to 
              develop the final array.
