Title       : Planning Grant for a National Center of Excellence for Advanced Technological
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1994  
File        : a9453260

Award Number: 9453260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack L Waintraub                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Merideth cwmny@ny001.bitnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sadie Bragg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph H. Eaione  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard A. Ciaccio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell K. Hotzler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY NYC Tech College
	      300 Jay Street
	      Brooklyn, NY  112012902    718/260-5173

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453260  Merideth                             A City University of New York
              (CUNY) consortium comprised of its  two-year colleges and other associate
              degree-granting institutions,  the New York City Board of Education and other
              public and private  sector partners, seeks an NSF planning grant to develop a
              National  Center of Excellence for Advanced Technological Education (ATE).  
              Over the next year, our consortium will work with outside experts  and enabling
              organizations to refine the scope and activities of  the National Center. 
              Center goals are: to establish a stronger  national presence for ATE in the
              region and nation; to develop  innovative ATE collaborations with business and
              industry in order  to respond more effectively to technological workplace
              needs; and  to take leadership in the development of ATE curricula, program 
              improvement, and model student support programs.  Our National  Center of
              Excellence will place special emphasis on responding to  the needs of
              minorities and women in urban ATE.  A planning grant  will help establish
              Center governance and management procedures and  to refine the Center's
              three-year implementation plan.  Our  proposed National Center would: (1)
              create an ATE National  Clearinghouse which will conduct research, sponsor
              conferences, and  develop regional/national telecommunications links among NSF
              ATE  Centers and the entire ATE educational community; (2) establish  criteria
              for the selection of exemplary ATE curricula to be  produced in multi-media
              formats and disseminated through the  National Center; (3) model ATE teacher
              and faculty enhancement  activities and devise non-traditional approaches to
              in-service  education; and (4) form a model business and industry collaborative
               providing leadership at every level of Center activities.  Other  cooperating
              organizations are Education Development Center (EDC);  the National Center for
              Research in Vocational Education; IBM,  NYNEX; and the Institute for Education
              and the Economy.  ***
