Title       : EPWG: Rural and Urban Images: Voice of Girls in Science, Mathematics, and
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1998      
File        : a9453110

Award Number: 9453110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $930409             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia S. Kusimo kusimop@ael.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn S. Carter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Seymour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appalachia Educ Lab Inc
	      1031 Quarrier Street
	      Charleston, WV  25325    304/347-0400

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1201,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453110  Kusimo    While the culture of science and science teaching is well
              recognized as a critical factor  influencing participation, few programs have
              been designed to increase participation by  addressing cultural aspects.  This
              program, however, reflects the environments in which it is  implemented, and is
              unique in addressing three major gaps in the present knowledge base:  the 
              effectiveness of support systems in increasing girls' persistence in science,
              mathematics, and  technology (SMT); the contrasts in effects of interventions
              in an urban and a rural setting; and  the effectiveness of materials reflecting
              rural environments in teaching SMT content.  This  program juxtaposes two
              environments--one urban, the other rural--in an intervention designed  to
              recruit and retain middle school girls in SMT.  Together, the two sites provide
              fertile ground  for examining the effect of "place" on girls' lives and their
              relationships with SMT.  The  program has three goals:  (1) to have an impact
              on the infrastructure of SMT curriculum design  by providing examples of
              materials and methods indigenous to rural environments and useful in  SMT
              education; (2) to create advocates for the inclusion of girls in SMT education;
              and (3) to  add to the knowledge base about rural and urban SMT education with
              respect to ethnicity and  culture.    The reach the goals, there are four
              thrusts:  (1) to develop and test a strategy for constructing  a social network
              made up of community members, family, and peers who advocate for and  support
              girls' involvement in SMT; (2) to design materials and strategies that recruit
              and retain  girls in SMT; (3) to conduct an ethnographic study that examines
              how girls, guardians, and  teachers perceive the role of girls in SMT; and (4)
              to produce one or more documentaries to  demonstrate (a) the social contexts in
              which rural and urban girls interact with SMT education,  (b) barriers to their
              full participation, and (c) changes over time when systems exist to support 
              and validat e their worth and competency in SMT.  An examination of the
              intersection of girls  and culture is critical to understanding the
              participation of girls in SMT.  To effectively  communicate these dynamics, we
              must give vision and voice to the girls in the project.   Although the project
              is being implemented in only two sites, the resulting documentary, 
              ethnographic study, and materials will greatly magnify its impact.  As we
              examine the support  mechanisms that must be in place and the types of
              materials and strategies that engage these  communities, we will increase our
              understanding of how to systematically acculturate girls in  SMT.  ***
