Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2000   
File        : a9453446

Award Number: 9453446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer A. Lewis jalewis@staff.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,9161,9296,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9453446  Lewis    Principal Investigator would pursue new areas of research
              and  instrumentation which are emerging in materials science and  engineering.
              In particular, the proposed research and educational  plan would focus on
              developing a fundamental understanding of  cross-disciplinary interactions in
              polymer-stabilized nanosized  ceramic systems.  Novel materials with unusual
              properties are  expected at the size and scale of nanosized particles, which
              are  greatly different or improved over conventional bulk ceramics.   Efforts
              will be directed to design organic processing aids their  effects on
              microstructural development.  The specific research  objectives are to study
              the role of "free" and adsorbed polymeric  species on interparticle forces,
              suspension stability and rheology,  and the influence of such properties on the
              resulting  microstructures of ceramic forms and coatings derived from these 
              systems.  The educational component of the proposed plan would  focus mainly on
              two activities:  new course and text development.   The Principal Investigator
              plan to develop a new graduate level  course entitled "Sol-Gel and Nanosized
              Particulate Ceramic  Processing Science" to be taught in the Spring, 1995. 
              These course  notes and those developed for a senior level course "Ceramics 
              Processing and Microstructural Development" which the Principal  Investigator
              currently teach will serve as a basis for preparing a  much needed text book --
              Colloidal Processing of Advanced Ceramics.    %%%    The specific research
              objectives are to study the role of 'free'  and adsorbed polymeric species on
              interparticle forces, suspension  stability and rheology and the influence of
              such properties on the  resulting microstructure of ceramic forms and coating
              derived from  these systems.  The Principal Investigator also plan to develop a
               new graduate level course and may prepare a text book in the field  in the
              near future.  ***
