Title       : EPWG: TECH TREK
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1995       
File        : a9453076

Award Number: 9453076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dawn M. Pickard                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335467             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Richter   (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Booth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              JoAnn Fredette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chris Palmerton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charlene Czerniak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGTE TV FM
	      136 Huron Street
	      Toledo, OH  43697    /   -

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1201,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453076  Richter    WGTE-TV-FM, Toledo Public Broadcasting, seeks to utilize the
              technical communications  expertise and facilities of public broadcasting to
              demonstrate innovative ways to advance gender  equity in Science, Engineering,
              and Math (SEM) careers.  The project, TECH TREK, is an  informal,
              out-of-school, technology-learning opportunity directed at middle school age
              Cadette  Girl Scouts and adult Girl Scout leaders.  In collaboration with the
              Maumee Valley Girl Scout  Council, COSI/Toledo, and SciMaTEC of the University
              of Toledo, WGTE seeks to design,  develop, test, and evaluate a model program
              offering week-long, hands-on experiences using the  staff, facilities and
              educational expertise of public radio and public television to provide science 
              and technology education for middle school Girl Scouts and Girls Scout leaders.
               Bringing  particular expertise in the technology area of video and audio
              communications, WGTE is  collaborating with the Girl Scouts to develop a new
              approach to involving girls in technology,  which can be replicated
              inexpensively, nationwide, through public broadcasting stations and local  Girl
              Scout Councils.    During the first year of the project, 50 Girls Scouts and 15
              Girls Scout leaders are to work on-  site with WGTE mentors, young professional
              women working in public broadcasting, who are  to: share their skills while
              demonstrating real life applications of their science and math  knowledge;
              provide the Scouts with career information; and guide the Scouts in hands-on
              video  and audio production activities.  Girl Scout leaders are to learn about
              gender equity issues in  science and technology education, and are to be
              trained to become advocates for encouraging  young women in further science
              study and careers, in addition to building basic audio and video  production
              skills which they can teach to others.  In the second year of the project,
              following  evaluation of the first year TECH TREK experiences, and fine-tuning
              of the curriculum, WGTE  is to prod uce and distribute a video conference and
              an audio bridge, as well as a "how to"  manual for Girl Scout Councils and
              public broadcasting stations to support the replication of  TECH TREK.  Through
              publicity, the staff is to recruit at least 50 stations and Girls Scout 
              Councils to replicate the Toledo program in their home communities, providing
              hands-on  technology learning experiences to about 500 Girls Scout leaders and
              1,250 Cadette Girl Scouts  in the first year of the national "roll-out".  Thus,
              the project is designed to involve a new player,  public broadcasting stations,
              in the national infrastructure which offers scientific and technical  learning
              opportunities for women and girls.  It builds a new avenue for active
              collaboration  between Girl Scouts of USA and public broadcasting to use their
              educational and technological  resources to address a societal problem.  ***
