Title       : Molecular Thermodynamics of Polymer/Mixed-Solvent Systems for Process/Product
               Design and Environmental-Protection Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9411366

Award Number: 9411366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170194             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Prausnitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Soane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              John Prausnitz  CTS-9411366       Thermodynamic properties of
              polymer/mixed-solvent systems are necessary for a variety of applications
              including surface acoustic-wave vapor sensors; recovery of organic vapors from
              waste-air streams using a polymeric membrane; pervaporation, and other
              polymeric membrane-separation processes; polymer devolatilization; vapor-phase
              photografting; and for optimum formulation of paints and coatings.  For
              rational process and product design, we require new experimental data and new
              correlation based on molecular thermodynamics.     Vapor-liquid equilibria for
              several polymer/mixed-solvent systems will be measured , both for dilute
              polymer solutions (using a sampled equilibrium cell ) and concentrated
              solutions (using a gravimetric polymer swelling technique).  Also, the theta
              temperature for various polymer/mixed-solvent systems will be measured and
              correlated with a procedure that involves measuring (by scanning) the
              cloud-point temperatures for a range of polymer concentrations and
              extrapolating to unity volume fraction polymer.  The goal of the study is to
              provide experimental data and correlations for thermodynamic properties of
              these systems for a wide range of applications in acoustic-wave vapor sensors,
              VOC membrane separation from air streams, vapor-phase photo-grafting, and paint
              formulation.  The successful completion of the project would significantly
              enhance the knowledge and technology base in these areas, enabling better
              design of existing processes and development of new processes and products.    
              The experimental techniques to be used are modifications to  existing
              techniques developed by the P.I.'s and others, to account for mixed solvents. 
              The correlational work will be with the P.I. 's previously developed Perturbed
              Hard-Sphere-Chain equation of state.  The theta temperature is the spinodal
              temperature in the limit of infinite polymer chain length and infinite dilution
              of the polymer in the solvent.  A program for this calculation has been develop
              ed by the P.I. and co-workers.  For the experiments, a tentative list of
              systems is given, and these are keyed to the specific technological
              application.  A typical error analysis for the gravimetric technique is given.
