Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Voters Use Campaign Information: On-line
               Versus Memory-Based Processing in a Presidential Election
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1994      
File        : a9411162

Award Number: 9411162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6238               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard R. Lau ricklau@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9411162  Lau      During election campaigns voters are exposed to large amounts
              of  information about candidates.  In some cases voters can choose  whether to
              pay attention, while in other cases the information is  so ubiquitous that
              voters can hardly avoid it.  But in all cases,  the flow of information is
              dynamic, one day information of a  candidate's position on an issue is readily
              available, the next  day it can hardly be found.  Yet, researchers use static
              surveys  as the method of choice for studying campaigns.  Surveys,  however,
              can only capture a single point in time, relying  generally on the voters'
              memories of what they have seen and paid  attention to.  The elections's
              dynamic nature is missing.  One  important result of this mismatch is that
              while we can make good  predictions of the vote choice, we cannot do nearly as
              good a job  describing how voters come to their choice.    This Doctoral
              Dissertation research project is designed to  develop a better understanding of
              the vote decision process by  using a dynamic, computer-based methodology to
              trace information  acquisition and decision-making while it is occurring.  In 
              particular, the question of whether voters employ an "on-line" or  a
              "memory-based" evaluation process will be explored.   Traditional voting models
              all suggest a memory-based model, where  voters store information about
              candidates during the campaign and  search the contents of memory in order to
              evaluate and choose at  the "moment-of-decision."  Were the model correct, then
              surveys  conducted near the time of decision would be an ideal methodology  for
              studying the vote decision because memories could be  accurately recalled.  The
              on-line model argues instead that  voters maintain an "on-line tally"
              representing the current  evaluation of a candidate; when the time comes to
              make a choice,  voters need not search memory for detailed information. 
              Indeed,  that information has often been forgotten.  Instead, they merely 
              recall the tally associated with each candi date and choose  accordingly.
