Title       : Auger-Photoelectron Coincidence Studies of Solids and Their Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1998  
File        : a9411610

Award Number: 9411610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Bartynski bart@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9411610  Bartynski    A technique of Auger-photoelectron coincidence
              spectroscopy (APECS)  with synchrotron radiation will be employed to study the
              core level  line shapes and Auger electron spectra in selected metals, 
              semiconductors and oxides.  The enhanced sensitivity of APECS will  be used to
              study the core level shifts, charge transfer, and  electronic structure at the
              clean and adsorbate covered surfaces.   With the ability of APECS to eliminate
              lifetime broadening, we will  probe the line shapes of 3p (4p) core levels in
              several 3d (4d)  transition metals for surface shifts and hidden splittings. 
              Site-  specific electronic properties and correlation effects in  inhomogeneous
              solids will also be studied by measuring core-valence  (CVV) Auger transitions
              coincidence with shifted core levels.   Finally, we will use the unique
              capabilities of APECS to explore  the photoexcitation/decay process itself. 
              The majority of the  research will be performed at the National Synchrotron
              Light Source  of Brookhaven National Laboratory.    Our group has developed
              Auger-photoelectron coincidence  spectroscopy using synchrotron radiation as a
              new experimental  probe of solids.  This is a qualitative improvement over 
              conventional Auger electron or photoelectron spectroscopy.  It is  more surface
              sensitive, it eliminates background signal, it  sharpens spectral lines, and it
              provides a new and unique way to  study the local electronic properties of
              complicated systems.  The  technique will be utilized to obtain new information
              about the  electronic structure and bonding at clean and adsorbate covered 
              semiconductor and metal surfaces.  The site-specific nature of the  technique
              will be used to probe the electronic properties of  different atoms in solid
              compounds.  The sharper spectral lines  will allow new ways to investigate
              magnetic effects and electronic  interactions in solids.  Finally the unique
              capabilities of this  technique will provide clues to the photoexcitation/decay
              process  itself.  The ma jority of the research will be performed at the 
              National Synchrotron Light Source of Brookhaven National  Laboratory.  ***
