Title       : Genetic Diversity and Behavioral Ontogeny
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1996   
File        : a9411140

Award Number: 9411140
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon M. Burghardt gburghar@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary F. McCracken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9169,9183,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              How do animals adapt to changes in their environments?  Are  all healthy, normal
              appearing individuals or their offspring  equally able to survive?  Since
              finding and utilizing food  resources are important aspects of survival and the
               occupation of new or altered habitats, this proposal aims at  the study of
              foraging and food use in a species with a  generalized diet that is known to
              exploit novel prey.  This  species is the common garter snake, Thamnophis
              sirtalis,  which can feed on a variety of small animals.  This  investigator
              will follow babies from birth through the first  months of life in a study that
              will look at the effects of  genetic background, diet, and ontogeny on food
              choice,  foraging ability, and growth.  The initial responses to prey  involve
              chemical cues in newborn common garter snakes. There  is great variability
              among individuals, even from the same  litter.  Experience with different prey
              types can alter prey  recognition, prey preference, and prey capturing ability.
               This project will investigate this individuality and  plasticity with snakes
              from different litters born to  mothers from the same natural area.  Since one
              advantage of  snakes is the large number of animals born to each mother, 
              snakes from each litter will be put in various groups raised  on controlled or
              free-choice diets.  Another advantage of  this species is that different babies
              born to a given female  may have different fathers.  Thus identifying which
              snakes  in a litter have the same or different fathers can help  separate
              genetic factors from prenatal environmental ones.  Newly developed
              microsatellite DNA techniques will be  applied in identifying animals with the
              same or different  fathers.  It is hoped that the results of this work will 
              help in predicting which aspects of foraging are most  important to survival
              when animals confront different or  changed environments, and how environments
              and genetic  differences interact.
