Title       : Peasants, Poverty, and Land Encroachment in Agrarian Nepal: A Political Ecology
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1994    
File        : a9411168

Award Number: 9411168
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117827             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nanda R. Shrestha   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Whitewater
	      800 West Main
	      Whitewater, WI  531901705    414/472-1027

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9411168  SHRESTHA       This study will analyze land encroachment as an
              ecopolitical  struggle over land access and control in agrarian Nepal using a 
              political ecology framework.  Nepal, like many developing  countries, has
              arrived at a juncture where mounting peasant  impoverishment has come face to
              face with growing ecological  degradation.  This interface reveals that poverty
              is not just a  socioeconomic issue; it is also an ecological issue with wide- 
              ranging ramifications.  As in many other agrarian societies,  there is a
              struggle between peasants' day-to-day survival, which  includes land access, on
              one side and the state's dominant  interests and environmental sustainability,
              which leads to  land/resource control, on the other.  Two basic questions
              emerge  from this growing ecopolitical struggle:  why does the struggle  occur
              and how does it affect the sustainability of what can be  termed "peasant
              ecology" in which peasants are engaged in direct  production relationships with
              nature.  Their socioeconomic  viability therefore is intrinsically intertwined
              with the  ecological sustainability of their environment.  Land  encroachment
              is thus seen as a form of peasant (social) movement  and/or a form of everyday
              resistance against the state and its  land control policy.  Guided by this
              general conceptualization,  this study will investigate three interrelated
              issues:  (1) the  evolution of human-environment relations in agrarian Nepal, 
              focusing on the social and political configuration of peasant  ecology, (2) the
              political ecology of land encroachment, i.e. the  social and ecopolitical
              conflicts over land in te Tarai, and (3)  the implications of these conflicts
              for peasants' socioeconomic  viability and environmental sustainability.  The
              study will  involve extensive research in Nepal relying on both the  collection
              of formal materials relating to land use policy and  actual land use and on
              interviews with peasants and officials in  the region.       This research will
              contribute to adva ncing a coherent  theoretical political ecology framework,
              one that can be used to  investigate similar struggles unfolding in various
              local and  regional contexts throughout the third world.  As such it will  also
              add new insights relevant to the formation of policies for  dealing with the
              growing tension between the protection of  critical environments and the social
              and economic survival of  local populations who are dependent on those
              environments.
