Title       : Cusp Turbulence and Transport and their Impact on Ionospheric Coupling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1997  
File        : a9411766

Award Number: 9411766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212310             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Drake drake@plasma.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy E. Eastman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9196,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The shocked solar wind plasma, or magnetosheath, provides the  basic input
              and outer boundary condition for the Earth's  magnetosphere.  The most direct
              access of this magnetosheath plasma  into the magnetosphere and ionosphere
              occurs in the region of the  outer polar cusp.  Thus, an enhanced understanding
              of plasma  processes at the magnetosheath/cusp interface is essential to the 
              advancing magnetopause and boundary layer physics.  Because of  tailward
              bending of the magnetic field near the outer  magnetospheric boundary, the
              entire magnetospheric boundary layer  is mapped through this cusp region into
              the frontside, high-  latitude ionosphere near local noon.  Although the
              interaction of  plasmas and fields in the outer cusp play a key role in linking
              the  magnetosheath and boundary layer to the ionosphere, very few  satellite
              measurements are available in this region.         This project's objective is
              to advance the knowledge of  plasma, field and plasma wave interactions in the
              outer and mid-  altitude polar cusp with a focus on plasma and momentum
              transport,  field fluctuations, and the resulting cusp current system.  The 
              investigators will identify and test those plasma and field  interactions most
              relevant to enhancing unique observations  available from satellite and used as
              a baseline sample of particle  and field characteristics in the outer cusp and
              mid-altitude cusp  regions.  Although very limited, available observations in
              the  outer cusp provide enough information on overall geometry and  plasma
              conditions to apply state-of-the-art 2-D MHD and hybrid  simulations of the
              magnetosheath-cusp interaction region including  coupling to the ionosphere. 
              Such simulations will provide  information on the local time-dependent flows
              and magnetic fields  in the outer cusp as well as the more nonlocal
              cusp/ionosphere  current system.  Understanding anomalous cross-field momentum 
              transport is crucial for developing quantitative models of the cusp  and
              dayside current systems.  The PIs  will therefore focus on  shear-flow driven
              instabilities and associated turbulence and  transport.  Realistic 2-D and 3-D
              hybrid simulations of shear-flow  across the magnetosheath/outer cusp and
              mid-altitude cusp wall  boundaries will be completed.  Theoretical predictions
              of electric  and magnetic fluctuation spectra will be compared, especially with
               observed ULF-ELF wave spectra.  In turn, cross-field transport will  be
              calculated based on the observed fluctuation spectra to assess  the importance
              of anomalous diffusion processes in the cusp region.
