Title       : Radiation Protection Management for Non-Military Nuclear Technologies in the
               Developing World Since 1955
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9411952

Award Number: 9411952
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura M. Calkins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberlee J. Kearfott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9187,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9411952  Calkins  This project will provide support for an historian of
              international  relations to receive one year of training in nuclear
              engineering,  health physics and radiation protection fundamentals.  The 
              investigator will also undertake collaborative research with a  senior nuclear
              engineer and health physicist, to enable her to  study the radiation protection
              management strategies accompanying  the worldwide diffusion of non-military
              nuclear technologies.   Project research will develop along three related
              lines: i) a study  of the role of radiation protection management features in 
              developing countries' nuclear technologies acquisition programs  since 1955;
              ii) identification of the structures and content of  formal and informal
              international regulatory regimes for assuring  exposure risk minimization in
              the education, health and safety,  materials management, and facilities
              oversight sectors; and iii) an  assessment of developing countries' past,
              current, and probable  future engagement with those regulatory regimes.  The
              outcome will  be multi-dimensional and technically specific examinations of the
               process of nuclear technology development and accompanying  radiation
              protection regulation outside the advanced industrial  states.  It will offer
              new insights into the utility of various  international regulatory regimes in
              non-military sectors and into  radiation protection and materials management
              worldwide.  Results  will be disseminated broadly through publications and
              presentations  in academic and policy-making communities, as well as through 
              university and public presentations.  ***
