Title       : Non-Hydrolytic Gel Processing and Optical Properties of Wide-Bandgap Gallium
               Nitride-Aluminum Nitride Semiconductor Quantum Dots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9411179

Award Number: 9411179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Subhash H. Risbud shrisbud@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip P. Power  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9411179   Risbud      The focus of the present research program is to
              investigate the  synthesis, processing and optical properties of Gallium 
              Nitride-Aluminum Nitride nanometer size semiconductors that will be 
              sequestered in a glass matrix. These quantum dot materials will be  prepared by
              a novel combination of organic precursor based  synthetic chemistry routes used
              for nitride compounds and an  anhydrous non-hydrolytic gel process for the
              glass matrix.   Composite materials containing Gallium Nitride and Gallium 
              Nitride-Aluminum Nitride quantum dots in glass will be synthesized  and
              characterized for nanostructure using high resolution electron  microscopy
              techniques and small angle x-ray scattering.  Parallel  optical spectroscopic
              characterization will be performed to obtain  absorption and luminescence data
              that will be correlated with  measured sizes of quantum dots in samples
              processed  under a  variety of conditions. The results of the proposed work
              will  contribute in a fundamental way to the new science of wide band gap 
              nitride semiconductors for photonic device applications.           %%%   The
              preparation of materials with architectures as small as five  orders of
              magnitude smaller than the thickness of human hair  (nanometer sizes) is an
              important frontier area of  contemporary  materials research because in this
              size range materials show  dramatic changes in optical and electronic
              properties.   Nanoclusters of semiconductor materials like silicon or compounds
               of two or more elements will have a significant impact on the  emerging
              technologies of miniature lasers, flat panel displays, and  laptop computers.  
              An important feature of this program is the  training of graduate and
              undergraduate students in a fundamentally  and technologically significant area
              of materials and processing  research.     ***
