Title       : Collaborative Research on Spatial Decision Making Using Geographic Information
               Technology and Multi-Criteria Decision Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1996     
File        : a9411021

Award Number: 9411021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139462             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy L. Nyerges nyerges@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9411021  NYERGES       Locational conflicts arise when different people or
              groups  give different weights to various factors when deciding where to 
              locate facilities or resources.  The development of spatial  decision-support
              systems (SDSSs) for use within geographic  information systems (GISs) has
              offered new approaches for solving  spatial problems and making locational
              decisions.  Knowledge of  the benefits and limitations of such systems is
              limited by a  paucity of conceptual and empirical critiques of their use, 
              however.  This collaborative research project will provide  insights into the
              use of a SDSS for groups in order to understand  how and why such a group
              system affects decision-making processes  and outcomes.  Special attention will
              be given to analysis of  that ways that several thematic map types and
              multi-criteria  decision models influence the dynamics of, and are influenced
              by,  small-group interactions for site-location decisions.  In  laboratory
              experiments of small groups with five participants  within each group, graduate
              students from environmentally related  programs will select sites for habitat
              restoration and  development in the wake of toxic-waste cleanup projects. 
              Participants will function in a group-based software environment  created from
              a combination of commercial and public-domain  software.  Interaction-coding
              techniques will be used to compile  data from transcripts of the interaction
              process in order to  ascertain how SDSS approaches affect group decision
              making.       This project will contribute valuable new insights into the 
              dynamics of collaborative decision making and the use of  information
              technology by adding substantive knowledge about  multi-phase group
              decision-making processes.  It will apply and  refine an interaction-coding
              scheme to develop a knowledge base  that other technology-based studies of
              collaborative spatial  decision making can use, and it will develop a more
              complete  understanding of the integration needs for information techno logy 
              that involves GISs, multi-criteria decision models, and SDSSs for  groups. 
              Because of the pervasive character of locational issues  requiring collective
              decision making, the potential applications  for advances along these lines is
              enormous.
