Title       : Challenges to Democratization in Post-Soviet Societies: Comparing Elite and
               Citizen Perspectives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1994   
File        : a9411643

Award Number: 9411643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297962             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur H. Miller arthur-miller@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vicki Hesli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Reisinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9411643  Miller  This project continues and extends the investigator's earlier 
              survey of research in three former republics of the Soviet Union.   The stated
              goal of many post-Soviet leaders is the  democratization of their countries. 
              Thus, the process of  democratization as well as the development of effective
              state  structures is the theoretical focus of this investigation.  In 
              addressing this task, the investigators look first to structural  and then to
              instrumental theories of democratization in an effort  to understand the
              likelihood that post-Communist systems will be  successful in dealing with the
              myriad challenges to  democratization they currently face.  The structural
              theorists,  with their concentration on such prerequisites for democracy as 
              socio-economic development and supportive mass values are helpful  in pointing
              up the importance of societal factors in contributing  to or constraining the
              development of democracy, but these  theories tend to be lacking in the
              provision of an adequate  evidentiary base.  The instrumentalist studies, while
               highlighting the importance of struggles between competing elites  in
              determining the ultimate structure of politics, are for the  most part based
              upon case studies and therefore lacking  generalizable outcomes.    The current
              project integrates the structural and instrumentalist  approaches by offering a
              new theoretical and analytical focus and  by providing new empirical evidence
              drawn from their earlier  cross-national and longitudinal studies of societies
              currently in  the process of transition.  The investigators will augment the 
              two approaches by incorporating an analysis of factors necessary  for the
              establishment of strong governmental institutions - -  recognizing that a
              successful transition to democracy requires  the concurrent establishment of
              democratic procedures together  with effective government.  Two factors in
              particular have  limited effective state development - - the salience of
              competing  national identities within  these societies and the relative lack 
              of legitimacy enjoyed by the institutions of authority.  Tapping  into citizen
              orientations becomes especially critical when  citizens come to base their
              political participation in their  ethnic identity, and when ethnic groups are
              separated by feelings  of distrust, suspicion, and resentment.  The researchers
              will  study whether the devolution of political power to ethno-regional 
              territories and the promotion of preferential treatment programs  serves to
              decrease ethnic-based conflict and enhance the  possibilities for stable
              democracy.  In addition, the researchers  argue that the degree of citizen
              support for political leaders,  institutions, and both political and economic
              reform is critical  during times of transition.    By interviewing citizens the
              study will provide an assessment  from the perspective of the citizen as to how
              effectively the  government is meeting the needs of the people.  The study will
               allow for a direct linkage between the orientations of the  decision-makers
              and the constituencies they are meant to serve.
