Title       : Dissertation Research: The Understory as Ecological Filter: Its Influence on the
               Abundance, Composition, and Size Structure of Seedling Bank in New England
               Deciduous Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1994  
File        : a9411785

Award Number: 9411785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Fakhri A. Bazzaz fbazzaz@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9411785  Bazzaz   This dissertation research will evaluate the role of
              understory plants in shaping characteristics of the seedling bank in central
              New England forests. The understory has the potential to influence development
              and composition by acting as a filter through which all tree seeds and
              seedlings must pass. This project will explore whether the understory acts as a
              general filter that influences seedling abundance of all species similarly or
              whether selectivity of an understory filter predictably influences species
              composition and relative size structure of the seedling bank. Spatial
              correlations of tree seedlings and understory plants will be described in
              stands where overstory trees have been mapped so that seedlings-understory
              relationships can be established independently of seed rain patterns. Growth
              and survival of naturally recruiting tree seedlings will be monitored under
              different understory types for two years. Field experiments involving
              understory manipulation will test the effects of the presence and identity of
              two dominant ferns on dispersal, germination, growth, and survival of rd oak,
              red maple, and yellow birch seeds and seedlings.   %%%   Studies of forest
              regeneration have focused on the growth of tree seedlings with respect to the
              location and condition of canopy trees, yet little is known about how the
              understory herb and shrub strata influence stand succession. Results of this
              study will add to an understanding of forest regeneration following disturbance
              by focusing attention on processes which shape the starting array of advanced
              regenerants released by overstory removal.
