Title       : RUI: The Democratization of Technical Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1994     
File        : a9411876

Award Number: 9411876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94943              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew L. Feenberg afeenber@mail.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9411876  Feenberg  This project in philosophy of technology addresses the
              relationship  between democracy and technical change.  Its purpose is to
              consider  whether, when and how public interventions into technical change  are
              justified.  It will attempt to explain the sort of public  interventions into
              technical change that are occurring, for example  in the environmental
              movement, and that might be fostered by the  growth of a new democratic
              "technical public sphere."  The  investigator will study two types of public
              action for technical  change:  actions directed at the state in an attempt to
              influence  regulatory policies, and actions directed at technology itself in 
              an attempt to alter its design to favor new applications.  Both  types of
              intervention may be called democratic; the first, because  the intervention
              represents neglected social interests; the second,  because it enlarges the
              domain of active agency open to citizens.   The research addresses challenges
              to the democratic legitimacy and  technical rationality of public intervention,
              by providing an  account of the role of various mediations, such as government 
              regulation and technical professionalism, through which the demands  of
              self-selected social groups are transformed into technical  policy.  Using
              philosophical analysis and case histories, the  research will attempt to
              identify when public demands are able to  meet tests of legitimacy and
              rationality, because they are  structured around procedures that can assure the
              representativity  of decisions and their place in the evolutionary development
              of  technical practice.  Results from this research will be published  in
              articles and a book; the case studies will also be incorporated  into an
              undergraduate textbook.  ***
