Title       : Quantum Chemistry by Random Walk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1998     
File        : a9411181

Award Number: 9411181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Anderson jba@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, supported by the NSF Theoretical and Computational   Chemistry
              Program, further develops the direct simulation Monte Carlo   method for the
              solution of the electronic Schroedinger equation.  The   goal is to compute
              definitive theoretical energy surfaces for various   molecular systems with two
              to six electrons including small Helium   clusters, Lithium hydride, and the
              proton transfer reaction between the   Helium atom and the Hydrogen molecule
              ion.  Approximate Monte Carlo   methods for larger systems will be developed
              based on cancellation of   Monte Carlo walkers with opposite signs.  The goal
              is to achieve   significant improvement in accuracy over that of fixed-node
              Monte Carlo   methods.  These methods will be applied to the water molecule and
              to some   small hydrocarbons.    Direct simulation Monte Carlo methods employ a
              rigorous mathematical   relationship between the solutions of certain
              differential equations and   the statistical average of a large sample of
              weighted random walks in   many-dimensional space.  The accuracy of the method
              applied to the   approximate solution of the electronic Schroedinger equation
              is limited   only by the size of the statistical sample.   Monte Carlo
              calculations   have yielded the most accurate quantum mechanical potential
              energy   surfaces for the hydrogen atom hydrogen molecule exchange reaction,
              and   for various other small molecular systems, and so provide reliable  
              standards against which to test all other computational methods in   molecular
              electronic structure theory.  The present research project is   of fundamental
              importance because it will provide additional benchmarks   needed to better
              establish the foundations of theoretical methods to be   applied to a wide
              range of chemical problems.  A second goal of this   research is the
              development of less precise but more efficient Monte   Carlo methods applicable
              to somewhat larger molecular systems.
