Title       : From Experimental Evolution to Genetics in the Work of W.E. Castele and E. M.
               East
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9411862

Award Number: 9411862
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marga Vicedo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goals of the Progressive Era and the reforms in educational institutions
              during those years had a great influence on the development of genetics in this
              country.  In response to the emphasis on useful knowledge, may biologists
              developed research programs in "experimental evolution."  Best conceived as an
              approach to inquiry, experimental evolution aimed to solve the riddles of
              evolution and to predict its workings.  The ultimate goal, however, was to
              manipulate and control evolutionary forces.  This pragmatic goal led American
              studies in heredity and evolution to assume very distinctive characteristics,
              especially a pronounced theoretical and methodological eclecticism. 
              Researchers did not profess allegiance to any particular school of thought
              because they were not interested in building theoretical systems, but rather in
              finding practical applications.    Dr. Vicedo is exploring how the interests
              and goals behind experimental evolution changed over two decades in such a way
              that the field of genetics was identified with studies about the structure of 
              the genome, the type of research program so successfully developed by Morgan's
              group at Columbia University.  She is analyzing how this change took place
              through an analysis of the work of W.E. Castle and E.M. East at Harvard along
              with other work done by a number of other biologists.    This study promises to
              enhance our understanding of the history of genetics and lead to a reassessment
              of current interpretations of the development of Darwinian and Mendelian ideas.
               It will also help us to understand the roots of Morgan's work and the
              interests and problems that led towards the Modern Synthesis in evolutionary
              biology.  The role of national context in shaping styles of scientific thought
              will also be examined.  This study promises to enrich our understanding of how
              social, institutions, pragmatic, and intellectual factors interact in the
              development of a scientific discipline.
