Title       : Topics in Stabilization of Nonlinear Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1994    
File        : a9411145

Award Number: 9411145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147264             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla A. Schwartz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Irwin W. Sandberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9147,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9411145  Schwartz       The control of systems modeled by nonlinear differential
               equations is an important topic to study because of the  prevalence of these
              models in manufacturing, chemical process,  automotive, power, and aerospace
              industries.  Normal form  techniques have been successfully applied to simplify
              the state  space expression of nonlinear ordinary differential equations.  
              Here we propose to study the stabilization of nonlinear control  systems using
              normal form techniques.  Thus, we are interested in  systems whose
              linearizations possess at least one uncontrollable  critical mode.  From some
              preliminary analysis, it can be  inferred that there is a great advantage to
              using the normal form  as a method to reduce the dimension of the system whose
              stability  is to be analyzed.  We propose to study this dimensional  advantage
              in detail as it may be applied to various problems.       One question of
              interest is to understand and characterize  the decoupling of the critical and
              stable modes of a nonlinear  control system in normal form.  Another line of
              proposed study is  to examine how the normal form characterizes the Lyapunov 
              function associated with the nonlinear system.  We would also  estimate the
              region of attraction of stability for nonlinear  systems using the normal form.
               We will study the relationship  between the normal form and the center
              manifold techniques which  have been previously used in stabilization analyses.
               Full and  Partial feedback linearization, and approximate feedback 
              linearization will also be studied, to see if these objectives  can be achieved
              more simply using the normal form.       Time scale techniques have been
              applied to control systems  in order to simplify analysis and obtain stability
              results.  A  further direction of the research herein proposed will be to 
              derive a deeper understanding of the relationship between  stability and time
              scale, and the relevance of time scale  techniques to existing center manifold
              and normal form techniques  in  stabilization of nonlinear control systems. 
              ***
