Title       : Wartime Catalyst and Postwar Reaction: The Making of the U.S. Synthetic Organic
               Chemicals Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1996     
File        : a9411742

Award Number: 9411742
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17240              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn Steen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Prior to World War 1, the United States possessed virtually no synthetic organic
              chemicals industry.  Instead, it relied almost exclusively on imports of such
              chemicals from Germany, the world leader in this area.  During and following
              World War I, American industrialists and government officials, with support
              from universities, promoted the organic chemistry industry through policies
              that included tariffs and embargoes, military procurement contracts, and
              confiscation of German chemical property.  By the end of the 1920's, the
              American chemical industry was firmly established as a world competitor capable
              of producing such notable products as aspirin, plastics, and dyestuffs.     
              Under a previous grant to support her doctoral dissertation research, Dr. Steen
              examined the development of the American  synthetic organic chemical industry
              from 1910 to 1933.  Under this grant, she is extending her American study to
              gain a greater understanding of the complex relationship between the German
              chemical companies and their American importing agents during years of wartime
              stress and rampant xenophobia.  She is also extending her previous study to
              include the area of pharmaceuticals.  In order to carry out this extended
              study, Dr. Steen is examining  German archives  of the Bayer Company, and the
              B.A.S.F. company , the archives at the Deutches Museum in Munich, and the
              Charles H. Herty papers at Emory University.
