Title       : Grammatical Agreement in Speech Production: The Cognitive Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1999   
File        : a9411627

Award Number: 9411627
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337460             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Kathryn Bock kbock@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9411672         The central issues in the study of language involve the 
              relationship between language and nonlinguistic cognition.  Accordingly, the
              aim of the project is to determine the kinds of  conceptual and linguistic
              information that are called on to  create grammatical agreement, and to explain
              their interplay in  ongoing speech. Two general agreement relations will be
              explored.  The first is number agreement between subjects and verbs,  extending
              work carried out during the previous grant period. The  second is agreement
              between subjects and pronouns, specifically  reflexive pronouns and tag
              pronouns. Previous research focused on  three questions about the production of
              subject-verb number  agreement in English: (1) the nature of the verb's
              agreement  controllers, whether linguistic or pragmatic; (2) the nature of  the
              number information that is used in agreement, whether  grammatical or
              conceptual; and (3) the principal locus of  agreement implementation, whether
              created over grammatical  relations or across surface strings. The empirically
              derived  answers to these questions indicate that the verb's agreement 
              controllers can be linguistic rather than pragmatic, that the  number used
              during agreement implementation is grammatical, and  that the implementation is
              driven from a grammatical level, with  little influence either from conceptual
              features of the message  or from the phonological features of inflectional
              morphemes.       The new  research extends these results in three directions. 
              All three have to do with the cognitive context of agreement. The  goal is to
              better illuminate the transition from conceptual to  linguistic features,
              including the mechanisms that implement the  concrete details of agreement. The
              experiments examine (a)  whether the number and gender features that are called
              on in  subject-verb agreement are the same as the number and gender  features
              called on in pronominal agreement; (b) whether the  features that are
              responsible for agreement errors are the s ame  features that control canonical
              agreement; and (c) how speakers  create agreement-inflected word forms. In
              addition to these three  main themes, studies are proposed to extend the work 
              crosslinguistically, going beyond the minimal agreement system of  English. All
              of the investigations draw simultaneously from  controlled experimental methods
              for eliciting utterances and from  observations of agreement patterns in
              everyday speech. In these  ways, the research systematically enhances our
              understanding of a  cardinal facet of human communication, the production of 
              language. The emphasis on normal production and the role of  syntax in it makes
              the ongoing research program unique in  psycholinguistics.
