Title       : REG: X-Ray Powder Diffractometer for Characterization of Ultrafine Materials and
               Novel Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1994       
File        : a9411901

Award Number: 9411901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jackie Y. Ying jyying@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hans-Conrad zur Loye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              52        Engineering-Astronautical               
Program Ref : 9162,9179,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Jackie Y. Ying  CTS-9411901    A X-ray powder diffractometer will be
              purchased and dedicated to support several research projects in the Departments
              of Chemical Engineering and Chemistry at Massachusetts Institute of 
              Technology.  The projects include structural tailoring of ultrafine materials
              generated through nanocrystalline synthesis, sol-gel processing, and  pillaring
              of  layered structures.  The common theme of these programs lies in the design
              of nanoscale structure, which consists of nanometer-sized crystallites or
              two-dimensional layered structures, high volume fraction of surfaces and
              interfaces, and microporous network.  X-ray diffractometry will be used in the
              identification of crystalline phases, and in the characterization of 
              crystallite size, lattice strain, film thickness, interlayer spacing, and
              thermal stability.  Novel nanostructures are targeted towards the following
              applications:  (1) high activity catalysts for SO2 removal, (2) microporous
              molecularly mixed multicomponent catalysts for partial oxidation and
              hydrodesulfirization, (3) low-temperature sinterable, high strength Si3N4-based
              structural composites, ad (4) high permselectivity dense metallic membranes for
              hydrogen purification and membrane reaction.  The first three projects are
              currently funded by NSF.    The proposed diffractometer will be also used in
              the phase identification and structural determination of new nitrides and
              oxygen ion conductors.  Ternary nitrides which have interesting metallic and
              magnetic properties will be synthesized via ammonolysis of solid state oxide
              precursors.  Accurate structural characterization of these polycrystalline
              powders will be performed with X-ray Rietveld refinement.  Similar structural
              determination is also proposed for novel layered bismuth oxides with intrinsic
              oxygen vacancies.  They have great potential as low-temperature superionic
              oxygen ion conductors, which will be very useful in fuel cell and air
              separation technologies.  Research is funded through gran ts from Division and
              American Chemical Society Petroleum Research Fund.  ***
