Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Molecular Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1994      
File        : a9411213

Award Number: 9411213
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Grace E. Panganiban   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1159      POSTDOC RSCH FELLOW IN MOL EVO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9125,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Appendage morphology and numbers are the keys used to define  arthropod
              subgroups and on that basis, insects are thought to have  evolved from a
              myriapod-like animal which had identical limbs on  each of many trunk segments.
              In a dipteran insect, Drosophila  melanogaster, a gene named distal-less (Dll)
              is expressed in  developing limbs. A homologue to that gene was cloned from
              Precis  coenia, a lepidopteran insect. That gene is also expressed in all 
              developing limbs, except the mandible, but in distinct patterns in  different
              limb types. These results suggest that Dll could be a  useful probe with which
              to examine the relationships between the  appendages of different arthropods
              and   to determine the origin of appendages in arthropod ancestors. 
              Representative myriapod and crustacean species will be chosen.  Homologues of
              Dll will be cloned from each species chosen and the  expression pattern of
              these genes in developing embryos and  appendages will be determined.   %%% 
              Although we have some understanding of how simple molecules might  have evolved
              to more complex forms, there is complete mystery  surrounding the evolution of
              complex structures such as limbs or  wings. The results of this work should
              give insight on appendage  (and arthropod) evolution and, perhaps, suggest
              mechanisms for the  evolution of such structures.                              
                                                                                             
                                               Review Analysis  Form 7          BIR 9411213 
              Grace R. Panganiban        Dr. Sean Carroll is striking out in a new direction
              in his interest  in molecular evolution of appendage development. He is an 
              outstanding scientist and this is an excellent environment for Dr.  Panganiban
              to continue her studies in this area. She has been in  his lab for 2 1/2 years,
              first working on a molecular study of  neuroblast formation and then switching
              to this project. (She is  tied to this area for personal reasons.) Her
              references were all  positi ve and this is an exciting and novel area of
              research. The  one panelist that was relatively lukewarm in his assessment of
              this  proposal felt that "this proposal lacks a compelling evolutionary 
              motivation" but his colleagues disagreed. Support is recommended.
