Title       : Dissertation Research: Origins of Public Health Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1994      
File        : a9411962

Award Number: 9411962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley A. Roe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Ms. Michelle Anne Laughran, working under the direction of  Professor Shirley
              Roe, is examining the rise of efforts on the part  of cities and other
              governments to regulate human behavior in order  to protect human health.  The
              degree to which a government might  optimally intervene is of constant concern.
               The United States, for  example, had a dismal failure in its attempt to
              criminalize  alcohol.  Use of alcohol in the United States was not stopped
              while  criminal behavior rose dramatically in order to meet the demands of 
              citizens wanting to drink.  The net effect was a broad scale  disrespect of the
              law.  Given this experience, Congress and the  Administration is currently
              debating how far it should go to  regulate smoking.  One approach, short of
              prohibition, would be  taxation; but even here, too high a tax will lead to
              smuggling and  other methods of subverting the law.      Regulation of public
              health arose in the modern world with the  efforts of cities in Northern Italy
              to prevent the plague.  Ms.  Laughran is examining the developments in Venice
              where a civil  magistrate for public health quickly expanded his powers to
              include  supervision of begging, prostitution, hostelries and the city's  poor
              population.  By tracing how this magistrate for health  expanded his power over
              such a broad spectrum of human behavior and  the effects this expansion had
              both on public health and the  operation of government, Ms. Laughran promises
              to illuminate both  the beneficial and the detrimental aspects of public health
              policy.
