Title       : The Rise and Fall of the Superconducting Super Collider
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1998   
File        : a9411671

Award Number: 9411671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240025             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lillian Hoddeson hoddeson@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Superconducting Super Collider (SSC), the American high-  energy physics
              project begun in 1983 and abruptly terminated  in 1993 by Congress after $2
              billion had been spent on  construction, offers everyone interested in science
              studies  a unique opportunity to study the dynamics of "big science."  This
              four year project under the direction of Professor  Lillian Hoddeson is being
              carried out by an experience  multidisciplinary team and aims to unravel and
              explain the  factors responsible for the genesis as well as the demise of  the
              SSC.    A proton collider more than an order of magnitude more  energetic than
              any earlier accelerator and far more  expensive, the SSC was the most ambitious
              particle  accelerator project ever attempted.  This frontier machine  was
              intended to fulfill `the desires and aspirations of the  whole US high energy
              community."   Because of its size and  cost, the alliances necessary to support
              this project  reached deep into the political, industrial, and even  military
              communities of the United States.  Professor  Hoddeson and her team aim to
              examine these linkages and to  study how a major scientific community creates a
              large  project and reacts to its collapse.  In examining the  termination of
              the SSC, the study will consider whether big  science, which previously had
              grown almost without bounds,  has reached a turning point, or perhaps an
              evolutionary dead  end, and whether future projects on the scale of the SSC 
              will ever be possible again.    For more than a decade, all four members of
              this research  team have been studying the field of high-energy physics, 
              including the SSC, from varying perspectives-- scientific,  historical,
              archival, philosophical, and sociological.  Two  of them have been
              communicating with SSC staff in an effort  to preserve important documents as
              well as the collective  institutional memory.  This study will integrate the 
              complementary experience of these scholars of science.  They  will undertake an
               intensive effort to study documenta tion,  preserve oral recollections of
              principal participants, and  prepare a carefully researched study of widest
              interest.
