Title       : Dissertational Improvement: Ecological Pressures Selecting for Dietary
               Plasticity During Migration in Two Neotropical Migratory Passerine Genera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1994       
File        : a9411650

Award Number: 9411650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11060              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglass H. Morse D_MORSE@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9411650  Morse         The decline of many populations of Neotropical  migratory
              songbirds has triggered much research over the  last decade into the biology of
              these species on their  temperate breeding grounds and their tropical wintering
               areas. The interim migration period has received much less  attention, despite
              the extreme energetic demands and the  very divergent behavior of migrants
              during this transient  period. During migration, many songbirds diversify their
               breeding-season behaviors to select different habitats, use  more foraging
              behaviors, and feed on more varied diet types  than at other times of the year.
               The ecological factors  behind the evolution of such behavioral plasticity and
              the  ecological and conservation implications these divergent  behaviors remain
              speculative.  The proposed research will  investigate these questions in one
              aspect of behavioral  diversification in autumn migrating songbirds - the shift
              in  diet from eating insects to one of eating fruit.       Preliminary research
              on Block Island, Rhode Island  suggests that unpredictability in resource
              abundance at  migratory stopover sites and increased energy intake on  expanded
              diets during the demanding migration period have  led to behavioral plasticity
              in songbirds. This research  will be furthered with continued monitoring of
              insect and  fruit abundance at stopover sites to monitor different  degrees of
              predictability of the two resources during  Autumn, 1994 and 1995. Furthermore,
              migrants will be fed  experimental  diets with varying degrees of fruit to 
              determine the extent they can fatten on expanded diets, thus  testing the
              hypothesis that diversification of ingested food  types has resulted from
              selection to maximize energy intake  during migration. Finally, experiments
              will allow evaluation  (through doubly-labeled  water techniques) of the amount
              of  energy saved by migrant birds in feeding on diverse diets.  These
              techniques allow estimation of the energy expenditure  of birds which can be
              follow ed under situations where birds  have monotypic and diverse diets
              available to them. These  studies will provide insight into the evolutionary
              pressures  for behavioral plasticity as well as important information  about
              the biology of migrating songbirds.  This in turn will  allow better
              conservation decisions to be made regarding  these declining populations.  ***
