Title       : Dissertation Support: Sociology of Alternative Knowledge of AIDS in the U.S. and
               England.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1994     
File        : a9411787

Award Number: 9411787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10864              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Watts mwatts@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9411787  Watts  Challenges to the received view that the human immuno-deficiency
               virus (HIV) is the primary cause of the epidemic of AIDS have  arisen from
              'heretics' within the biosciences, and from academics,  authors and treatment
              organizations outside of institutionalized  science.  Some of this response can
              be attributed to the failure of  Western researchers to characterize the
              virus's action completely  and to advance effective therapies.  This
              dissertation project will  seek to provide a more comprehensive explanation for
              this increase  in the production and dissemination of alternative knowledge on
              the  AIDS epidemic.  The thesis is that understanding national  structural
              differences in the political organization of dissidents  and their access to
              scientific forums and the mass media is  necessary to explain the different
              degrees to which dissidents in  the United States and England have succeeded in
              deconstructing  'expert' discourse and orthodox knowledge on the epidemic and 
              engaged the 'AIDS establishment' in serious dialogue on the  cause(s) and
              treatment of the disease and the appropriate direction  for public health
              policies regarding the epidemic. This research  will 1) explore the sites and
              content of alternative knowledge on  acquired immune-deficiency syndrome and
              AIDS in the United States  and England, and 2) explain the structural
              differences in the  access that dissidents have to forums for disseminating
              their views  in each country.  Methodologically, the research will involve
              semi-  structured interviews with dissidents, participant observation of 
              dissidents during the 2nd Alternative AIDS Conference and dissident  meetings,
              and archival research on dissident publications and  media. It will involve
              analysis of dissident claims as presented by  individuals, in archives, audio
              and video-tapes, and science  journals.  Representatives of media who have
              aired dissident views  as well as science reporters working for several English
              and U.S.  newspapers who have restricted  dissident debates will be 
              interviewed, as will persons who have sought to limit dissident  access to
              international scientific and medical forums on AIDS.    ***
