Title       : Dissertation Research: Examination of Prehistoric Jordanian Economies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1994      
File        : a9411400

Award Number: 9411400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky Karlovsk@husc4.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lamberg-Karlovsky    Under the direction of Dr. Lamberg-Karlovsky, Ms. Meridith 
              Chesson will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Building  on pilot
              work in 1993, Ms. Chesson and her collaborators will  conduct archaeological
              excavation at the site of Tell el-Handaquq   South which dates to the Early
              Bronze Age and which is located in  the Jordan Valley. Research indicates the
              presence of substantial  fortification walls which encompass the entire 10
              hectare site.  At lease seven towers complement the fortification system. Over 
              the entire site, room blocks are visible on the surface, some  with walls
              extending for more than 30 meters. Test excavations in  one set of room blocks
              revealed domestic architecture with  associated ceramic, lithic, faunal and
              groundstone remains. The  site therefore has the potential to shed significant
              new light  into household organization during the period when fortified  highly
              organized villages first emerged in the Near East. Ms.   Chesson will uncover a
              large domestic area and analyze the range  of cultural materials thus
              recovered. She will attempt both to  reconstruct the range of social and
              economic activities which  occurred within household compounds and to determine
              the nature,  function and importance of the household unit in Early Bronze Age 
              times.    Archaeologists are interested in the processes which lead to the 
              rise of cities and complex civilizations. While traditionally,  much attention
              has been focussed on temples and major public  buildings, both archaeological
              and ethnographic research indicate  that the household constitutes the basic
              level at which change  and adaptation occurs. Given clearcut evidence for the
              presence  of household compounds at Tel el-Handaquq and the ease with which 
              they can be excavated, the site provides an excellent opportunity  for
              examination of this issue. The project is also important  because it will both
              produce data of interest to many  archaeologists and assist in the training of
              a promising young  sci entist.
