Title       : Dynamics of Task-oriented Communication: Tests of Computer Models of Affect
               Control Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1998  
File        : a9411157

Award Number: 9411157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110796             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn Smith-Lovin smithlov@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,9139,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This is a study of dynamics of identity maintenance in conversational
              interaction, focusing on turn-taking and interruption in conversation, based on
              a new theoretical approach that combines the three dimensions of status
              (deference), power (dominance), and expressivity.  Two studies will test this
              new model.  Study 1 uses data from 53 mock juries.  Identity measurements are
              taken from group participants before the discussions began.  Event history
              analysis will model the risk of ending a turn with either a normal transition
              or an interruption.  Identity information from both the current speaker and the
              next speaker will be used to predict turn length and type of transition.  Study
              2 will use an experimental design to manipulate the identities that people
              bring to conversations.  By assigning people to roles with varying evaluative
              and potency connotations, then having them engage in activities to instantiate
              those roles, the experiment will randomly assign the identities expected to be
              maintained in conversational interaction.  Event history analyses parallel to
              Study 1 will be used to test the theoretical predictions.  %%%   This project
              is a step toward important new developments in advanced computing.  It employs
              affect control theory, a formal, mathematical model of the interrelationship of
              identity, behavior, emotion and attribution.  The theory is embodied in a
              computer simulation called INTERACT that predicts the emotional and evaluative
              responses of human beings confronted with various complex situations.  This
              research will test the computer simulation's predictions, and if the hypotheses
              are supported will enable the elaboration of INTERACT to allow prediction of
              small group behavior.  Most importantly, INTERACT software can then be expanded
              to include a much larger set of linguistic terms, running on faster and larger
              machines, that would permit computers to simulate emotional behavior and to
              respond more appropriately to the emotional behavior of human beings.    %%%  
              Affect c ontrol theory is a major intellectual force in contemporary social
              psychology, and the sociology of emotions is among the most active new
              subdisciplines, so this research will be of wide interest to social and
              behavioral scientists.  The improvement of simulation models of emotion in
              social interaction will have significant implications for artificial
              intelligence and for human-computer communication.
