Title       : An Evolutionary Approach to Bio-Organic Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1997   
File        : a9411641

Award Number: 9411641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fredric M. Menger MENGER@EMORY.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    With funding from the Organic Dynamics Program Professor Menger at Emory
              University will  study the hydrophobic association of various long-chain
              organic materials containing carboxylate,  amine, imidazole, hydroxyl, and
              metal functionalities into complex assemblages called "clumps."  These
              substances will be screened for potential catalytic activity in water toward a
              variety of  organic reactions.  Methods related to combinatorial chemistry will
              be used to identify clumps  that exhibit catalytic activity approaching that of
              enzymes.  These methods will be extended to  the study of substances bonded to
              colloidal gold and to substances bonded to polymers.    This study will measure
              the ability of a mixture of organic molecules containing long chains of 
              chemically bonded carbon atoms and other reactive atoms to associate together
              in water solution  to form microscopic spherical balls called clumps.  These
              clumps are expected to behave in a  manner similar to naturally occurring
              enzymes.  Because organic reactions do not occur readily  in water, these
              clumps may help to enhance the reaction of organic compounds in a water 
              environment.  This could help to reduce the amount of hazardous wastes
              generated from  industrial production of organic compounds that normally
              require organic solvents that must be  recycled or burned.
