Title       : Race Redistricting, and Representation in the United States House of
               Representatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1994      
File        : a9411028

Award Number: 9411028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56722              (Estimated)
Investigator: David T. Canon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9411028  Canon  A central problem for representative democracy is to provide a 
              voice for minority interests in a system that is dominated by the  votes of the
              majority.  The legitimacy and stability of any  democracy depends, in part, on
              its ability to accomplish that  difficult aim.  The problem is especially acute
              in the U.S.  Congress where minorities are dramatically underrepresented.  
              State legislatures attempted to address this concern in the 1992 
              reapportionment process by creating 20 new districts in which a  majority of
              the voters are African-American or Hispanic.  The  goal of "empowering"
              minority voters through creative  redistricting is extremely controversial. 
              Detractors ridicule  the policy as affirmative action for African American
              politicians  and worry about creating political apartheid.  The issue received 
              national attention for several weeks in the summer of 1993 as the  Supreme
              Court handed down a landmark decision that could  challenge the new districts
              (Shaw v Reno) and Lani Guinier's  nomination to the Civil Rights Commission was
              removed by  President Clinton under pressure from Democrats who bridled at  her
              notion of "authentic black representation."  Minority  districting also has
              important implications for the normative  debate raging in the minority
              politics and women's studies  literature concerning the "politics of
              difference" versus the  "politics of commonality."  A politics of commonality
              strives to  provide equal protection of the laws without special treatment  for
              any single group, while a politics of difference calls for  proper remedies for
              previous discrimination and exclusion.  Most  political observers, including
              proponents and opponents of the  strategy, see the creation of
              minority-majority districts as an  embodiment of the politics of difference.   
              This research challenges that common wisdom.  The investigator's  previous
              research shows that many of the African American  politicians who were elected
              in the new districts embody the  politics of c ommonality, rather than the
              politics of difference.   This investigation will determine whether behavior in
              campaigns  translates into behavior in office.  Does the racially charged 
              atmosphere of some campaigns carry over into the governing  process so that
              some blacks do not represent white voters?  Are  promises to represent both
              white and black constituents kept by  black members who were elected by
              biracial coalitions, or do they  follow their colleagues in the Black Caucus on
              some issues that  are racially polarizing?  This research will examine roll
              call  votes, speeches, introduction of bills, committee assignments, 
              constituency service, and the media's coverage of black House  members to
              explore the nature of representation in black  districts.   The multivariate
              analysis to be employed will be  supplemented by interviews of members and
              their staff.  The  research will provide important new insights about the
              nature of  representation provided to these new districts, the linkages 
              between campaigning and governing in racial politics, and the  usefulness of
              racial redistricting as a means of empowering  minority voters.
