Title       : Faculty Workshop on Computer-Aided Instruction in Linear Algebra and
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1993  
File        : a9054195

Award Number: 9054195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Haver                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71731              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee L. Zia llz@garlic.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Homer F. Bechtell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9268,
Abstract    :
              This three-week summer workshop at the University of New Hampshire             
              targets undergraduate mathematics faculty who teach linear algebra             
              or differential equations, but have minimal experience with                    
              computer-aided instruction (CAI) in their courses.  These faculty              
              seek to enhance their teaching by creating CAI materials, e.g. in-             
              class demonstrations, problem sets, syllabi, and operational                   
              procedures, that effectively integrate computer technology into                
              their instructional plans.  Morning sessions survey and reinforce              
              specific mathematical concepts, address the development of                     
              pedagogical strategies, and examine the design of curriculum                   
              materials.  Each afternoon, participants work in teams to                      
              formulate, produce, and evaluate CAI materials appropriate to their            
              individual courses.  Guest visitors supplement these regular                   
              activities with talks and discussions on applications and broad                
              pedagogical issues raised by CAI.  The major impact of the program             
              is the enhancement of the teaching of differential equations and               
              linear algebra.  Effective use of CAI in these subjects can                    
              increase the mathematical maturity of students without sacrificing             
              course content.  This objective is also with curricular goals in               
              engineering and the physical science.
