Title       : Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement in Membrane Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1990 
File        : a9054212

Award Number: 9054212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Haver                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51951              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Stewart Slater   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Manhattan College
	      Manhattan College Parkway
	      Bronx, NY  104632216    212/920-0100

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9268,
Abstract    :
              Membrane technology is a state-of-the-art area critical to many of             
              the traditional and emerging engineering fields.  It is important,             
              therefore, that undergraduate faculty be educated in the field of              
              membrane technology in order to integrate it into the engineering              
              curriculum .  Membrane processes are being incorporated into the               
              growing areas of biological engineering/biotechnology, hazardous               
              waste management, microelectronics production, specialty chemical              
              and biochemical production, biomedical engineering, and in the                 
              traditional chemical and petroleum industries.  This workshop is               
              combining both the lecture and laboratory components of this                   
              advanced technology providing participants with hands-on                       
              experience.  Workshop participants attend lectures on the                      
              fundamentals, design and applications of membrane processes such               
              as reverse osmosis, ultrafiltration, microfiltration,                          
              electromembranes, pervaporation, gas permeation and hybrid systems.            
              The undergraduate faculty participants perform experiments with                
              state-of-the-art membrane systems and investigate actual                       
              applications to industry.  Several publications, a "white paper"               
              and laboratory manual result from the successful execution of this             
              workshop.  These publications substantially broaden the impact of              
              the project and significantly contribute to improvements in                    
              undergraduate science and engineering education.
