Title       : Mathematics Teachers Preparation Improvement Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1992   
File        : a9054583

Award Number: 9054583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Haver                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $426322             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth Ann Meyer ruth.a.meyer@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Flanders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dwayne E. Channell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will develop materials for two mathematics                        
              courses for preservice teachers, one course for teachers at                    
              the elementary-middle school level and one for teachers at                     
              the high school level.  The related theme of the courses is                    
              teaching and learning with computing technology.  The course                   
              for K-8 preservice teachers will center on probability and                     
              statistics.  The materials development will include                            
              laboratory-based activities that integrate calculators and                     
              computers to motivate, enhance and reinforce the learning of                   
              probability and statistics.  The course for secondary                          
              preservice teachers will involve students in active learning                   
              situations designed around cooperative and individual                          
              investigations of mathematical problems.  Emphasis is placed                   
              on mathematical problem solving, mathematical modeling, and                    
              multiple representations of mathematics.  Probability and                      
              statistics will be the setting for some of the problems.                       
              Computer technology is used to generate data, perform                          
              statistical analyses, sketch graphs, draw geometric                            
              figures, approximate solutions to equations, and carry out                     
              algorithms.  The materials from both courses will be                           
              disseminated widely with a special focus on the teacher                        
              preparation institutions within Michigan.  The NCTM Standards                  
              will be the basis for decisions about curriculum to be                         
              included and instructional strategies to be used.  The                         
              project team will be supported by a team of advisors from                      
              other teacher education institutions within Michigan and from                  
              other states.  The advisors have been selected for their                       
              expertise in technology, mathematics, and statistics.                          
              Teachers will also be involved as advisors in the project.                     
                                                                                             
              The cost sharing will be 50% of the NSF funding for the                        
              project.
