Title       : SGER: Mathematical Modeling of Living Cell Membranes: Application to AFM-Based
               Recognition Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0311833

Award Number: 0311833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61386              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eveline Baesu ebaesu@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,9102,9150,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The research supported by this SGER award addresses the
              quantification of the response of the in vivo cell membranes probed with Atomic
              Force Microscope (AFM). The long-term objective is to understand the extent to
              which the membrane of a cell mirrors certain biochemical processes within the
              cell and how the biophysical properties of the membrane provide insight into
              the health of a cell. At the heart of such an investigation is a theory capable
              of modeling the complex interaction between an AFM probe and the soft cell
              membrane. Such a theory then renders the AFM a powerful tool for characterizing
              the biomechanical properties of cell membranes. 

The investigation proposed
              here is based on a general continuum theory derived from first principles of
              fluid membranes endowed with local bending resistance. In accordance with the
              physics of the problem the membrane is assumed to enclose a fluid medium, which
              transmits hydrostatic pressure to the membrane, and a point load is applied at
              the pole of the membrane to simulate the effect of an AFM probe. Both types of
              loading are associated with a potential and the problem is then cast in a
              variational setting, which is used to obtain the equations that describe
              axisymmetric equilibrium states of the cell membrane. Further refinements
              associated with global constraints on the enclosed volume and contact with a
              rigid substrate are proposed together with a solution strategy that relies on
              an iterative scheme for calculating the associated Lagrange multipliers. The
              main goal then is to use the numerical implementation of the model to identify
              the material constants associated with the mechanical behavior of the cell
              membrane through correlation with AFM data and further refinement of the model.
               The expected outcome of this seed grant project would be the first
              experimentally validated model that characterizes the nonlinear interaction
              between an AFM probe and a cell membrane.

The broader impact of the proposed
              research is the development of new technology for biological research, by
              including Atomic Force Microscope among the tools used in cell investigation.
              The proposed theoretical/computational approach together with the experimental
              program has far reaching potential applications.  Using this method, the effect
              of pathogens on healthy cell membranes can be studied resulting in physical
              methods for identification and detection of these pathogens (for e.g. in
              developing defensive measures against biological and chemical agents).  A
              promising area of investigation would be to investigate changes in the membrane
              of tumor cells that enable cells to divide and metastasize.  This could
              potentially lead to earlier detection and confirmation of malignancy.  Yet
              another fruitful avenue of research would be to use this method to gain a deep
              understanding of the underlying mechanics of cell motility.  Finally this
              method could facilitate a deeper understanding of the relationship between
              membrane properties and disease, i.e. how changes in membrane properties and
              membrane-bound proteins leads to (or are indicative of) disease, which in turn
              could lead to alternative treatment strategies.

