Title       : 2003 Cold Spring Harbor Conference: Genomic Approaches to Transcriptional
               Regulation, March 6-9, 2003, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0311769

Award Number: 0311769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Stewart stewart@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1080,1154,9183,9263,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project provides partial funding for the "Genomic Approaches to
              Transcriptional Regulation Conference", to be held at Cold Spring Harbor
              Laboratory, March 6-9, 2003.  The meeting will focus on unraveling the
              regulatory information that controls the activation and repression of genes
              involved in developmental, metabolic, and environmental responses.
              Traditionally, investigators have studied this problem by analyzing the
              DNA-binding preferences of specific transcription factors, and/or the
              cis-regulatory elements that control the expression patterns of single genes.
              These studies have tentatively identified DNA sequence motifs for around one
              hundred transcription factors, and have led to the idea that transcriptional
              regulation at the genome level involves a complex interplay between modular DNA
              sequence elements such as enhancers, silencers, insulators, and basal promoter
              elements.  Despite this progress, there is still much to learn about the
              mechanisms that control the transcriptional repertoire within an individual
              cell.  Because of the scope of this problem, researchers have begun to refine
              traditional experimental approaches and invent new ones. Many of these
              approaches involve a computational component in their design or interpretation.
               Other strategies have evolved from the availability of several complete
              genomic sequences and the prospects of many more to come.  It is clear that
              effective collaborations between experimental and computational biologists will
              be required to grapple with this complex problem.  Thus this meeting will be
              organized so as to permit a free cross-disciplinary exchange of existing ideas
              and expertise. It is hoped that this meeting will provide a mechanism for the
              establishment of new collaborations, and a forum for discussing new
              experimental and computational approaches.
