Title       : Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between
               NSF and SRC: Fast Methods of Coupled EM. Circuit and Logic Simulation for
               Giga-Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0120371

Award Number: 0120371
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225003             (Estimated)
Investigator: C.J. Richard Shi cjshi@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vikram Jandhyala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1752,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project aims at developing fast algorithms for rapid simulation of
              giga-scale systems-on-chip, where coupled circuit, logic, and electromagnetic
              (EM) effects (including RLC parasitics, coupling, cross talk, skin and thermal
              effects---both quasi-static and full-wave), are becoming increasingly
              important.  For coupled EM and circuit simulation, we propose to investigate a
              novel partial-element equivalent electric circuit (PEEC) approach. For coupled
              EM and digital simulation, we propose to investigate variant time stepping in
              EM analysis and to use conservative synchronization with digital events. More
              specifically, our approach consists of the following key
              elements:

Developing fast integral-equation-based solution methods that will
              make feasible EM simulation in these settings, and will permit hierarchical or
              multilevel EM analyses at varying degrees of model
              complexity.

Implementation of fast and hierarchical schemes through a
              variation of the partial equivalent electric circuit method for triangular mesh
              tessellations.

Coupling of EM simulation schemes directly to digital logic
              simulation in order to analyze switching and ground bounce in power-ground
              plane situations.

Exploitation of structure and redundancies present in EM,
              circuit-level as well as coupled-system matrices in order to drastically reduce
              memory and computation time to a degree such that rigorous and complete coupled
              simulation will be feasible for complex-systems-on-chip.  Sensitivity analysis,
              reduced-order modeling, and multi-physics simulations are targeted in
              addition.

Development of optimized compilation techniques for generating
              ordinary differential equation (ODE) code for circuit simulation, and for
              exploiting the circuit structural regularity for fast hierarchical circuit/EM
              simulation.  The application drivers for testing proposed coupled EM/circuit
              and EM/digital simulation will include (1) Giga-hertz CMOS transceivers on
              chip, and (2) Power/ground network of giga-hertz digital circuits including
              gate switching activity modeling.

It is intended that the development of
              fast and rigorous EM/circuit and EM/logic simulation will enable accurate yet
              efficient sign-off simulation of next generation mixed-signal circuits and
              systems, enable simulation in the loop design optimization and architecture
              tradeoff, and finally enable design for testability where EM effects are
              becoming hard to characterize, predict, and measure.

