Title       : RES - Women in Information Technology: Pivotal Transitions from School to
               Careers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0120458

Award Number: 0120458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $655850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol J. Burger cjburger@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peggy S. Meszaros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Creamer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The " Women in Information Technology: Pivotal Transitions from School to
              Careers" project is gathering primary research data for K-12 and university
              educators, policy makers, and administrators about those pivotal transition
              points in girls' lives that result in their positive or negative view of
              information technology as a viable career choice. It is gathering new
              information about how the total environment - at the high school, community
              college, and university levels, both inside and outside the school -- helps
              shape girls' perceptions of technology as friendly or unfriendly to them. It
              will document longitudinally the impact of family, peers, school, and community
              on girls' perceptions of IT careers; examine the key transition points in
              girls' experiences with technology; and determine how the choice of a
              nontraditional career is associated with the development of
              self-authorship.

The project combines standard interview and survey
              techniques within the theoretical framework of self-authorship. Methods include
              a pre- and post-survey; individual interviews; small group interviews; a
              videotape documentary and case studies of the longitudinal development of
              girls' career transitions and choices; and group activities using computer
              programs to stimulate girls' interest in and understanding of IT careers. A set
              of IT careers workshops are planned as an incentive for participating students
              and parents, as another data collection point, and as a model for IT career
              exploration.

The project is an interdisciplinary collaboration among faculty
              with expertise in the areas of gender and science, quantitative and qualitative
              research methods in the social sciences, and information technology impacts on
              children, youth, and families. Dr. Marcia Baxter Magolda, leading expert in the
              study of how college students' and young adults' self-authorship effects their
              learning capacity, will act as an advisor for this project. The other advisors
              include a former school principal and superintendent, evaluation and data
              analysis expert, educational technology expert, state technology workforce
              director, and a communications
researcher.


