Title       : Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between
               NSF and SRC: Coupled Device and Circuit Simulation for Critical RF IC Blocks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0120275

Award Number: 0120275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kartikeya Mayaram karti@ece.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1752,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With the proliferation of RF ICs in consumer electronic products there is a
              critical need for simulation and modeling tools that enable first pass success
              in silicon. The trend towards integrating complete systems on a chip, requires
              very high performance digital, analog, and RF circuits to be integrated on the
              same silicon substrate. Successful integration of these complex systems
              requires new design tools and design approaches that significantly advance the
              state-of-the-art. Certain aspects of RF system performance are easier to
              characterize and verify in steady state. Examples of these are distortion,
              power, frequency, noise, and transfer characteristics such as gain and
              impedance. The proposed work focuses on developing a coupled device and circuit
              simulator that will accurately address the modeling and simulation needs of
              critical and noise sensitive analog and RF devices and circuits. A coupled
              device and circuit simulator provides a
direct link between the IC fabrication
              technology, device design and the higher level of circuit design. Since the
              models from the device simulator (numerical models) are predictive, they can be
              used to evaluate the impact of technology on circuit performance. Additionally,
              this work provides the foundation for new design approaches that will advance
              the state-of-the-art for analog and RF circuits blocks.

This research will
              focus on modeling, simulation, and design of high performance and high
              frequency analog and RF circuits. The key contributions of this work will
              be:

A software architecture for incorporating general purpose device
              simulators in the coupled device and circuit simulator CODECS. The architecture
              will allow integration without extensive modifications to the device simulator
              and enable simulation of technologies such as SiGe and SOI, and also simulation
              of optical devices. This tool architecture also facilitates parallelization
              over a cluster of workstations.

Availability of time-domain and
              frequency-domain steady-state simulation methods within one simulator.
              Numerical (physical) models and compact circuit models can be used within this
              simulator.

Capability of simulating device-to-device interactions including
              substrate and thermal couplings.

Coupled device and circuit noise simulation
              techniques for RF circuits.

Validation of simulator with fabrication of
              improved designs for the following RF circuitry:  low noise amplifier (LNA),
              mixer, and voltage controlled oscillator (VCO). These circuits are critical
              blocks in a transceiver and are particularly sensitive to noise.

The
              research in this proposal is tightly integrated with a significant
              educational
component. This will include development of courses in RF
              integrated circuits, and modeling and simulation for RF applications. A new
              undergraduate course will be developed. This course will focus on transceiver
              architectures and discrete design and will include a lab in which students will
              gain hands-on experience in radio design. The emphasis will be on projects
              related to transceiver design. The research results, including the software,
              circuit designs, and course-related materials will be available on the world
              wide web. In addition, results from the proposed work will be presented at
              meetings of the Semiconductor Research Corporation and the NSF Center for
              Design of Analog and Digital ICs.


