Title       : Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between NSF and SRC:
               Radio Frequency CMOS Design Techniques for Multi-Standard Wireless
               Communications Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0120225

Award Number: 0120225
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohammed I. El-Naggar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1752,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal deals with new design techniques and chipsets for the coming
              generations of wireless systems, which provide a wider domain of services and
              work with different standards. The emphasis will be on the design of low power
              RF, analog and mixed-signal transceiver front-ends in standard MOS technology.
              Interdisciplinary research work is proposed at the architecture, block,
              circuit, and device levels leading to CMOS chipsets and single chip front-end
              design for both cellular and indoor wireless applications.  Transceiver
              architectures for the implementation of multi-standard TDMA and CDMA wireless
              systems are proposed.  Research is then proposed in three main thrusts
              encompassing RF, baseband and frequency synthesis CMOS design techniques. In
              the RF part, MOS modeling of GHz Nonlinearities will be studied and
              optimization techniques using device widths and bias currents as design
              parameters to achieve low power and high linearity will be developed.  The
              proposed modeling and optimization techniques will then be used in the design
              of low noise amplifiers, linear power-efficient power amplifiers and mixers
              with controllable gain settings.

In the baseband part, a multi-standard
              Sigma-Delta data converter architecture is proposed for TDMA (GSM family and
              DECT) systems while a pipeline architecture is proposed for CDMA systems. 
              Digitally programmable variable gain amplifiers and filters are proposed as
              part of a CMOS cell library for baseband signal processing. In the frequency
              synthesis part, techniques for multi-standard frequency synthesizers together
              with tuning schemes for multi-standard voltage controlled oscillators are
              proposed.
Based on the proposed ideas, several chipsets at the sub-system
              level will be demonstrated togther with two multi-standard single chip CMOS
              receivers at the system level, one for TDMA systems and one for CDMA systems
              (WCDMA, CDMA 2000).

A management plan for the proposed activities is
              provided and a discussion on the education component of this work is included.
              The proposed work should contribute to the preparation of the nation's critical
              mass of well trained engineers and scientists that is desperately needed in
              integrated circuits and systems for future wireless systems. This will enable
              us to compete effectively on the global scale.


