Title       : Center for Advanced Materials for Water Purification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0120978

Award Number: 0120978
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Chapman                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20130000           (Estimated)
Investigator: James Economy jeconomy@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7213      STC Class of 2002
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Center for Advanced Materials for Water Purification,
University of Illinois at
              Urbana-Champaign 
(OIA-0120978)


ABSTRACT

The U.S. and the world are
              facing the very real dangers of depleted aquifers, inadequate surface water
              supplies, and contamination from a variety of sources including agricultural
              runoff, industrial discharges, acid rain, and ground-water pollutants.
              Waterborne pathogens are also a growing threat for water supplies.  These
              dangers are expected to increase as populations continue to grow. Numerous
              technologies are being implemented to purify water, but current membrane and
              adsorbent materials used in water purification are not sufficient to solve all
              contamination problems and meet increasingly stringent new standards being
              proposed to protect health. 

The best state-of-the-art materials have
              well-known shortcomings that are due to shortfalls in the current understanding
              of the underlying science. Indeed, to develop the revolutionary new materials
              and systems for safe and economical water-purification technology needed to
              counter the impending water crisis requires a coordinated, intensive,
              multi-year effort of scientists and engineers. The vision of this Center is to
              forge multi-disciplinary groups of researchers, educators, and practitioners
              into a cohesive team with the overarching goal of developing new functional
              materials and systems to purify water for the peoples of the United States and
              the world.

This Science and Technology Center (STC) has several
              distinguishing features. First and foremost, it provides coordinated
              participation of researchers in the following areas: water quality at Stanford
              and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), material science at
              UIUC, basic physical science (chemistry and physics) at the University of
              California at Berkeley, Clark Atlanta University, Stanford, and UIUC, and
              system-level experts at Stanford and UIUC.  Furthermore, the Center facilitates
              the technology transfer and feedback from practitioners in water treatment
              through linkages with the UIUC Waste Management Research Center, and the Orange
              County (CA)Water District, as well as other water-quality organizations.
              

Another distinguishing feature of the STC is its establishment of a
              collaborative laboratory (collaboratory) for its education, research, and
              outreach functions, to ensure the integration of the activities. In this
              multi-disciplinary collaboratory, chemists, material scientists, physicists,
              biologists, and engineers will work together with library and
              information-science experts in the Center to disseminate information and
              research results showing how to synthesize, characterize, and understand new
              material systems designed to separate compounds from water and/or transform
              them.

The premise of this STC is that advanced, selective and efficient
              water-treatment technologies will be based on membrane filters, adsorbents, and
              catalytic surfaces.  Rational development of the required materials requires a
              firm grasp of the basic science of the aqueous interface. The key issue is to
              observe and to manipulate on the Angstrom to nanometer scale interactions
              between the aqueous solution and the solid substrate. The goals of the STC are:
              (i) to advance the basic understanding of these interactions; (ii) to use the
              results to radically improve membranes, filters, adsorbents, and ion-exchange
              materials through the synthesis of new materials that are able to separate
              selectively and/or transform compounds in water; (iii) to integrate these new
              materials into viable water purification systems; and (iv) to integrate the
              human and knowledge infrastructure with the research mission to implement
              effectively the science and technology.
To accomplish these goals, the STC is
              organized in four core teams: (i) Interfacial Processes and Molecular
              Characterization, (ii) Materials Synthesis and Development, (iii) System
              Analysis and Integration, and (iv) Collaboratory Education and Outreach.

The
              Center supports education and outreach activities for: (i) K-12 teachers and
              students to learn why clean water is important and how fundamental research and
              sound engineering can help make water cleaner; (ii) underrepresented groups in
              science and engineering, encouraging members of such groups to pursue careers
              related to water purification, material science, and engineering; (iii) citizen
              groups, water industry professionals, and local governments to help formulate,
              debate, and implement policies related to water quality control; and (iv) the
              general public to understand the need for basic research on water purification.
              All constituent groups are supported by a web-based collaborative laboratory to
              support knowledge dissemination, mentoring, learning, public debate, and
              discussion. The main tool used for the collaboratory is the INQUIRY-based
              learning and research environment developed in the UIUC School of Library and
              Information Science, which allows two-way research and education to be
              conducted between the partners and all the participants and constituent groups
              of the Center.

The STC seeks aggressively to increase diversity in
              education, research, and outreach.
Diversity is essential for increasing the
              numbers of under-represented groups in science and technology.  The STC can
              make the greatest impact if the knowledge and technologies developed are
              implemented throughout the U.S. and the world by diverse educators and
              researchers. To achieve this impact, the proposed STC has
partnered with the
              Environmental Technology Consortium (ETC) of historically black colleges and
              universities (HBCUs) and other minority institutions (MIs) to increase minority
              participation. In addition, CAU is an active water-treatment research partner,
              which supports the training of a diverse group of students in water
              purification research.

Due to the critical need for improved materials and
              processes for water purification, this
STC has an immediate opportunity to
              transfer the knowledge gained from basic science and engineering research to
              the practitioners in the field. In addition to the usual modes of dissemination
              in conferences, proceedings, journal articles, and courses, the collaboratory
              two-way learning and research tools developed through the STC quickly transmit
              knowledge between the academic partners and the partner organizations. 


