Title       : Dissertation Research: Behavioral Style and its Endocrine Correlates in Young
               Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2002    
File        : a0120175

Award Number: 0120175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11970              (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Watts david.watts@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Many psychologists have studied the influential role of personality in mediating
              how humans approach life.  Physical anthropologists and primatologists have
              largely ignored this variable in nonhuman primates, focusing instead on the
              significance of a group-living individual's dominance rank in the social
              hierarchy.  But using dominance rank to predict variables such as stress levels
              often proves unsatisfactory: dominance has been found to only weakly correlate
              with variables such as baseline hormone levels.  In this project the researcher
               will consider the role of personality or behavioral style as an additional
              variable that explains differences between nonhuman primate individuals. 
              Specifically, behavioral and physiological data from captive, peer-housed
              groups of young chimpanzees at the University of Southwest Louisiana Research
              Center in New Iberia, Louisiana will be collected.  Individuals of similar rank
              with respect to variables that define behavioral styles will then be compared. 
              For example, how good is individual X at picking fights that he/she can win? 
              How adept is individual Y at forming valuable friendships?  It is expected that
              these variables may not perfectly correlate with rank; a low-ranking individual
              may actually be quite good at picking winnable fights, for example. 
              Individuals with different behavioral styles will be compared for urinary and
              serum hormone levels in order to assess the relative effects of dominance rank
              and behavioral style on stress physiology, health, and growth.  It is predicted
              that consideration of behavioral style will provide for a fuller understanding
              of the factors affecting intra-group relations and physiological parameters
              than dominance rank alone, and will broaden our approach to primate
              socioecology.
