Title       : Comparative Chloroplast Genomics: Integrating Computational Methods, Molecular
               Evolution, and Phylogeny
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0120709

Award Number: 0120709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1350000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Jansen rjansen@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tandy J. Warnow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda A. Raubeson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1693      BE: GENOME-ENABLE ENVIR SCI&EN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1689,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0120709
Jansen, Raubeson, and Warnow
	A Biocomplexity grant has been awarded
              to an interdisciplinary team of
researchers from the University of Texas,
              Central Washington University,
University of New Mexico, the DoE Joint
              Genomics Institute, and Penn State
University to undertake comparative
              evolutionary analyses of complete chloroplast genomes from more than 50
              representative land plants.  The team of four biologists (Jansen, Raubeson,
              Boore and dePamphilis) and five computer scientists (Warnow, Moret, Bader,
              Sankoff and Miller) will address a number of important issues in three areas at
              the intersection of biology and computer science: phylogeny of land plants,
              chloroplast genome evolution, and computational genomics.  Fifty-five complete
              genomic sequences will be generated (greatly augmenting the 10 or so now
              known), new computational approaches for examining relationships using genomic
              data will be designed and
implemented, and bioinformatic tools and resources
              for genomics will be
developed.  Then, the data and approaches will be used to
              study the relationships of plants and the patterns and processes of mutation as
              they affect the chloroplast genome. These results will be made available to
              both the scientific and lay communities.   In addition, students in the fields
              of computational biology, bioinformatics, phylogenetic analysis, and genomics
              will be trained.
	Understanding relationships among organisms is an essential
              prerequisite for all areas of Biological Science, including such diverse fields
              as ecology, evolution, forensics, medicine, and molecular biology. Land plants,
              the focus of this study, include over 300,000 species and form the basis of
              terrestrial ecosystems.  The phylogenetic history of this important group of
              organisms, only imperfectly understood, will be clarified by this research. 
              This project also will make major contributions to our understanding of the
              mutational mechanisms and evolutionary processes acting within the chloroplast
              genome.  This genome contains genes essential to plant function; studying its
              evolution should provide basic information of fundamental importance to plant
              scientists.  Finally, this project will have important implications for
              computational biology, one of the
fastest growing fields of science today. 
              This includes the development and
testing of new algorithms in comparative
              genomics, such as gene-order changes, that will increase the scope of
              theoretical computational biology.  All software developed by the team will be
              made freely available.


