Title       : Center for Embedded Networked Sensing (CENS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0120778

Award Number: 0120778
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20075999           (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah L. Estrin destrin@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine L. Borgman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 7213      STC Class of 2002
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0120778
U of Calif - Los Angeles

The research focus of the Center
              for Embedded Networked Sensing (CENS) will be the fundamental science and
              engineering research needed to create scalable, robust, adaptive,
              sensor/actuator networks. The vision of densely distributed, networked sensing
              and actuation requires advances in many areas of information technology.
              Moreover, there is a critical interplay between the technology and the
              applications and physical context in which it is embedded. By conducting
              research in the context of specific and high-impact scientific applications,
              CENS will enable new scientific discovery through high resolution, in situ
              monitoring and actuation. At the same time, CENS will explore the fundamental
              principles and technologies needed to apply embedded networked sensing to a
              wide range of applications.

The Center will focus initially on fundamental
              technology and on four experimental application drivers: habitat monitoring for
              bio-complexity studies, spatially-dense seismic sensing and structure response,
              monitoring and modeling contaminant flows, and detection and identification of
              marine microorganisms. To support this scope, CENS will combine the expertise
              of faculty from diverse engineering disciplines with the expertise of
              biological, environmental and earth scientists. During the lifetime of the
              Center, additional opportunities for applying the technology to natural and
              engineered systems will be pursued.

The CENS educational focus will be
              twofold: new hands-on experimental capabilities for grades 7-12 science
              curriculum through access to real-world, real-time, sensor-network
              interrogation, along with materials for teacher-training, and undergraduate
              research opportunities in cutting-edge technologies (e.g., wireless systems,
              MEMS, embedded software) and scientific applications (e.g., bio-complexity,
              seismic and environmental monitoring), with emphasis on under-represented
              minority students.

CENS will benefit from and contribute to a large number
              of related activities on its participating campuses, and in the larger research
              and education community, including: UCLA's California Nanosystems Institute,
              Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics, Nanoelectronics Research Facility;
              USC's Information Sciences Institute, Wrigley Institute for Environmental
              Studies; UC Reserve systems; Cal State and GLOBE Teacher training programs;
              INEEL, JPL government laboratories; DARPA, and NSF-related research activities.
               Many of the constituent technologies will have near- and long-term commercial
              relevance.

