Title       : DEM-Research Internships in Science and Engineering (RISE): Linking
               Undergraduate Female Students in SMET Fields and Female Faculty Mentors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0120786

Award Number: 0120786
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899814             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda C. Schmidt lschmidt@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paige E. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet A. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne M. Spence  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Maryland is testing an educational intervention program
              designed to 
address aspects of both external (contextual) and internal
              (individually based) barriers to success and persistence of women in science
              and engineering. The program -- called RISE: Research Internships in Science
              and Engineering -- offers a hands-on introductory orientation program for
              freshmen (Level One) and an enhanced team research experience for upper class
              students (Level Two) . The enhanced team experience consists of participation
              in all-female research teams, mentoring by female faculty members and advanced
              female students (undergraduates and graduate students) who are paid and trained
              to perform significant mentoring and teaching of undergraduate women. The
              female faculty member's own research program is the setting for the student
              teamwork and mentoring.

Specifically, the intervention addresses the
              external factors of the "chilly climate" of science, the lack of female role
              models and mentors, and the lack of a female "critical mass" among students and
              faculty in SMET academic departments. Regarding "internal barriers," we
              identify underestimation of abilities as operationalized by "self-efficacy" as
              the most useful psychological construct for understanding the ambivalence
              related to career choice and persistence in SMET undergraduate majors.
              Self-efficacy describes the notion that students develop beliefs about their
              personal capabilities at different academic pursuits (e.g., whether or not they
              can "do math"). Self-efficacy has been the basis for a large body of findings
              in the vocational literature, much of it focusing on the debilitating effects
              of low self-efficacy on the selection and persistence of career options
              including engineering and science fields.

Female faculty are supported in
              their mentoring of young women (both in terms of training and finances), and at
              the same time make progress in their own research program. The entire research
              team (consisting of the faculty member, RISE Fellows and up to four RISE
              participants) is taking part in training on mentorship, team functioning, and
              psychological constructs key to enhancing the successful learning of women
              students

This demonstration program has the potential to bring some of the
              advantages of an all-female learning environment, epitomized by women's
              colleges, into more mainstream higher education such as the University of
              Maryland College Park. Replicable features include: role model hierarchies,
              mentor training, and all-female research teams. Also replicable is the notion
              of a two level program, beginning with a front end experience that excites and
              prepares entering female college students, moving on to an extended research
              internship in the later years that involves close contact with successful woman
              scientists and engineers.


