Title       : DEM-Changing Faculty through Learning Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0120825

Award Number: 0120825
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karan L. Watson watson@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey E. Froyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Joseph Newton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Dwight Look College of Engineering and the College of Science at Texas A&M
              University will conduct a demonstration project aimed at changing faculty
              knowledge, personal vision, commitment and interactions with students, through
              learning communities.

The project will help faculty improve four strategic
              disciplines that underpin improvement of learning environments for women,
              underrepresented minorities and all students:

1) Development and invitation
              -- Faculty members examine mechanisms through which women and men develop
              intellectually and motivationally, and understand the role of invitation in the
              development process.

2) Mental models -- Faculty members understand and make
              explicit how they build chains of reasoning from observable data through
              assumptions to action.

3) Personal vision -- Faculty members improve their
              capacity to imagine and act in ways that maximize their individual
              self-fulfillment.

4) Personal commitment -- Faculty members improve their
              capacity to move from creating a personal vision to recognizing that they have
              power and responsibility to realize it.

The critical element of learning
              environments on university campuses is the faculty; therefore, development of
              learner-centered educational environments rests on helping faculty develop the
              mental and interpersonal disciplines that provide the foundation for such
              environments. Changing how women are treated, how the classroom is managed, how
              teaching is performed, how graduate students are mentored, all depend on
              numerous individual faculty. However, university campuses are not analogous to
              neural networks that can be trained by feeding back quantitative error
              measurements through algorithms such as the back-propagation method. Instead,
              university campuses more closely resemble complex adaptive systems in which
              diversity, interaction and selection of numerous and complicated agents gives
              rise to observable, emergent properties. If the aim is to create learning
              environments that are both more inviting and more welcoming, it is not
              sufficient to bombard faculty with messages such as "Be inviting!" or "Be
              welcoming!". Instead, it is important to identify disciplines that should be
              nurtured and developed across the entire faculty with the conviction that if
              faculty members practice these disciplines, then they will create learning
              environments that are inviting and welcoming.

As faculty members become more
              proficient in the four strategic disciplines, the project should observe
              changes in attitudes about learning, teaching and the role of women and
              minorities in SMET. The project also should observe increasing participation in
              the workshops and faculty learning communities sponsored by the project.
              Finally, the project should observe improvement in retention of women in
              undergraduate physical
science and engineering; improvement in the enrollment
              in graduate study; and improvement in retention of women in graduate physical
              science and engineering.

