Title       : BE/CNH: Interactions of Riparian Pattern, Policy, and Biocomplexity in Coupled
               Human/Riverine Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a0120022

Award Number: 0120022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  2001   
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1950000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley V. Gregory stanley.gregory@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Bolte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Hulse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1689,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Complex patterns in river systems emerge because of the interdependence of
              biophysical and human processes, non-linearity in factors that shape process
              and pattern, and the unique behavior of linear patchwork mosaics within river
              networks. This research project combines field studies, biological models,
              complex systems techniques, and alternative future depictions to explore two
              interrelated aspects of biocomplexity: complexity of biotic communities and
              complexity of coupled human/natural resource systems. The investigators
              hypothesize that as biotic resources become scarce or impaired, a
              human/riverine system becomes more tightly coupled. This research will examine
              the ecological vulnerability of these emergent landscapes from the perspectives
              of likelihood and reversibility under different policies. The objectives are to
              explore system behaviors through a combination of field and model studies.
              These models apply complex systems approaches to explore coevolution of
              policies and landscape patterns, building on relationships identified through
              field studies of biotic complexity in large rivers and their floodplains. The
              4-yr research project is focused on lowland rivers of the Pacific Northwest and
              is expected to develop of a set of transferable models of ecological and human
              interactions in river floodplains. The project will foster interactions between
              students, researchers, river guardians, and the Willamette Restoration
              Initiative to create a unique learning environment for students and the public.
