Title       : Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between
               NSF and SRC: Inter-Pulse-Interval Based Mixed Signal Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0120369

Award Number: 0120369
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel W. Hammerstrom   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marwan A. Jabri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph Etienne-Cummings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1752,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Although digital signal representation has become almost universal,
              there are still many areas where an analog representation is required to
              interface with an analog world or to meet various other objectives such as
              power dissipation, frequency, or cost. In these domains analog signal
              representation is essential for many input modalities such as instrumentation,
              sensor interfaces, and communications. Likewise, there are related output
              applications, such as biomedical actuation and industrial control. In addition,
              the needs of wireless and fiber-optical communication have reinvigorated analog
              design. However, there are serious problems concerning how to keep these analog
              components on a reasonable scaling curve as Moore's law continues unabated in
              the digital domain, and in integrating analog representations into large,
              complex digital systems ("system on a chip").
 
The purpose of this proposal
              is to study a new approach to representing analog signals that we believe will
              integrate more cleanly into these deep submicron, single-chip systems. Today
              analog signals are almost exclusively represented by current or voltage
              quantities. Our proposal is to borrow a page from neuroscience and to use the
              Inter-Pulse-Interval (IPI) between single-bit, asynchronous pulses to represent
              analog quantities. We are proposing to develop a mixed-mode analog/digital cell
              library and design methodology based on IPI representation and the associated
              computation elements, and to engineer a case study to illustrate the outcomes. 
              

As we move to deep submicron and then on to the nanometer/molecular
              devices, the problems that digital encounters with scaling, such as threshold
              inconsistency, subthreshold currents, hot-electron effects, doping variability,
              substrate coupling, and transmission line and complex cross-talk effects, are
              even more serious for analog circuitry. IPI representations will provide
              significantly better immunity to these effects, as well as to the more
              traditional process, temperature, and reference voltage variations. For most
              applications, pulse based analog systems will require less power. There are
              numerous advantages to using pulses or pulses to communicate. They are
              significantly more immune to noise. An approximate analogy would be that of AM
              versus FM radio signal representation.  The outcomes of the proposed research
              are

 Create a library of basic communication, computation (arithmetic and
              logic) and conversion building blocks;
Design, implementation and testing of a
              case study using the derived building blocks and methodology;

Document an
              IPI-based design methodology



