Title       : An Integrated Approach Towards a Quantitative Model of Salt Marsh Biocomplexity
               and Morphodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0120582

Award Number: 0120582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67245              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Furbish dfurbish@garnet.acns.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yang Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yuch-Ping Hsieh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1692      BE: COUPLED BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1579,1689,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Furbish
0120582

Salt marshes are important ecosystems that are frequently
              impacted by human activities. Because of the nonlinear nature of many salt
              marsh processes and the complex interactions among them, computer modeling
              based on experiments, field studies and emerging remote sensing techniques
              offers a critical opportunity for achieving significant advances in
              understanding and predicting salt marsh dynamics. During this project we will:
              (i) identify essential key physical, biological and chemical components that
              should become the foci of predictive models of salt marsh dynamics; (ii)
              identify and assemble key personnel necessary to pursue a collaborative
              modeling effort, coordinating our efforts with scientists pursuing related work
              at Pace, Yale and Rutgers Universities; (iii) identify key theoretical
              concepts, computational tools and field-based studies necessary for rigorous
              model development and testing; and (iv) prepare a full-scale proposal for a
              comprehensive research program that effectively combines these theoretical,
              computational and field-based components. The centerpiece of our efforts during
              the 1.5-year project period involves organizing and convening two novel
              workshops. The first will be focused on salt marsh processes and dynamics; the
              second will be focused on implementing and testing predictive modeling, and the
              coupling of remote sensing techniques with modeling. Both will involve field
              excursions to wetland/salt marsh sites. Project activities will be organized
              through the Center for Earth Surface Processes Research (CESD), an
              interdisciplinary Center of Excellence at FSU, and involve mutual participation
              of scientists at FSU and the Pace-Yale-Rutgers group.

