Title       : Davidson Data Center and Network for Transition Economies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0120376

Award Number: 0120376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398499             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Svejnar svejnar@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anna Meyendorff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Levinsohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine Terrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Davidson Institute
	      724 East University
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091234    /   -

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This grant establishes the Davidson Data Center and Network (DDCN), a center and
              an international network of institutions to make widely available micro and
              macroeconomic data on transition economies (those moving from central planning
              to a market system).   The DDCN has been discussed and formulated with the
              leading institutions in the field of transition and emerging markets. 
              Providing access to these data is important for many reasons. In addition to
              providing valuable information on the unprecedented process of reform in
              transition economies, data from these economies allow better tests of basic
              economic theories since mature market economies rarely display sizable
              variation in key variables and since transition economies provide opportunities
              to analyze the emergence of phenomena that have been long established in market
              economies. Research based on these data will also have considerable policy
              impact. The transition economies comprise over one-third of the world's
              population and a better understanding of how public policy can improve the
              functioning of these economies will have a tremendous impact on the welfare of
              the poor. Moreover, major reforms in transition economies have so far been made
              largely on the basis of the experience of advanced economies, and at times they
              have generated undesirable outcomes.  The DDCN will have a significant
              beneficial impact on graduate education and academic as well as non-academic
              research in several respects. First, it will promote research on transition
              economies by significantly lowering both the costs of and the risks associated
              with such research. Second, it will increase collaboration among researchers
              already studying the transition economies, helping to eliminate wasteful
              duplication of effort in collecting data. Third, the DDCN will have a
              particularly great benefit for graduate students, many of whom depend on
              readily obtainable data for the success of their dissertation research.
