Title       : Biocomplexity-Dynamic Controls On Emergent Properties of River Flood Plains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0120523

Award Number: 0120523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack A. Stanford stanford@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              F. R. Hauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Lorang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Kimball  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1692      BE: COUPLED BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1579,1689,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0120523
Stanford

The conceptual foundation of this biocomplexity proposal is
              that river flood plains are regional centers of ecological organization.  This
              system is dependent on interactions among dynamic, nonlinear physical and
              biological processes linking water, heat and materials (biota, sediment, and
              plant-growth nutrients), flux and retention to fluvial landscape change. 
              Strong interactions between short-duration, high  stream-power floods, channel 
              and  sediment  movement, increased roughness due to presence of vegetation and
              dead wood and upwelling of groundwater creates a complex, dynamic distribution
              of resource patches, which we refer to as the shifting habitat mosaic.  This
              rnosaic promotes biodiversity and complex food webs that sequester and
              transform energy and materials.

Using  this conceptual foundation and the
              implications of two decades of research on  expansive gravel-cobble flood
              plains in  western USA rivers. we propose a set of working
hypotheses that
              address emergent  properties  of these and other similar  flood plains.  We
              will improve and integrate our existing 3D hydrologic model with new channel
              change, heat flux and nutrient cycling model in a dynamic flood plain
              biogeochemical simulator that is initialized from remote sensing information. 
              The goal is spatially explicit quantification of heat and nutrient fluxes in
              relation to the habitat dynamics.

We propose an educational component that
              proactively links the floodplain research with  the summer academic program at
              the Flathead Lake Biological Station (FLBS), the natural resources curriculum 
              of our local Native American college (Salish and Kootenai College) and an
              annual national workshop for environmental professionals and high school
              teachers.


