Title       : A Study Group Meeting to Develop a Joint U.S./Sweden Initiative to Improve
               Gender Equality in the Engineering and Technological Workforce
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0120181

Award Number: 0120181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58924              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yolanda S. George YGeorge@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne G. Brainard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and the Women in
              Engineering Programs & Advocates Network (WEPAN), under the auspices of the
              Global Alliance for Diversifying the Workforce in Science and Engineering, will
              hold a study group meeting to develop a joint United States/Sweden initiative
              to improve gender equality in the engineering and technological workforce. This
              grant supports planning, implementation, and documentation for the
              meeting.

Partners in Sweden include the Swedish Embassy of the United States
              of America; WITEC -- Women in Science, Engineering and Technology; Encounter AB
              (a women-owned company to promote equal opportunity programs in Sweden); the
              National Agency for Higher Education (part of the Swedish Ministry for
              Education and Science); and the Swedish Ministry of Industry, Employment, and
              Communications.

Specific goals and objectives for this project are to
              identify challenges, appropriate strategies, and partnering organizations to
              implement action plans to:

(1) Foster pathways to leadership for women in
              the engineering and scientific technology workforce, during both the higher
              education and career years. (2) Better understand the gender perspective in the
              engineering design process.

Participants will include representatives from
              higher education, business, government, and professional
              associations.

Pre-meeting literature and Internet searches will be conducted
              to determine what is already known and what programs already exist in these two
              areas, in both the U.S. and Sweden. Short surveys will be sent to selected
              engineering schools, business, and professional associations to identify
              existing strategies in these two areas. Before the study group meeting,
              participants will receive a written report of the findings. Proceedings of the
              study group will be produced and posted on the web sites of both the Global
              Alliance and the Swedish Embassy of the United States of America.
