Title       : US-Middle East Materials Planning Meeting and Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a0120522

Award Number: 0120522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158939             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. P. H. Chang r-chang@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1711,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The sixth workshop in a series of international materials workshops is being
              planned for the Middle East in 2002. The U.S.-Middle East Materials Workshop is
              an international workshop dedicated to materials research, education, and
              technology. The goals of the workshop are to clarify in detail the major
              materials science issues in the Middle East through plenary sessions and
              breakout group discussions; further the development of collaboration via the
              establishment of a Materials World Net; and strengthen the relationships
              between the participants and their colleagues. To these ends, the organizing
              committee plans to invite approximately 20 participants from the U.S., 40 from
              the Middle East, and 15 government officials from various countries. Previous
              NSF sponsored materials workshops held in the NAFTA countries, Europe, Latin
              America, Asia, and Africa  have consistently expressed the desire to establish
              a Materials World Net, which would link materials scientists and engineers
              around the world by providing them with access to comprehensive databases and
              collaborative research and education programs.There is evidence to support the
              conclusion that the World Net is also desirable among researchers in the Middle
              East. The principal organizer (PI) of the workshop, Professor R.P.H. Chang at
              Northwestern University, will work together with the co-organizer Dr. Albert
              Narath from the U.S. and an organizing committee (OC), with members drawn from
              Egypt, Jordan, Turkey, Israel and additional Arab countries. Those parties will
              come together at a planning meeting in Turkey in late 2001. Over the course of
              two days, the group will determine an appropriate location, time, speakers,
              topics, and an agenda for the workshop to be held the following year. The
              planning meeting will serve as the beginning of a dialogue among the organizing
              committee members during the next year. The culmination of the planning will be
              a workshop in 2002  focused on materials research, education, and specialty
              topics that the planning meeting participants will have identified.
%%% 
              
Previous NSF co-sponsored international workshops have involved NAFTA
              countries (1995), European countries (1996), Pan-American countries (1998),
              Asian Pacific countries (1998), and Africa (2000).  All of these workshops
              shared the common goal of fostering greater international cooperation and
              collaboration in the broad field of materials research. Topics which are
              presumably important to the region include corrosion, thin films, concrete,
              minerals, petroleum and natural gas, and polymers.  The participants will be
              asked to make recommendations in each area and devote special attention to the
              development of virtual institutes as a vehicle for furthering cooperation. The
              U.S.-Middle East Materials Workshop is being jointly supported by the Division
              of Materials Research, the Office of Multidisciplinary Affairs, the
              International Division, and the Division of Chemical and the Division of
              Chemical and Transport Systems.

