Title       : Modeling of Unified Channel Mobility for Quantum Hydrodynamic Simulation of
               Nanoscale MOSFETs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0120128

Award Number: 0120128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ting-wei Tang ttang@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The CMOS technology is now being ushered from l8Onm node to 13Onm node. For
              lOOnm-l3Onm generation technology, many key issues of transistor design must be
              reexamined. One of them is non-equilibrium transport which takes place in
              nonoscale MOS devices. Because of continuous down-scaling of the device, the
              gate length now becomes comparable to or smaller than the inelastic
              mean-free-path. In this regime, the non-equilibrium /non-local transport of
              carriers in MOS devices requires substantially different formulation from that
              of the conventional one.
In this research project, it is proposed to construct
              a unified mobility model for carriers in the channel of bulk, SOI, thin-body
              SOI, and DG MOSFETs applicable to gate length below lOOnm. Based on sound
              physics of non-equilibrium transport including quantum effects, the
              conventional low-field inversion layer mobility will be extended to the
              high-field regime by seeking an effective average carrier energy which
              characterizes the non-local transport occurring in the device. A series of
              self-consistent Monte Carlo (MC) simulations of carriers in inversion layers
              with a quantum mechanically corrected potential will be carried out in the
              region encompassing retarding-, low-, and high-fields. A unified channel
              mobility will be constructed in such a way that it can accurately predict
              velocity overshoot at the drain end of the channel, quantization effects in the
              inversion layer including tunneling, as well as thermionic emission-limited
              current density across the source-channel barrier. This unified channel
              mobility will then be incorporated in the quantum hydrodynamic (QHD) transport
              equations for numerical simulation of nanometer-scale bulk, SOI, thin-body SOI,
              and DG MOSFETs.
It is expected that this research will provide a consistent
              and easy means of moving the simulation hierachy from drift-diffusion to MC
              Boltzmann via a hydrodynamic (HD) formulation. The project will enable
              simulation of MOS devices with the channel length of 100nm and below. Such
              capability is required of simulation of next generation of integrated circuits,
              which are expected in a few years.
The proposed research will also benefit
              both graduate and undergraduate students on campus and engineers in industry
              who take P.I.'s device simulation course through the distance learning. The
              P.I. has constantly updated course materials based on research results of the
              past NSF projects and other research projects supported by the industry.



