Title       : SGER: Corporate Venture Capital: Fostering Innovation through Equity Investment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0120188

Award Number: 0120188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65358              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan D. Meyer ameyer@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT (SES 0120188-SGER) MEYER

Principal Investigator: Alan D. Meyer,
              University of Oregon - Eugene Corporate Venture Capital: Fostering Innovation
              Through Equity


Analysis: This highly innovative project proposes to
              investigate the emerging practice of corporate venture investing whereby
              corporations seek to invest in start-up ventures, often as an alternative to
              investment in in-house R&D. Externalizing R&D can take the form of R&D
              alliances and research consortia, but a growing share of corporate R&D dollars
              has been devoted to equity investments in start-ups, the focus of this
              research. Corporations seek both financial returns and strategic benefits,
              including exposure to new and disruptive technologies, access to new products,
              and identification of propsective acquisition targets. While independent
              venture capital has been highly successful, however, corporate venturing has
              been more challenging. Levels of equity investment fluctuate with economic
              cycles, so many firms started venturing units only to close them down when
              economic times turned tough. Much of the knowledge upon which independent VC
              firms prosper is tacit, and some of their central practices clash with
              corporate cultures and systems within which the corporate venture efforts are
              embedded.

                                                The research
              objectives of this project include:

Contentualize corporate venturing by
              conducting an historical analysis of corporate venture investment (CVI)
              programs.

Evaluate the transferability of practices developed by private VC
              firms into CVI units;

Develop a typology of alternative organizational
              structures being used to house and pursue CVI;

Conduct a real-time
              longitudinal analysis of the rapid coevolution of CVI units and the venturing
              environment;

Identify best practices for corporate venturing.

Cooperation
              has been arranged with Atrium Capital, IBF (International Business Forum),
              Allegis Capital, Sun Microsystems, 3M Enterprise Development, Compaq Computer
              Corporate Development, Adobe Systems, and Intel.
There exists no other work
              examining this emerging area of corporate innovation, nor any comparing
              internal versus independent venture capital. In light of extensive outsourcing
              of R&D, information as to the potential for this practice as well as its
              hazards seems highly likely to yield interesting insights of theoretical and
              practical impact. In the judgment of the Program Director, the cooperation of
              these corporations and the track record of the researcher argues strongly for
              important contributions from this Small Grant for Exploratory Research.


