Title       : BE/CNH: Alternatives to Crisis: Constructing Models of Resilience in the Red
               River Valley of the North
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0120009

Award Number: 0120009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis R. Keeney drkeeney@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IATP
	      2105 First Avenue South
	      Minneapolis, MN  554042505    612/870-3404

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1691,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Around the world, regional ecosystems dominated by resource-based extractive
              economies (agriculture, forestry and fisheries) are in crisis, facing painful
              transitions imposed by the convergence of processes operating at local and
              global scales.  The Red River of the North (that forms the border of Minnesota
              and North Dakota flowing north into Manitoba and Hudson Bay), an area of
              intensive and industrialized agriculture that has long been considered one of
              the most fertile farming regions in the world, is one such system in a painful
              transition.  Crop disease, abnormally wet climate patterns, and low commodity
              prices have combined with long-term economic, social, and ecological declines
              to generate an increasingly severe regional crisis.

The objective of this
              project is to distill from the multiplicity of causal factors a simple systems
              model that can be used to explore the natural, economic and social dynamics
              observed in this most recent crisis in the Red River Valley (RRV), and to use
              the model to explore alternative policies with stakeholders and decision makers
              in the RRV.  Through the use of an interdisciplinary dynamic simulation process
              (Adaptive Environmental Assessment) involving citizens, scientists and resource
              managers, the project seeks to generate insight into the small and tractable
              set of key processes that have precipitated the simultaneous collapse of
              regional systems and to explore what other outcomes might have been possible
              under different decision-making scenarios.  The model will have both practical
              and theoretical significance.  By exploring how a stable but brittle regional
              system collapsed through a series of subtle multiple and reinforcing
              discontinuities, and by simulating the response of that system under different
              decision-making and reorganization scenarios, the model will advance
              understanding of resilience dynamics in coupled social-ecological systems.  It
              also will provide a solid, practical foundation for expanding dialogue among
              diverse stakeholders, develop additional modeling and outreach efforts, and
              build capacity for regional problem-solving.  Insights and understanding
              derived from this model may prove valuable to agro-ecosystems in other regions
              facing similar challenges that have not yet experienced large-scale collapse. 
              What are the implications for other commodity based agricultural economies
              around the world (e.g., the corn belt of the Upper Midwest)?  Can
              agro-ecosystems and other economic activities in the RRV be reorganized to
              arrive at longer-term, more resilient solutions that will allow the region to
              escape from the vicious cycle of spiraling ecological and economic crisis? 
              This project is an award emanating from the FY2001 special competition in
              Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural
              and Human Systems.


