Title       : DIS: Una Mano al Futuro: Making Science Accessible to Latino Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0120865

Award Number: 0120865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97034              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine J. Didion didion@awis.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc Women in Sci, Inc.
	      1522 K St NW
	      Washington, DC  20005    202/408-0742

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Association for Women in Science (AWIS) will develop a guide to mentoring
              aimed at the Latino community, called Una Mano al Futuro. Studies demonstrate
              that students are more likely to pursue science if they have mentors, have
              opportunities to explore potential careers, and learn in a supportive
              environment. Una Mano al Futuro will focus on reaching high school Latino girls
              at a critical stage and providing resources that can be used by the young
              women, their parents, teachers, and community leaders to create the environment
              that allows the women to explore their interest in science and technology
              careers.

For the past 10 years, AWIS has established and improved community
              mentoring programs for pre-college, undergraduate and graduate students with
              funding from the Sloan Foundation, NSF and the NEC Corporation. AWIS's prior
              projects built on the knowledge and success of the Sloan mentoring program and
              produced a new publication: Creating Tomorrow's Scientists: Models of Community
              Mentoring.  AWIS will edit and
revise their award-winning mentoring books,
              including A Hand Up: Women Mentoring Women in Science and Mentoring Means
              Future Scientists, and produce Spanish language editions with on-line companion
              materials in both English and Spanish.

AWIS will work with several partners
              in developing materials and in dissemination to the Latino community: ASPIRA, a
              non-profit organization committed to Latino youth issues, and Minority Women in
              Science (MWIS). Members of AWIS, throughout its 76 local chapters, will
              distribute materials and assist in planning community-based events to reinforce
              the message of the materials.

