Title       : Dissertation Research: Ecological Bases of Agonistic Coalitions in Capuchin
               Monkeys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2001  
File        : a0120250

Award Number: 0120250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8684               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Janson janson@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	The ecological basis for pair-wise aggressive encounters has been investigated
              in many species of non-human primates. Some species also form aggressive
              coalitions while searching for food, but the ecological correlates of such
              coalitions have yet to be studied. A coalition is defined as cooperation by two
              or more individuals in an aggressive encounter against one or more other
              individuals. This study will focus on pair-wise and coalitional aggression in
              the white-faced capuchin, Cebus capucinus in the context of feeding. The
              objectives of this study are (1) to measure the ecological factors that may
              affect the rates of aggressive contests by quantifying the costs and benefits
              associated with resource competition and (2) to test an ecological explanation
              for the evolution of coalition behavior in non-human primates.  
	Data will be
              collected at two dry-forest study sites in Costa Rica.  The researchers will
              examine whether the ecological costs and benefits associated with coalition
              formation differ systematically from those that prevail during pair-wise
              contests, and whether males and females are equally likely to form coalitions. 
              Because males are usually dominant to females in C. capucinus, one would expect
              females to form coalitions to gain access to food patches occupied by a male. 
              The ecological benefit of fighting over a food patch will be measured as the
              nutritional gain available to contestants in the patch, whereas the cost to an
              individual includes both the cost of a physical injury and the time needed to
              find alternate food patches if it loses.   The ecological explanation will be
              tested against the simple alternative that the frequency of fights and
              coalitions reflect overcrowding or the availability of coalition partners in a
              food patch. This study will help us to understand the origins of cooperative
              behavior in non-human primates and humans. 

