Title       : The Cnidarian Genetic Toolkit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0120591

Award Number: 0120591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1331129            (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans R. Bode hrbode@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis Kibler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Steele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra W. Clifton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Martinez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1689,9169,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0120591
Bode

It is becoming increasingly clear that understanding how an
              organism interacts with its environment will require a complete accounting of
              the genes which make up the organism and the expression patterns of the genes
              under various conditions. Members of the phylum Cnidaria (jellyfish, corals,
              sea anemones, and hydras) are key members of their environments, yet very
              little is known about their genetic makeup. To address this problem, a
              collection of cloned DNAs representing the messenger RNA populations (cDNAs) of
              two well-studied cnidarians will be generated. The two organisms that will be
              used are the freshwater cnidarian Hydra and the colonial marine cnidarian
              Podocoryne. Bacteria containing the cloned cDNAs will be robotically arrayed to
              generate archives of the clones. Sequence data will be obtained from
              approximately 50,000 of the cDNA clones from each organism. The resulting
              sequence data will be analyzed in various ways using bioinformatic computing
              tools. The analyses will provide information on what genes are present in
              cnidarians and how those genes are evolutionarily related to those in animals
              which diverged more recently than cnidarians, such as vertebrates and insects.
              Such information will be very valuable for defining the processes by which
              multicellular animals have evolved. The availability of cloned cDNA sets from
              two model cnidarians will also make it possible to examine the expression of
              large numbers of genes in these organisms using the technique of DNA array
              analysis. In particular it will be possible to identify genes whose expression
              changes when the organisms are placed under conditions which reflect those
              present during periods of environmental stress (e.g. elevated temperature).
              Genes whose expression levels change under stress conditions in the laboratory
              may be useful tools for monitoring the health of cnidarians (e.g. corals) in
              their natural setting.

