Title       : MPS Internships in Public Science Education - MPS-IPSE: Seeing is Believing: A
               multi-disciplinary proposal to create public exhibits and curriculum
               integrating current research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0120960

Award Number: 0120960
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209194             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew W. Craig mcraig@mnstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George R. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minnesota St Unv Moorhead
	      1104 7th Avenue South
	      Moorhead, MN  56563    218/236-2011

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1696,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0120960
PI: Craig, Matthew
Inst: Minnesota State Univ. Moorhead

With
              this award under the MPS Internships in Public Science Education Program,
              Minnesota State University Moorhead (MSUM) and the MSUM Regional Science Center
              (RSC) will develop a traveling public exhibit and associated curricular
              material in each of four topics : dark matter in spiral galaxies, probability
              games of chance and beyond, X-ray microtomography, and green chemistry.  The
              underlying theme of these topics is 'Seeing is Believing'.  Using regional
              resources and examples, participating teachers and students will be able to
              visualize the underlying concepts and develop material to increase public
              understanding of this topical research.  Each summer five teachers, six
              undergraduates, and a member of the White Earth Tribal and Community College
              staff will work with MSUM scientists and educators and RSC staff to develop
              material for two projects.  Exhibits will be introduced to the general public
              during a multi-day exhibit at WETCC scheduled to coincide with the White Earth
              Reservation's annual pow-wow.  Exhibits will then be displayed at the Regional
              Science Center over the summer and circulate through local classrooms during
              the academic year.  Curricular materials will be disseminated through a yearly
              educational workshop offered at MSUM.   

This award is funded by the MPS
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.
***
