Title       : Biocomplexity in African Savannas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0120630

Award Number: 0120630
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1424965            (Estimated)
Investigator: Niall P. Hanan niall@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip N. Omi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luanne B. Otter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Scholes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael B. Coughenour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1692      BE: COUPLED BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1689,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Biocomplexity in African savannas
Niall P. Hanan, Robert J.
              Scholes, Michael B. Coughenour, Luanne Otter, 
Philip Omi, Gerhard
              Dangelmayr

Savannas are globally important ecosystems of great significance
              to human welfare and economies, especially in many less developed countries in
              Africa and Eurasia.  In Africa, the savannas are also home to the greatest
              density and diversity of large herbivores and carnivores of any ecosystem on
              earth.  However, the mixture of trees and grasses that defines savanna systems
              is inherently unstable and multiple factors related to soil type, climate,
              herbivore density, and wild-fire frequency are thought to contribute to their
              coexistence. Thus savannas are biocomplex systems where processes such as
              grazing intensity and fire frequency simultaneously depend on and control
              savanna structure, productivity and nutrient recycling.
This project will
              investigate biocomplexity in the context of African savannas. We are developing
              the conceptual and numerical understanding of savanna ecosystems that will
              allow prediction of savanna structure and function resulting from the complex
              interactions and feedback between driving variables. This will include the
              change in stable states under varying conditions, the resilience of the
              different forms of savanna to change, and the thresholds between stable states.
              The project will further use savanna systems as a general model for
              understanding complexity in biological systems and to develop methods of
              analysis and interpretive tools that promote a broader public understanding of
              the inter-relatedness of environmental systems.  


