Title       : (RES) Assessing Women in Engineering Programs: Developing Exportable Tools for
               Success.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0120642

Award Number: 0120642
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $898194             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rose M. Marra rmarra@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Bogue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop standardized, exportable and comparable assessment
              instruments and models for Women In Engineering (WIE) programs nationwide, thus
              allowing them to assess their program's activities and ultimately provide data
              for making well-informed evaluations. 

To accomplish this goal, the
              principal investigators at the University of Missouri and Penn State University
              will work over a three-year period with their institutions' WIE programs and
              three cooperating programs at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Georgia Tech,
              and University of Texas at Austin. With these five programs that collectively
              represent a variety of private and public, years of experience for WIE
              directors and student body characteristics, the investigators will pilot,
              revise, implement, conduct preliminary data analysis and disseminate
              easy-to-access, reliable and valid assessment instruments. The principles of
              formative evaluation will be applied to all instruments and products. All
              institutions will use the same set of instruments, thus allowing them to have
              access to powerful benchmarking data in addition to the data from each of their
              respective institutions.

A prior project, the Women's Experience in College
              Engineering Project (WECE) sought to characterize the factors that influence
              women students' experiences and decisions by studying college environments,
              events and support programs that affect women's satisfaction with their
              engineering major, and their decisions to persist or leave these majors. In
              contrast to WECE's macro-level and student focus, this proposal's target
              audience is WIE directors, with a focus on WIE programs, not students.

Women
              in Engineering programs around the United States are a crucial part of our
              country's response to the need for more women in engineering professions. There
              are about 50 WIE programs nationwide. Half have expressed interest in this
              effort. WIE directors will benefit by having ready-made assessment tools that
              will allow them to collect data on programs, evaluate these programs, and make
              decisions on how to revise programs and / or redistribute limited resources to
              maximize overall program effectiveness. Data from these instruments will also
              provide substantiated evidence for administrators, advisory boards and
              potential funding agencies. Finally, because these instruments will be
              available nationwide, programs will have the opportunity to take advantage of
              powerful benchmarking data for their decision-making processes.

This project
              provides the next logical step in the national movement to recruit and retain
              women in engineering.

