Title       : Jewel of the Pantanal: A Planning Grant for a Large Format Film
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0120829

Award Number: 0120829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48814              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Aydelott taydelott@nmmnh.state.nm.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Museum of Nat His Fdn
	      P. O. Box 7010
	      Albuquerque, NM  871047010    505/841-2889

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The New Mexico Museum of Natural History is developing a large format film on
              the Pantanal in Brazil, the world's largest wetland.  The film will focus on
              the Hyacinth Macaw, an indicator species whose health reflects the health of
              the entire ecosystem, and will explore the relationship between the climate,
              geology, hydrology and ecology of the region.  It also will examine three
              threats to the region:  a large scale river channeling project which would
              drain 50% of the marsh, gold mining activities that dump millions of tons of
              sediment into streams, and large-scale corporate farming which pollutes the
              region with pesticide and fertilizer run-off.

Science content for the series
              will be under the direction of Dr. Richard Smartt, former Director of the New
              Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science.  The series will be co-produced
              by Timothy Aydelott, from the museum, and Constance Bennecke, an independent
              producer in Brazil.  Barrie Howells will be executive producer and Rodney
              Taylor will be director of photography.  Both Mr. Howells and Mr. Taylor have
              extensive large format film experience.  Ralph Adler of RMC Research will
              conduct audience research during the planning phase

The major activities
              during the planning stage include:

Conducting audience research to determine
              the familiarity of the public with the ecosystem and with the concepts to be
              presented in the film.  In addition to topic testing, the research will assess
              the audience's current knowledge or misconceptions about wetland ecosystems and
              the Pantanal.

Convening the project advisors to develop the science content,
              finalize content goals, and to suggest ideas and strategies for presenting the
              science.

Attending a regional planning conference in the Pantanal to
              establish working relationships with scientists in the field.

Developing a
              script treatment for the film.


