Title       : Development of Sol-Gel Synthesis Methods for Organo-Ceramic Adsorbents for
               Separations of Cobalt, Chromium and Arsenic Ions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2001   
File        : a0120204

Award Number: 0120204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence L. Tavlarides lltavlar@ecs.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the proposed work is to develop efficient metal-ion separation
              systems based upon the development of a new class of organo-ceramic hybrid
              materials which can be used as adsorbents for the extraction of toxic and
              valuable metal ions from aqueous streams. These organic-inorganic hybrid
              materials are designed at a molecular level to take advantage of desirable
              properties from both components such as a high reactivity of functional organic
              molecules for metal extraction and a high physico-chemical strength of the
              ceramic structure as well as fast metal transport in the pores. The development
              of these hybrid adsorbents is a multi-disciplinary work in which organic
              synthesis chemistry, nano-scale materials science, and engineering/technology
              of chemical and environmental applications are closely interrelated. In this
              project, over 10 functional organic compounds will be developed and tested for
              their affinity for the proposed target metal ions, chromium and arsenic. After
              prescreening, two or three functional organic compounds will be selected for
              further evaluation with each metal ion to develop the most desirable adsorbent
              materials. These materials will be used to demonstrate their applicability for
              separating the target metals in a variety of industrial and environmental fluid
              streams.
Successful developments in the proposed project will lead to the
              understanding and advancement of the sol-gel processing technology and the
              identification of methodologies to produce and characterize organo-ceramic
              hybrid adsorbents for separation of toxic and industrially important metals.
              For example, a hybrid adsorbent developed for arsenic separation might be
              employed to produce safe drinking water from arsenic-contaminated ground water
              in many regions. Similarly efficient adsorbents for chromium separations could
              be applied to recycle this metal from contaminated effluent streams in the
              electroplating industry. In addition, the technology might be extended to other
              industrial applications to produce catalysts or new additives for polymers,
              flame-retardants, and lubricants. The project will also disseminate basic
              knowledge through research publications and novel industrial applications
              through patents, and it will provide training and education to students,
              including Native Americans concerned with contaminated lands. 

