Title       : Symposium on RNA Biology IV: RNA Tool and Target to be held October 18-21, 2001
               at the Friday for Continuing Education at the University of North Carolina in
               Chapel Hill
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a0120931

Award Number: 0120931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Agris Paul_Agris@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLECULAR SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of the Symposium on RNA Biology IV. RNA: Tool and Target are: To
              promote communication in a variety of research areas central to understanding
              the role of the structure and function of RNA in biological systems in a
              focused and intimate manner not obtainable at regular society, or other group
              meetings.  To provide an educational experience for young investigators,
              postdoctoral fellows and graduate students (especially women and minorities) in
              a setting conducive to open discussions with access to established
              investigators who have broad experience in all fields of RNA biology. To
              stimulate inclusive discussion and the sharing of ideas and techniques by
              postdoctoral fellows and graduate students, as well as principal researchers.
              To bring researchers to a venue where three major universities, federal
              research institutions and laboratories, and many corporate research centers are
              located. RNA research, especially
RNA as target and tool, has spawned a dozen
              biotechnology companies in the US alone and has been funded extensively by
              several large, well-established corporations, including those in North
              Carolina's Research Triangle. This proposal requests funds to cover the costs
              of bringing several major speakers to the meeting, to cover the registration
              fees for selected young speakers and for covering some of operating
              expenses
that will be incurred during the symposium.

