Title       : Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between
               NSF and SRC: Scalable Design and Test Methods for Single-Chip Multi-Link
               Radio-Frequency Transceivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0120255

Award Number: 0120255
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mani Soma soma@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Allstot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1752,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Recent developments in mixed-signal systems, especially those integrating
              computing and
communication in a system-on-a-chip, have focused on the goal to
              communicate information via wireless devices and networks. While digital system
              design to process baseband information is moving into the low gigahertz (GHz)
              frequency range, the mixed-signal transceivers have to operate in the ISM bands
              (2.5 GHz up to 5.8 GHz) with even higher frequencies in the near future to
              satisfy bandwidth demands. Analog design advances have produced several
              transceiver designs up to 5 GHz, using CMOS, BiCMOS, and other technologies. To
              reduce noise, these designs tend to separate the transmitter and receiver, and
              so far, have provided only a single physical link (one transmitter and one
              receiver) in a wireless device. In the design area, this proposal addresses the
              creation and verification of scalable systematic design methods to integrate
              two or more physical links on one single chip to provide more bandwidth and
              flexibility in communication applications. A methodology to incorporate
              multi-links is scalable in the sense that more links can be added by
              application demands. To create this methodology, we propose the following
              design approaches:

1. Noise cancellation techniques and circuits to deal
              with digital switching noise.

2. Noise cancellation techniques and circuits
              to deal with RF noise interference between different transceiver links and
              circuits.

These circuits will be validated using case studies from industry
              with whom we have had close
collaborations: Texas Instruments, Motorola, and
              National Semiconductors, who will provide
advanced fabrication technologies
              and simulation models for this study.
The designs will be fully tested and the
              development of scalable test methods is the second focus of this proposal.
              Mixed-signal test advances, despite intense activities, have been rather slow,
              especially in high-frequency (GHz) test. We propose to investigate the
              following approaches and distill the results into a test methodology that can
              be scaled with respect to operating frequencies and process advances:

1.
              End-to-end digital test methods using one transmit link and one receive link on
              the same chip
to verify correct information transmission.

2. Designs of
              on-chip delay and phase measurement circuits, operating at the same frequency
              as
the transceivers.

3. Interface between ATE and on-chip test circuits to
              use test resources efficiently.
During the validation of these test
              methodologies, we will need access to advance test equipment for comparison
              purposes, and these equipment will be provided by our collaborator at Teradyne
              (Tualatin, OR) and Wavecrest (San Jose, CA).

Another level of integration
              involves the curriculum - research aspects of the proposed work,
which is
              being implemented in our current curriculum revision. Dissemination approaches
              re-used the distance learning methods and assessment supported by NSF, FIPSE,
              and our own
university.  The proposal will deliver fundamental methodologies
              and techniques, and train the
first-generation system architects in
              high-frequency mixed-signal design and test.

