Title       : Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between
               NSF and SRC - Three Dimensional Planar Device Integration for Mixed Signal
               Electronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0120278

Award Number: 0120278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157095             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandip Tiwari st222@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1752,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research effort is directed to providing a novel solution to the problems
              that occur with mixed-signal integration by using three-dimensional
              implementation of planar silicon transistors. The planned research will explore
              mixed signal technology's viability through research and development of device
              and process technology incorporating digital and analog planar transistor
              structures in different single-crystal device planes using techniques of
              single-crystal silicon layer transfer at low temperatures and by isolating the
              digital and analog functions with a ground-plane in between.  This will be done
              while continuing to allow a large interconnection density in the horizontal and
              vertical direction for signal transmission. In order to make this feasible,
              transfer of thin (100's of nm) layers of single-crystal silicon on a planarized
              low roughness silicon dioxide surface at temperatures below 550 C has been
              demonstrated. Interconnections and ground planes based on doped poly-silicon
              and/or tungsten are incorporated in between the single-crystal silicon planes.
              The use of multiple planes, with oxide in between, also allows incorporation of
              other passive elements while limiting the increase in area together with a
              reduction in the loss effects of high frequencies. 

It is expected that this
              approach will reduce noise and cross-talk  through the use of ground-planes and
              reduced coupling.  This should provide additional freedom in the design of
              analog transistors, such as the metal-oxide semiconductor field-effect
              transistors in this project. This approach is also compatible with and can
              incorporate other developments in passive elements, such as high quality factor
              inductors, filters, etc., in back-end of the fabrication process. This research
              addresses significant issues for potential industrial applications , as  analog
              and digital technologies can differ from each other in quite substantial ways
              because of the design requirements inherent to high frequency or low power.
              Maintaining low cost, the need for operation at low power, and the circuit and
              systems issues arising from interference between analog signals and digital
              signals are a few of these challenges. 

