Title       : STC: National Center for Earth-Surface Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0120914

Award Number: 0120914
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19271727           (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Parker parke002@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 7213      STC Class of 2002
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                   National Center for Earth-surface Dynamics

             
                  Gary Parker, Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, Christopher Paola
                    
                        OIA-0120914, University of Minnesota

                             
                                   ABSTRACT

The National Center for Earth-surface Dynamics
              (NCED) is a Science and Technology Center focused on understanding the
              processes that shape the Earth's surface, and on communicating that
              understanding with a broad range of stakeholders.  NCED's work will support a
              larger, community-based effort to develop a suite of quantitative models of the
              Earth's surface: a Community Sediment Model (CSM).  Results of the NCED-CSM
              collaboration will be used for both short-term prediction of surface response
              to natural and anthropogenic change and long-term interpretation of how past
              conditions are recorded in landscapes and sedimentary strata. This will in turn
              help solve pressing societal problems such as estimation and mitigation of
              landscape-related risk; responsible management of landscape resources including
              forests, agricultural, and recreational areas; forecasting landscape response
              to possible climatic and other changes; and wise development of resources like
              groundwater and hydrocarbons that are hosted in buried sediments. NCED
              education and knowledge transfer programs include exhibits and educational
              programs at the Science Museum of Minnesota, internships and programs for
              students from tribal colleges and other underrepresented populations, and
              research opportunities for participants from outside core NCED
              institutions.

The Earth's surface is the dynamic interface among the
              lithosphere, hydrosphere, biosphere, and atmosphere. It is intimately
              interwoven with the life that inhabits it. Surface processes span environments
              ranging from high mountains to the deep ocean and time scales from fractions of
              a second to millions of years. Because of this range in forms, processes, and
              scales, the study of surface dynamics has involved many disciplines and
              approaches. A major goal of NCED is to foster the development of a unified,
              quantitative science of Earth-surface dynamics that combines efforts in
              geomorphology, civil engineering, biology, sedimentary geology, oceanography,
              and geophysics. Our research program has four major themes: (1) landscape
              evolution, (2) basin evolution, (3) biological sediment dynamics, and (4)
              integration of morphodynamic processes across environments and scales. Each
              theme area provides opportunities for exchange of information and ideas with a
              wide range of stakeholders, including teachers and learners at all levels;
              researchers, managers, and policy makers in both the commercial and public
              sectors; and the general public.
 
NCED is headquartered at St. Anthony Falls
              Laboratory, University of Minnesota. Participating institutions are the
              University of Minnesota, the Science Museum of Minnesota, Fond du Lac Tribal
              and Community College, the University of California at Berkeley, the
              Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Princeton University. To learn more
              about NCED, including opportunities to participate, please contact us at St.
              Anthony Falls Laboratory or via the NCED website: www.nced.edu.


