Title       : DEM/RES: Small Group Mathematical Modeling Approaches to Improved Gender Equity
               in Engineering (SGMM) Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0120794

Award Number: 0120794
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $885260             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith Zawojewski judiz@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              P.K. Imbrie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith J. Bowman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Heidi Diefes-Dux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Small Group Mathematical Modeling Approaches to Improved Gender Equity in
              Engineering (SGMM) Project is a collaboration between the engineering and
              mathematics education faculty at Purdue University. The plan is to demonstrate
              that innovations in collegiate engineering courses have the potential to
              address gender differences in interest and persistence, and that the
              implementation is systemic. The proposed effort will be designed to address
              mathematical topics that have been identified as foundational to engineering
              and likely barriers for women in these courses, and to design environments
              where skills and abilities women bring to engineering are rewarded and
              valued.

The modeling activities will be incorporated into selected early
              engineering courses at Purdue University, including those required of all
              incoming freshmen engineering students. Those involved are over 3000
              engineering students (~600 women) in freshman engineering courses, all
              instructors in freshman engineering (including faculty and graduate
              assistants), and a number engineering faculty teaching sophomore level courses.
              During Phase I, a small technical team, realistic, modeling activity will be a
              required of all freshmen. The activity will be delivered via WebCT, an
              internet-based instructional tool [www.webct.com]. During Phase II additional
              realistic modeling activities will be incorporated in sophomore-level materials
              engineering courses.

Complementary research efforts will be used to build a
              case study of this innovation. The purpose of the research is to inform (1) how
              these modeling activities are used to identify emerging student talent, (2) how
              the various constituencies react to the use of these activities (male and
              female students, instructors), (3) how these activities address the targeted
              mathematical areas, and (4) how students' vision of their future engineering
              career and their gender identity interact. The information will provide
              insights into the
potential effects of the small technical team, realistic,
              modeling activities in engineering courses, the dynamics of gender-equity
              issues of the Purdue engineering program, and factors outside the engineering
              program that may influence the interest and persistence of students (especially
              women) in the field.

The proposed project studies gender-related issues at
              the student, the instructor, and the programmatic level. The activities and
              supporting materials will be available to other universities on a web site
              already sponsored by Purdue University, and linked to the Purdue Women in
              Engineering Program web site. 

