Title       : SGER: Analysis of Exterally-Sustained MMHD Processes for Enhanced Electrical
               Power Generation Efficiency Using Gas from Reformed Coal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0120617

Award Number: 0120617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Miles miles@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0120617
Miles

This research program will explore the potential of electron
              beam sustained MHD power generation for enhancing the electrical efficiency of
              advanced ground based coal fired power plants. In conventional MHD, the high
              temperatures that are required (even with seeding) lead to significant oxides
              of nitrogen production. The electron beam sustained MHD has the capability of
              operating at relatively cool temperatures, without the need for seed material
              to be added to the flow.  The lower temperature allows of a variety of new,
              possibly high efficiency, low polluting approaches to be explored, the most
              desirable of which would be the utilization of the high flame temperature to
              drive a high velocity, low temperature supersonic flow with rapid quenching of
              the formation of oxides of nitrogen through a supersonic expansion.  The active
              control of the conductivity that electron beam sustained MHD affords also opens
              the door to advanced methods of control for MHD processes, particularly to
              suppress parasitic current paths and permit operation in dynamic modes that
              might allow for improved performance. The electron beams enter the MHD channel
              along magnetic field lines, and the conductivity is sustained by the secondary
              electrons that are produced.  To suppress the electron loss rate, the channel
              must be operated at low pressure. For ground based facilities, this means the
              flow will need to be supersonic. Since the presence of coal slag along the
              walls will cause difficulty with electron beam transmission into the MHD
              channel, the main focus of the research will be to examine the coupling of the
              electron beam MHD concept together with new membrane technology gasification
              processes that convert coal to hydrogen and CO2.  MHD has the potential for
              more efficient electrical conversion of hydrogen through combustion at a
              temperature higher than is possible with turbine inlet temperature limits. This
              research explores the possibility of e-beam sustained MHD for high efficiency
              conversion by independently
controlling the combustion temperature through
              combustion in a supersonic nozzle, the formation of oxides of nitrogen through
              kinetic rate differentials, and the optimization of the conductivity profiles.
              Modeling indicates that the cost of the electron beams can be relatively small
              if the electron loss rate is minimized.

