Title       : Chip-Package Co-Design Methodology for Integrated RF Microsystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0120308

Award Number: 0120308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306143             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. R. Mukund prmeee@rit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Santosh K. Kurinec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jayanti Venkataraman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Madhavan Swaminathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,1517,1752,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The research aims to develop a chip-package co-design methodology using System
              on a Chip and System on a Package technologies. This is necessary to span
              multiple domains both in technology and circuitry in integrated RF
              microsystems. These systems include RF, analog and digital circuits and are
              sensitive to the constraints imposed by each domain on the other domains and
              the package. Most systems are currently being designed in CMOS technology and
              are driven by the requirements of the digital domain. This research will be
              conducted in three phases. In the first phase of this project, limits of RF
              circuit performance will be investigated. The constraints of the digital
              physical design environment on Rf circuit design will also be examined. In the
              second phase, emerging technologies such as Copper metal layers and deposition
              of Ferrite material will be studied for RF passive components, and compared
              with standard Al metal technology. In the third phase, a co-design methodology
              will be developed for the chip and the package, that includes component
              optimization, floor planning and routing. The developed methodology will be
              used on a test bed that will be fabricated and tested. 

The RIT
              collaboration with Georgia Tech brings expertise in microsystems science and
              engineering together with design, modeling and characterization of electronic
              packaging. Graduate students and undergraduates will benefit from the breadth
              of the research collaboration that includes the synthesis of chip design and
              packaging, and the advances in integrated RF microsystems

