Title       : Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between
               NSF and SRC: Optimal Double-Gate MOSFET Structure for Mixed-signal Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0120328

Award Number: 0120328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin C. Kan kan@ece.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1752,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0120328
Kan

This proposal focuses on investigating innovative circuits based
              on double-gate MOSFET structures in the mixed-signal environment. The research
              efforts will establish a whole suite of knowledge on circuit design, device
              modeling, device design, and device fabrication for optimal performance and
              reliable operations in the deep submicron double-gate MOSFET technology.  The
              comprehensive aspects from circuit to fabrication will not only provide a
              thorough understanding of the mixed-signal circuit design trade-off, but also
              will enable a balance development for graduate and undergraduate students
              participating in the program.

Initial scaling studies on double-gate MOSFET
              device design has been performed by analytical solutions and the full-2D
              electrostatic solver. Design variables such as channel length, Si film
              thickness, gate oxide thickness, and contact work functions will be selected
              according to different benchmark in circuit applications. The static coupling
              between the two channels can be maximized or minimized, the dynamic coupling
              can be tuned to fit the circuit operations. Steep subthreshold slope including
              DIBL (drain-induced barrier lowering) consideration can be achieved through
              appropriate design consideration on quantum-mechanical effects. Novel Schottky
              S/D contact technology by the PI's group will be employed and evaluated in the
              overall device operations and circuit requirements. This modeling study will
              serve as the scaling guidelines for device and process
              design.

Simultaneously with the fabrication process development of
              double-gate CMOS technology, pre-Si prediction of device parameters will be
              obtained from detailed modeling and scaling studies based on experimental
              measurement on the larger devices with similar structures.  A scalable compact
              model for double-gate CMOS will be developed based on the preliminary
              analytical and numerical solutions. The predicted parameter set and the
              scalable device model will enable early analysis of mixed-signal circuit
              design, which will in turn give directives to fabrication process trade-off.
              Novel mixed-signal circuits will be constructed using the tight (no contact
              parasitic) and fast (down to 0.1ps, i.e., 10THz, limited by either the
              dielectric relaxation time or carrier transit time of carriers travelling
              between two channels) coupling between the two MOS structures.

The PI
              expects that this task will result in new low-voltage circuit topologies that
              exploit both gates of the double-gate MOSFET to achieve high-performance
              operation with low power consumption. He also expects to determine a great deal
              about how the double-gate MOSFET structure can be optimized for different
              circuit applications.

Innovative Claims
Novel mixed-signal circuit
              functionality can be obtained from using the tight and fast
coupling between
              the two gates of the proposed structure.
Methodology for device and circuit
              co-design can be demonstrated through double-gate
MOSFET analog and
              mixed-signal circuits.
 Novel low-voltage, low-power mixed-signal circuits
              with high performance can be designed utilizing the unique double-gate
              structure of the proposed devices.

