Title       : Center for Biophotonics Science and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0120999

Award Number: 0120999
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19936048           (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis L. Matthews dlmatthews@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 7213      STC Class of 2002
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Biophotonics is the science of generating and using light and other forms of
              radiant energy whose quantum unit is the photon for visualization,
              measurements, analysis, and manipulation of biological materials.  The
              discipline strives to exploit the high spatial resolution, sensitivity, and
              spectral specificity of photonics to understand and affect biological structure
              and/or function. 

The Center for Biophotonics Science and Technology (CBST),
              an NSF Science and Technology Center, is a multi-disciplinary and
              multi-institutional activity designed to support a goal-directed, sustained
              effort to broadly advance the science of biophotonics.  Center activities are
              spread over four university campuses, UC Davis, UC San Francisco, UC Berkeley,
              and Stanford University, and the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.   The
              CBST emphasizes vertical integration of knowledge and applications that span
              the intellectual landscape, from creating new instrumentation and techniques to
              helping understand molecular mechanisms to providing technology that will
              enable the creation and development of important new biomedical tools. 
              

Research at the Center is divided among four strategic thrust areas:  1)
              biomolecular mechanisms; 2) imaging and diagnostics; 3) computational
              biophotonics; and 4) biomedical applications.  The area of biomolecular
              mechanisms concentrates on experiments and tools related to the newly emerging
              field of single molecule imaging and detection, methodologies that are used in
              individual projects to investigate on a sub-cellular level molecular mechanisms
              related to DNA-protein interactions.   The area of imaging and diagnostics
              focuses on the development of new instruments for a number of imaging
              methodologies, including ultra-high resolution optical microscopy, imaging
              non-linear optical properties of tissues, optical interference imaging through
              otherwise opaque tissue, and imaging tissue oxygenation by NIR imaging.  
              Computational biophotonics focuses on the application of new simulation codes
              and supercomputers to support the projects in areas one and two and, in
              general, increase the understanding of photonic transport in and interaction
              with tissue.   The area of biomedical applications focuses on optimizing and
              applying existing technologies to significant medical problems, including
              hyperspectral microscopy for searching for new optical signatures of disease,
              development of new, light-activated materials for surgical applications, and
              the utilization of x-ray sources for protein crystallography and live cell
              imaging. 

The centerpiece of the educational activity is the development of
              a series of six teaching modules, or "stepping stones," that bring the concepts
              of light, biology, and biophotonics to students from kindergarten (Step One,
              K-3) through graduate and post-doctoral research (Step Six). Central to the
              concept of the "stepping stones" approach is that the modules emphasize
              hands-on science activities promoting scientific inquiry and concept
              development.  The "stepping stones modules" are disseminated widely to schools
              in the community through various mechanisms, among them the MESA and 4-H Youth
              Development Program.  

The Center has a strong, collaborative program for
              fostering outreach to and participation by non-center researchers in research
              activities.  An Industry Partners Consortium (IPC) is used to bring interested
              members from industry together with CBST participants for the purpose of
              knowledge exchange, collaborative research, and the direct transfer of
              intellectual property and technology know-how to the commercial sector.


