Title       : Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: Joint Initiative Between NSF and SRC :
               Three-Dimensional Impedance Engineering of Substrates for Mixed Signal
               Integrated Circuit Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0120368

Award Number: 0120368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ya-Hong Xie yhx@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              King-Ning Tu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mau-Chung F. Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1752,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0120368
Xie

Technological demand exists for mixed-signal integrated circuits
              based on Si VLSI. Such technology will enable the reduction of the form factor,
              power consumption, and circuit design complexity of mixed-signal IC's that are
              the core of portable electronics, personal communicators, the read-write
              channels of computer hard drives, and modems for internet access. The
              advancement of the technology is currently hampered by the cross-talk issue,
              for which there is no viable solution insight.

The PIs propose an innovative
              solution to the problem. Through-the-wafer porous Si regions analogous to a
              moat are inserted between the noise producing and noise sensitive circuits to
              isolate electromagnetic interference (EMI). Such isolation is achieved via the
              high impedance nature of the porous Si region comparing to the alternative
              pathway of Si substrate for the EMI to reach true ground. The same porous Si
              regions can also be used to isolate high performance passive components
              (inductors and capacitors) from the substrate. Similar porous Si moat can be
              converted to highly conductive regions by coating the internal pore surfaces
              with metal. Highly conductive regions can serve as grounded shields for RF
              interference. Alternatively, through-the-wafer porous Si "posts" can be
              fabricated with porous Si removed afterward. This will result in deep vias. 
              Metal can be introduced into the vias, resulting in Faraday cage type of
              structures for shielding electromagnetic interference. An appropriate name for
              the proposed research is three-dimensional impedance engineering of the
              substrate.

In the proposed research, The PIs will scrutinize the
              effectiveness of all three approaches for RF cross-talk isolation. They will
              focus on the frequency range from 100 MHz up to above 40 GHz. This is the
              targeted frequency range by Si-based mixed-signal integrated circuits for the
              near future. By introducing this porous Si-based comprehensive process module
              into Si VLSI process flow, they will provide a unique solution to several of
              the most challenging issues present today in the Si mixed-signal IC
              technology.

Their research will address the following critical issues
              relevant to the realization of the innovation. The issues include the isolation
              effectiveness, long-term stability of the isolation region, the preferred
              masking scheme and material, the method for introducing metal into the porous
              Si region, the mechanical integrity of the porous Si with and without metal
              coatings, the compatibility with Si VLSI processing, and potential
              contamination concerns.

The proposed research encompasses materials science
              and electrical engineering.  It will migrate from mostly material and
              processing issues at the beginning of the project, to RF circuit fabrication
              and testing towards the end of the project. The research will be carried out in
              collaboration with Conexant where their test chips will be fabricated, and
              Agere Systems (supporting our research in porous Si via SRC) where their
              initial study into this strategically important field started.

In addition
              to the expected technological impact, the proposed research will serve the
              important function of educating a new generation of engineers by exposing them
              to the frontier of the information technology. Conducting thesis research on
              such a project will give them an education in the combined areas of fundamental
              materials science and a keen sense of the requirement of practical devices
              through the collaboration with industry. They will become members of the
              innovative workforce that has been the drive force for the prosperity of our
              society.

