Title       : MPS Internships in Public Science Education - MPS-IPSE: Making the Nanoworld
               Comprehensible
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0120897

Award Number: 0120897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $515085             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy C. Crone crone@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur B. Ellis  (Principal Investigator former)
              Thomas F. Kuech  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Krajniak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1024,1696,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This IPSE award, funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
              Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences, involves a partnership
              between Materials Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) on Nanostructured
              Materials and Interfaces at UW-Madison (UW) and the Discovery World (DW)
              science museum in Milwaukee aimed at bringing cutting-edge research on advanced
              materials and nanoscale science and technology into the museum and K-12 school
              settings.  This multi-faceted project will enable Internships for Public
              Science Education (IPSE) participants to enhance their communication skills
              substantially while bringing the excitement of state-of-the-art MRSEC research
              themes to pre-college and public audiences.  Through the IPSE program, a
              diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students will team with UW MRSEC
              researchers, DW personnel, and K-12 educators to develop grade-appropriate
              curriculum materials.
%%%
Initially, laboratory experiments and
              demonstrations will be developed around existing MRSEC-created education
              products, making the materials science and engineering concepts associated with
              such advanced materials as ferrofluids, shape memory alloys, and amorphous
              metals accessible.  New initiatives will create instructional materials for DW
              and K-12 teachers and students around he current research themes of fullerenes,
              nanotubes, and Giant Magnetoresistance (GMR).  A new module teaching students
              about polymers in chemical engineering using polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) will
              be produced.  An innovative museum program, the Test Pilot Training Program
              (TPTP), will link IPSE participants with middle and high school students to
              provide mentoring on scientific themes and career development related to
              materials science and engineering.  These pre-college students will serve as
              ambassadors for DW, making presentations at DW and local schools, and assisting
              with the training of newly recruited TPTP participants.  Nearly 50 graduate and
              undergraduate students will participate over the three-year project period. 
              Program results will be disseminated through meetings and publications of
              professional disciplinary and pan-disciplinary organizations, workshops for
              regional K-12 teachers that will be held as part of the project, and a workshop
              held in partnership with the Association for Science-Technology Centers (ASTC).
               Formal evaluations of the program's impact on museum visitors and on the IPSE
              participants will be conducted.  The UW-DW IPSE project can serve as a model
              for the professional development of technically oriented students, providing
              them with rich opportunities for sharing their scientific knowledge and
              enthusiasm with pre-college and museum audiences.  This will enhance the
              communication skills of IPSE participants while also making the public and K-12
              teachers and students aware of exciting research developments.  The project
              will thus contribute to science literacy and to the development of a diverse,
              technically trained workforce. 

