Title       : Building Pathways into the Geosciences for an Hispanic Community of Learners in
               El Paso
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0120012

Award Number: 0120012
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Cook                              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kate C. Miller miller@geo.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Langford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher L. Andronicos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1697      OPPORT FOR ENHANCING DIVERSITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1697,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Building Pathways into the Geosciences for an Hispanic Community
of
              Learners in El Paso


The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP), with an
              enrollment of about 15,000 students of which 70% are Hispanic and 10% are
              Mexican Nationals, is one of the largest Hispanic-serving institutions in the
              country. The demographics of the UTEP student body (85% of whom come from the
              El Paso region) reflect those of the dominantly Hispanic metroplex of more than
              two million inhabitants on both sides of the US-Mexican border that the
              university serves. Thus, the characteristics of the community give UTEP
              advantages in recruiting minority students into the geosciences. UTEP has both
              MS and Ph.D. programs in Geological Sciences.

This project expands minority
              participation in the geosciences at the university by increasing the number of
              Hispanic students who major in either Geological Sciences or in a new
              interdisciplinary program in Environmental Sciences.  It proposes to build a
              community of aspiring geoscientists in El Paso by establishing an outreach
              program to enhance awareness of the geosciences among local high school
              students. The program offers stipends to college students in exchange for
              progress towards a bachelors degree in Geological or Environmental Sciences and
              participation in research with geoscience faculty and graduate students. The
              centerpiece of the outreach program is a two-week summer camp for high school
              juniors that introduces students and teachers to a variety of topics in the
              geosciences and demonstrates how the biology, chemistry, and physics covered in
              high school courses integrates with geoscience.  Students are encouraged to
              enroll in introductory environmental science or geology as freshmen and given
              the opportunity to serve as peer mentors in subsequent summer programs. 

