Title       : DIS - Gender Schemas and Science Careers: Tutorials for Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a0120465

Award Number: 0120465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia V. Valian vvvhc@cunyvm.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4020

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project will produce on-line tutorials for SMET students and faculty at
              colleges and universities, and for anyone else interested in a summary of
              research about the role of gender in science careers. The tutorials will be
              developed using Powerpoint slides with voice-over narration. Each will include
              an annotated bibliography, a questionnaire for site visitors to fill out
              (voluntarily), the opportunity to send queries and comments to PI, and question
              and answer material from those emailed messages.

The work will be performed
              at Hunter College - CUNY and the tutorials will be mounted on a Hunter College
              server. The tutorials can thus be reached by anyone in the world with access to
              the web. Once a demonstration tutorial is created, the PI will contact
              educational institutions and groups concerned with gender equity in science in
              order to invite such groups to evaluate the tutorial and to provide a link to
              the Hunter College site. As the project continues, more organizations and
              groups will be invited to create links to the site.

Tutorials like these do
              not currently exist. The PI is uniquely qualified as the author of a published
              book on women's advancement in the professions (extensively summarizing
              research), as a cognitive psychologist who has developed new courses related to
              gender, as a frequent presenter on the topic (having given 100+ presentations
              to and discussions with science students and educators), and as the developer
              of a web site for prospective graduate students to Hunter's MA Program in
              Psychology. The PI in particular will leverage experience giving lectures to
              diverse audiences.

Outcome measures will be evaluated from a) the number of
              visits to the site and to each tutorial, b) the number of educational
              institutions and organizations with links to the site, c) analysis of
              questionnaires and emailed messages. Feedback results that are relevant to the
              larger community will be posted to the site once they have been
              analyzed.

Science-based information about inadvertent bias in evaluations of
              men and women is available in technical sources but is not known to most
              students or educators. The resulting product will provide a suite of 15-minute
              tutorials that could be incorporated into workshops, briefings, classroom
              discussions, web sites, and on-line courses aimed at anyone studying the
              underrepresentation of women in SMET. The content drawing on many research
              findings and results is a substantive and accessible complement to many
              briefings and reports that primarily present summaries of statistics.

