Title       : DEM: FUTUREBOUND: Identification of Effective Strategies to Increase Placement
               and Success of Women in Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0120878

Award Number: 0120878
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $896768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie E. Reyes   (Principal Investigator current)
              Katrina L. Mangin  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              University of Arizona (UA) in partnership with Pima Community College (PCC; a
              multi-campus institution) proposes a comprehensive program to increase the
              enrollment, retention, and graduation of women especially minority women of
              Hispanic and American Indian origins, in tracks leading to BS and graduate
              degrees in astronomy, biosciences, chemistry, physics, engineering and related
              fields. 

This project strengthens previous activities by 1) building on
              collaboration between PCC and UA science departments in research internship
              programs, extending these efforts to highlight the needs of women especially
              minority women students; 2) integrating community college level programs into
              UA's Women in Science and Engineering K-12 and university programs; 3) paying
              new attention to differences within groups and fields; and 4) identifying and
              initiating strategies for long-term institutional changes.

PCC's
              multifaceted program will include 1) increasing recruitment; 2) individual
              student mentoring and academic advising; 3) enrichment efforts to strengthen
              students' preparedness and widen their knowledge of career choices; 4)
              improvement of institutional instructional and support programs focusing on
              interactive learning, classroom climate, enhanced outreach to high school
              science teachers, and coordination of minority and support programs; and 5)
              financial support for students.

Activities at the UA will include new
              efforts to enhance students' motivation, performance and financial support and
              will foster their use of existing units serving minority and women
              undergraduates. Collaboration with the Graduate College and Women of Color
              Consortium will address advancement to graduate education. We will compare
              students' GPAs and progress towards BS and Graduate education for the target
              group to those of all PCC science and engineering students. 

The prime
              target group is women who have been consistently highlighted as most
              underrepresented and most difficult to retain and advance in science-related
              areas. We will address different needs and issues across fields and among
              groups, reflecting the multiple intersections of gender and ethnicity. The most
              underrepresented of all -- minority women, will be a special focus. Strategies
              that work with these populations can be applied to all students.

The project
              offers a potential model for improving on articulation of community college
              students into four-year undergraduate and graduate institutions. Since
              nationally, community colleges are an entry into higher education particularly
              for women and minorities, increased articulation with a focus on science and
              engineering could increase participation of these groups at higher
              levels.



