Title       : RES - AnimalWorld: Enhancing High School Women's Mathematical Competence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0120809

Award Number: 0120809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carole R. Beal cbeal@psych.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Royer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly P. Woolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Some national assessments show that the gender gap in math achievement has
              narrowed dramatically in the last decade, and that there has been a significant
              increase in the number of mathematics courses taken by high school women.
              However, other data indicate that female students do not confront the critical
              transition from high school to college with deep, conceptually based
              mathematical competence that supports entry into STEM (science, technology,
              engineering, mathematics) careers. Specifically, female students perform much
              less well than males on complex problem solving, when they must apply novel
              problem solving approaches, and when they must work under time pressure or
              transfer skills to problems not previously seen. Other research points to
              differences in female and male students learning styles; female students
              require more structured, concrete and repetitive instruction whereas males do
              equally well with more abstract hints and help, suggesting that they have a
              deeper understanding of mathematical concepts. A related concern is that female
              students increased math course taking has not translated into a higher number
              of women in the pipeline towards careers; that is, women are taking additional
              math but are not planning to utilize it in their careers. The consequences are
              seen in the continued under-representation of females in STEM majors and
              careers, and the critical lack of mathematically sophisticated workers in
              numbers sufficient to meet our nations needs.

This project is designed to
              investigate the factors that contribute to female students shallower
              mathematical competence, as well as the learning styles that characterize male
              and female students at the critical transition from high school to college. Our
              investigations take place in the context of a multimedia, multi-component
              simulation environment: AnimalWorld. AnimalWorld provides high school women
              (and men) with 1) an intelligent tutor for high school mathematics (fractions;
              algebra; geometry; ratios/proportions/decimals; probability) that provides
              gender adaptive instruction and allows for analysis of male and female learning
              styles; 2) a virtual mentor component, in which students who are solving math
              problems in the simulated world can meet real female researchers and experts
              (through video clips embedded in the simulation) who discuss their training and
              the importance of math for their careers; 3) a math at your fingertips module
              in which students periodically rehearse math facts to free cognitive resources
              for higher-order problem solving, predicting increased math test scores; 4) a
              module to enhance students spatial cognition through dynamic manipulation of
              objects in simulated three-dimensional environments, which will allow us to
              provide a strong test of the hypothesis that females poorer math achievement
              reflects less well developed spatial cognition; and 5) an SAT-Math preparation
              module designed to narrow the striking gender gap on this critical achievement
              test.

Our prediction is that female students who work with AnimalWorld will
              show significant increases in their complex math problem-solving skill,
              including their SAT-Math exam performance; that gender adaptive instruction
              will foster greater conceptual understanding in female students; and that
              virtual mentors will encourage female students to report greater interest in
              STEM careers. The results will increase our understanding of male and female
              learning styles, as well as provide new approaches to effective mathematics
              instruction for all students.

