Title       : Mixed Integer Programming for Radiotherapy Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0120145

Award Number: 0120145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Langer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
0120145
Langer

There are approximately 1.2 million new cases of cancer
              each year in the US and about half undergo treatment with radiation therapy.
              External beam treatment directs a collection of high energy beams from outside
              the patient's body towards the tumor. Using the widespread method of conformal
              radiotherapy, beams are positioned at multiple angles, each shaped to match the
              tumor. The newest technique, intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT), breaks
              down whole beams into finer beamlets, each of which can, in effect, be assigned
              a separate intensity. The radiation therapy planning problem is to choose a set
              of beams/beamlets and assign intensities to them to push tumor dose as high as
              the tolerances of nearby healthy tissue will allow. Even small increments in
              tumor dose consistent with tolerance constraints can improve thousands of lives
              per year. The objective of the proposed research is to develop computational
              methods tailored to radiation therapy that can compute feasible plans provably
              within a specified percent of the best possible within the 24-48 hours
              available for treatment planning.

To determine volume distributions of dose,
              oncologists typically model the irregular geometry of tissue structures as the
              union of a large number of embedded discrete points. Given that the dose
              delivered to a point can be approximated as linear in the beam intensities, the
              task of treatment planning optimization can be modeled as mixed-integer program
              (MIP) with variables corresponding to those intensities, and constraints
              limiting the dose at each of the tissue points. Dose-volume constraints, which
              require a specified fraction of each normal organ volume receive a dose below
              its threshold for damage, are enforced by collecting point constraints for each
              tissue in a multiple-choice group with alternatives delineated with binary
              variables.

The research will develop and test two contributions to generic
              MIP methodology in order to enable computationally efficient solutions to be be
              found for the radiotherapy planning problem. The aim is to provide solutions
              that satisfy prescribed constraints with an objective value that lies within a
              provable bound around the optimum. The first of these will strengthen LP
              relaxations of MIP formulations for the multiple-choice (dose--volume)
              constraints by constructing and adding new valid inequalities. The second will
              adapt a column-generation approach to deal with the massive IMRT formulations.
              Instead of modeling the intensity of each beamlet within an IMRT beam, whole
              patterns of beamlet intensities will be represented as single columns and
              generated as required.













