Title       : The Albert Einstein Distinguished Educator Fellowship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0120520

Award Number: 0120520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70535              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Patrick White whitep@triangle-coalition.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Triangle Coalition Tech
	      1840 Wilson Boulevard
	      Arlington, VA  22201    703/516-5960

NSF Program : 7345      PRES AWARDS FOR EXCEL IN SCIEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will fund an Albert Einstein Fellow to work in the Division of
              Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education of the National Science
              Foundation for ten months, beginning August 15, 2001.  ESIE, the Program
              Director, and the Fellow will determine the specific duties of the Einstein
              Fellow.  The majority of the time the Fellow will work on the Presidential
              Awards for Excellence in Mathematics and Science Teaching program (PAEMST). It
              is anticipated the Einstein Fellow will:

1. Work on the professional
              development component of the PAEMST Program.  The PAEMST program works with
              major national mathematics and science teacher organizations to provide
              precessions for the Presidential Awardees attending annual meetings of these
              groups.  The Fellow will help design these activities for the past awardees and
              identify other possible professional development opportunities.  This will
              include but not be limited to helping the Program Director make arrangements
              for the audiovisual needs of the speakers; conference meals; and selection and
              coordination of speakers.
2. Act as a liaison with former awardees in the
              field.  
3. Review and screen all state nominee's applications for eligibility
              and prepare them for the National Selection Committee.
4. Help the Program
              Director organize the National Selection Committee meeting. 
5. Monitor and
              encourage the submission of requested data from State Coordinators.  Collect,
              organize, and analyze requested data. This includes but is not limited to
              annual reports, number and category of applications received, and opinion
              surveys.
6. Assume various responsibilities with respect to the PAEMST
              Website.  
7. Assist in the planning and conduction of the awards week.
8.
              Review and edit PAEMST correspondence including but not limited to letters,
              posters, the BioBook, and brochures. 

The NSF Einstein Fellow will not
              perform the work of a Program Officer, handle any NSF proposals (including
              proposals for the PAEMST Program), conduct any part of the review process, or
              access NSF data systems where access is restricted under the Privacy Act to NSF
              employees and contractors.
The Fellow will provide three written reports to
              the Triangle Coalition, which will describe her responsibilities and on-going
              activities.  These will be used to evaluate the Fellow's accomplishments during
              the Fellowship period and to offer personal perspectives and recommendations to
              the Fellowship program.
