Title       : Convex Underestimators for Dynamic Optimization Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a0120441

Award Number: 0120441
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291205             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul I. Barton pib@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI: Paul I. Barton 
Institution: MIT
Proposal Number:
              0120441

The objective of this research is to develop deterministic global
              optimization algorithms for nonconvex dynamic embedded optimization problems,
              mixed-integer dynamic optimization problems and nonconvex variational problems.
               The approaches need to be practically implementable and they should provide
              theoretical guarantees of locating the global optimum.

Research: In the
              first research task, the PI will develop a convexity theory and convex
              underestimators for optimization problems with a very general integral
              objective function and linear time varying dynamic system embedded.  With these
              theoretical foundation, it will be possible to adapt existing deterministic
              global optimization algorithms for nonconvex nonlinear programs and
              mixed-integer nonlinear program, hence also addressing mixed-integer dynamic
              optimization problems.  Next, the PI will explore how this composite function
              approach can be extended to problems with nonlinear dynamic systems embedded. 
              This extension will draw heavily on the theory developed for the linear case. 
              In the final research task, he will explore the construction of convex
              underestimators for variational and optimal control problems, i.e., convex
              underestimators on linear spaces of functions.  A number of major research
              challenges exist in the application of these variational convex
              underestimators, including the numerical generation of rigorous lower bounds
              from the convex underestimating problems, and how to partition a linear space
              of function in, for example, a branch-and-bound procedure.

Impact: The
              research will make fundamental contributions via developing a convexity theory
              for dynamic embedded optimization problems, and developing methods for the
              construction of convex underestimators for dynamic embedded optimization
              problems and variational problems.  This theory will lead to a series of
              practical deterministic global optimization algorithms for the solution of
              these problems.  The capability to solve such problems to guaranteed global
              optimality will have broad practical implications.  For example, in the area of
              process operations there is hope for solving problems such as formal safety
              verification, the synthesis of integrated batch processes, and the design of
              major process transients such as start-up and shut-down procedures, using
              detailed dynamic models.  Most serious industrial accidents occur during such
              transient events.  Furthermore, the method will have applicability in other
              engineering disciplines as well as applied mathematics.

