Title       : High Risk Exploratory Research: Archaeological investigations on the Mehran
               plain, southwest Iran
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0120519

Award Number: 0120519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19908              (Estimated)
Investigator: Abbas Alizadeh a-alizadeh@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas T. Kouchoukos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Revolution of 1978 and the subsequent Eight Year War with Iraq resulted in
              the cessation of systematic fieldwork in Iran by foreign archaeologists. With
              the support of the Iranian Cultural Heritage Organization, an international
              team co-directed by Abbas Alizadeh and Nicholas Kouchoukos will begin a new
              program of field research in the arid southwest region of the country. Here,
              archaeologists in the 1960s and early 1970s produced a rich material record of
              fundamental transformations in the economic and political organization of human
              societies, including the emergence of sedentary agriculture, nomadic
              pastoralism, cities, states and empires. To accomplish this, they developed a
              powerful synthesis of archaeological method and anthropological theory that
              moved Near Eastern prehistory from an orientalist antiquarianism to the
              forefront of the influential New Archaeology. To resume work in southwest Iran
              after nearly 25 years is therefore to take up again an enduring set of research
              problems and a lapsed conversation between archaeology and social theory. With
              these goals in mind, Drs. Abbas Alizadeh, Nicholas Kouchoukos and their
              colleagues will conduct six weeks of exploratory survey and excavation on the
              Mehran Plain in autumn 2001. Their research will address interrelated sets of
              questions concerning: 1) the history of human-environment interactions,
              specifically the domestication of sheep and goat, the adoption of agriculture,
              and the development of canal irrigation; 2) the interaction between pastoral
              nomads and settled farmers in the emergence and development of social and
              political complexity in the region; and 3) the relationship between emerging
              polities of southwest Iran and the neighboring, more precocious city-states of
              southern Mesopotamia. Located near the natural habitat of the wild ancestors of
              domesticated cereals and caprines, within the traditional winter grazing lands
              of mobile pastoralists, and along the most important historic route between
              Mesopotamia and Iran, the Mehran Plain is ideally located for such
              investigations. Field research will focus on the excavation of two known sites
              which together provide a continuous, stratified sequence of artifact, floral,
              and faunal assemblages spanning the 9th through 4th millennia BC. Fieldwork and
              subsequent analysis will focus in particular on changing practices of plant and
              animal exploitation and the social logics and intersecting institutional forms
              through which agricultural and pastoral production were valorized, intensified
              and integrated. Ultimately, the project will attempt to understand the
              development of these practices and structures in their local, regional and
              global context.
