Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological Informatics for FY2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0120292

Award Number: 0120292
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicolas E. Buchler buchler@itp.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N,Buchler
	      Kohn Hall, UC Santa Barbara
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/967-1564

NSF Program : 1398      BIO INFOR POSTDOCT RSCH FELLOW
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological
              Informatics for FY2001.  The fellowship supports research and training at the
              postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational,
              computational, mathematical, and statistical sciences. The goal of the
              fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a
              career in biological informatics in which research and education will be
              integrated. There is an increasing need for training in biological informatics
              at all occupational levels, and it is expected that Fellows trained through
              these fellowships will play important roles in training of the future
              workforce.

The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled
              "From genome to gene expression:  Mapping and understanding genetic networks in
              Dictyostelium development."  Upon starvation, Dictyostelium amoeba communicate,
              sort, and adhere to each other to form ``tissues''.  This transformation,
              resulting in a resistant spore, utilizes all the mechanisms crucial for normal
              development of multicellular organisms.  Promoters, repressors, and the
              architecture of genetic networks involved in development in Dictyostelium are
              being explored using both genomic and gene expression data and mathematical
              modeling. 

