Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY: Hexapod Phylogenomics - Bringing Phylogenetic Supercomputing to
               the Masses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0120718

Award Number: 0120718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1340000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Whiting michael_whiting@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Quinn Snell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. Clement  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Whiting  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith A. Crandall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1693      BE: GENOME-ENABLE ENVIR SCI&EN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1689,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0120718
Whiting
A Biocomplexity in the Environment: Genome-Enabled grant has
              been awarded to an interdisciplinary team of researchers at the Brigham Young
              University that combines expertise in computer science, statistics, and
              phylogenetic systematics to address three fundamental questions in evolutionary
              biology, genomics, and computational biology. (1) What are the major
              relationships among Hexapods (insects and related taxa)? (2) How has
              mitochondrial genome evolution occurred relative to Hexapod diversity?  (3) How
              can we develop fast, parallel computer algorithms to reconstruct phylogenetic
              relationships for large data sets?  To answer these questions, the
              investigators will sequence about 2500 species across hexapod diversity for
              about 12 nuclear genes representing a total sequencing effort of 30 million
              base pairs.  They will then sequence about 120 mitochondrial genomes across the
              major lineages representing each of the hexapod orders to examine mitochondrial
              genome evolution in the context of a well established phylogeny from the 12
              nuclear genes.  This represents another 1.8 million nucleotides of sequence. 
              Parallel-processing algorithms will be developed for computational analysis of
              large nucleotide sequence data sets.  
The results will provide a framework
              for understanding Hexapod diversity (crucial for understanding agricultural
              pests, disease vectors, etc.), mitochondrial genome evolution (instrumental in
              understanding the functional significance of gene rearrangements), and easily
              available parallel approaches for phylogenetics.  Because phylogenetics is
              becoming an instrumental tool in the study of human disease (both due to
              infection and the genetic component of complex diseases such as cancer and
              coronary artery disease), the ability to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships
              accurately and with great speed for ever-increasing data sets is key to making
              the link between genetic changes and disease risk factors.  The investigators
              will heavily involve undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
              fellows in every phase of this work and provide outlets in the form of
              publications and informational websites.

DEB-0120719
Michael Whiting, Keith
              Crandall, Mark Clement, Quin Snell, David Whiting

A grant has been awarded
              to an interdisciplinary team of researchers at the Brigham Young University
              that combines expertise in computer science, statistics, and phylogenetic
              systematics to address three fundamental questions in evolutionary biology,
              genomics, and computational biology: 1) What are the major relationships among
              Hexapods (insects and related taxa)? 2) How has mitochondrial genome evolution
              occurred relative to Hexapod diversity?  And 3) how can we develop fast,
              parallel computer algorithms to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships for
              large data sets?  To answer these questions, the investigators will sequence
              ~2500 species across hexapod diversity for ~12 genes representing a total
              sequencing effort of 30 million base pairs.  They will then sequence ~120
              mitochondrial genomes across the major lineages representing each of the
              hexapod orders to examine mitochondrial genome evolution in the context of our
              well established phylogeny from the 12 nuclear genes.  This represents another
              1.8 million nucleotides of sequence.  Finally we will develop parallel
              algorithms for computational analysis of nucleotide sequence data.  

The
              results will provide a framework for understanding Hexapod diversity (crucial
              for understanding agricultural pests, disease vectors, etc.), mitochondrial
              genome evolution (instrumental in understanding the functional significance of
              gene rearrangements), and easily available parallel approaches for
              phylogenetics.  Since phylogenetics is becoming an instrumental tool in the
              study of human disease (both due to infection and the genetic component of
              complex diseases such as cancer and coronary artery disease), the ability to
              reconstruct phylogenetic relationships accurately and with great speed for
              ever-increasing data sets is key to making the link between genetic changes and
              disease risk factors.  The investigators will heavily involve undergraduates,
              graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows in every phase of this work and
              provide outlets in the form of publications and informational websites.


