Title       : Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between
               NSF and SRC: Pipelined Data Converter Design Strategies for Sub-100nm Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0120345

Award Number: 0120345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall L. Geiger rlgeiger@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1752,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Analog to Digital Converters (ADCs) are one of the key components that are
              needed in many integrated circuits today and the application and demand for the
              converters will only accelerate throughout the next decade as applications
              expand and the ability to put large systems on a chip becomes reality.
              Paralleling and enabling this growing demand is an evolution in semiconductor
              technology with processes that have a continued shrinking of feature sizes and
              supply voltages. Although these evolutions are providing dramatic speed and
              transistor density improvements in most digital circuits, they are presenting
              increasing challenges for realizing analog and mixed-signal functions and the
              two decade-old strategy of using the same basic circuit structures to implement
              key functional blocks such as the analog to digital converter will no longer be
              successful in the sub-100nm processes that are now under development.

This
              research is focused on developing design methodologies that can be used to
              design high-performance analog to digital converters in sub-100nm semiconductor
              processes in which not only the supply voltages are decreasing but also the
              gain characteristics of the basic transistor are deteriorating. The three major
              initiatives in the project are a) developing techniques for building fast
              high-gain operational amplifiers that can operate with very low supply
              voltages, b) developing built-in self-calibration and built-in self-test
              algorithms for pipelined data converters, and c) incorporating these results
              into a prototype converter than will be fabricated in a fine resolution process
              so that the theoretical performance characteristics can be experimentally
              validated.

The low voltage operational amplifiers should find applications
              in sub-100nm
processes well beyond their use in pipelined data converters. The
              self-calibration strategy is based upon treating the pipelined data converter
              as a system, which is identified through the use of a dedicated digital signal
              processing block. This approach will provide for yield enhancement and will
              inherently provide capability for built-in self-test which will be of
              increasing importance as increasingly complex analog and mixed-signal functions
              become deeply embedded in large single-chip systems.


