Title       : Structural Damage Detection and Evaluation Using a Scanning Laser Vibrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0120798

Award Number: 0120798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168415             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Frank Pai paip@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Inspection of aging civil structures, after-earthquake buildings and bridges,
              aging aircraft, and mechanical systems under fatigue loading requires a method
              that can perform on-site quick and accurate damage detection of large
              structures.  Unfortunately most of conventional non-destructive inspection
              methods are local methods; it is slow and expensive to use them for on-site
              inspection of large structures.  Because damage signals are always contained in
              dynamic responses of structures, this research project is to develop a
              dynamics-based global inspection method for the detection and estimation of
              defects in large composite and built-up structures. 
Toward a global
              inspection method a scanning laser vibrometer will be used to provide accurate
              and dense measurement of Operational Deflection Shapes (ODSs) of structures,
              and a newly developed Boundary Effect Evaluation (BEE) method will be used to
              extract damage-induced boundary effects from the ODSs to reveal damage
              locations.  The BEE method is a model-independent method; it uses a
              sliding-window least-squares curve-fitting method to decompose an ODS into
              central solutions and boundary solutions.  Because damage introduces new
              boundaries to a structure, boundary solutions exist around damage and
              structural boundaries and hence can reveal damage locations.  Moreover, crack
              sizes can be estimated by using stress intensity factors from fracture
              mechanics.  Experiments have been performed to verify the capability of this
              BEE method in locating surface slots, edge slots, surface holes, internal
              holes, fatigue cracks, and stiffened sections.  Numerical and experimental
              results indicate that the BEE method is more sensitive and reliable than other
              dynamics- or deformation-based methods. The accuracy and capability of this BEE
              method will be improved by investigating the noise patterns of ODSs, the use of
              low-order transverse ODSs, a new data acquisition method using a lock-in
              amplifier, and a systematic method of selecting ODSs for examination. This
              project will result in an efficient and reliable damage detection and
              estimation method for performing condition-based structural safety inspection
              of large civil, mechanical, and aerospace
              structures.























