Title       : Biocomplexity: The Roles of Resources, Competition, and Predation in Microbial
               Degradation of Organic Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a0120453

Award Number: 0120453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  2001   
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Taghon taghon@imcs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lily Y. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1670,1689,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0120610

Bacteria play crucial roles in cycling of elements
              and thus the functioning of the biosphere. We know a great deal about the
              metabolic diversity of bacteria, and the pathways of the reactions they
              perform. Outside of simple laboratory systems, however, we cannot predict with
              any certainty the rates at which bacteria grow, metabolize, and mineralize
              organic matter. This project  is about understanding, at a mechanistic and thus
              quantitative level, what affects the activity of bacteria in nature. While
              initially the problem seems straightforward, the investigators believe that its
              solution has been elusive because there are complex processes involved. This
              complexity exists over several levels of biological organization (individual,
              population, community), and in the microscale spatial heterogeneity of the
              environments in which bacteria function.   The ultimate goal of this study  is
              to develop, and test, a model that will predict the rates of organic matter
              cycling in natural systems. Such a model must include the physical and chemical
              factors controlling the availability of resources (reactants) to bacteria,
              interactions (potentially competitive) among different bacterial populations,
              and interactions among bacteria and their predators. The shorter-term goal, and
              the explicit goal of this project, is to focus on one type of environment -
              estuarine sediments - and one category of organic matter - polycyclic aromatic
              hydrocarbons (PAHs) in a background of natural organic matter. 

The approach
              centers on a tight coupling between modeling and empiricism, since it is our
              belief that models and experiments lead to new, useful knowledge only when
              there is a steady interaction. The model we will develop considers both
              bottom-up (e.g., resource availability) and to-down (e.g., predation) controls
              on bacterial activity.  Estuarine sediment will be used as the environmental
              matrix for modeling and experimental testing inasmuch as these sediments are
              inherently complex and heterogeneous due to their widely varied chemical and
              physical properties, the mixtures of organic and inorganic constituents of
              which they are composed, and the simultaneous occurrence of chemical, physical,
              and biological processes.   Bicyclic and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
              (PAHs) will be chosen as a type of reactant that is used by only certain types
              of bacteria in the system. Thus, the time rate of change in PAHs will be used
              as a barometer of the activity of some members of the community. This will
              provide a sensitive and specific comparison of model predictions and
              experimental data. Models will be structured to account for variability in
              properties of the biological and abiotic components. The framework of the
              models will include spatial heterogeneity in sediment properties, population
              dynamics including competition and predation, nutrient and PAH mass transfer,
              and molecular dynamic simulations. Complexity will be added incrementally, as
              indicated by closely coupling model predictions with experimental results. The
              expertise of the group assembled to conduct the proposed research encompasses
              ecology, engineering, environmental geochemistry, and microbiology.
              

Educational and training opportunities, on a variety of levels, will be
              built into this research. Specifically, the project will include mechanisms to
              enhance coursework in both undergraduate and graduate programs in environmental
              technology and engineering education; to broaden student research training that
              will explore dynamic interactions within and among environmental systems and
              will be directed by a multidisciplinary team of faculty investigators; and to
              provide enrichment opportunities for in-service teachers of science courses in
              grades 5-8 through a partners-in-learning program.



