Title       : Breakdown of Balance and the Generation of Inertia-Gravity Waves in
               Upper-Tropospheric Jets and Fronts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0120333

Award Number: 0120333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225406             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Cunningham cunningham@met.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert I. Barcilon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The topic of balanced flow and its breakdown is of fundamental importance to
              geophysical fluid dynamics and weather prediction, yet the dynamics associated
              with it remain largely unknown. The objective of this project is to investigate
              the nature of balance in upper-tropospheric jets and fronts, the conditions for
              it to breakdown and the generation of inertia-gravity waves, and the physical
              mechanisms responsible for it. The approach is to start with a simple two-layer
              primitive equation for the examination of the fundamental dynamics and then
              extended to frameworks with increasing complexity, such as including the
              stratosphere.  Numerical simulations using these models will examine the life
              cycles of baroclinic waves in which frontal systems develop and inertia-gravity
              waves are generated. Based on the results from the numerical studies, an
              idealized analytic model will be developed to describe the essential dynamic
              behavior of the generation of inertia-gravity waves.

This project will
              enhance the understanding of the inertia-gravity waves that are important to
              weather forecasting. The importance of this work extends beyond the pedagogical
              applications to include potential benefits to aviation and weather forecasting.
              If an analytical approach for forecasting significant gravity wave activity
              generated by some kind of flow imbalance can be formulated, then it will have
              direct applications to forecasts of clear-air turbulence associated with
              upper-level jet streams, and to the generation of severe weather resulting from
              gravity wave forcing. Results from the project can demonstrate the roles that
              breaking waves from frontal systems may play in the atmospheric general
              circulation.  


