Title       : Quantum Fluctuations of the Order Parameter in Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0120702

Award Number: 0120702
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anatoly Larkin larkin@tpi.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonid I. Glazman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports theoretical research and education to study quantum
              fluctuations in low-dimensional superconductors.  Three projects are planned:
              (1) The investigators will calculate corrections to the existing mean-field
              theory of the upper critical field in thin superconducting films.  They will
              consider mesoscopic effects in the distribution of impurities that lead to the
              appearance of superconducting droplets above the BCS upper critical field.  The
              Josephson network of the superconducting droplets may become macroscopically
              superconducting at low temperatures. The genuine transition point is determined
              by the interplay of the quantum fluctuations of the order parameter and the
              proximity effect.  The behavior of various physical quantities near the
              transition will be considered and contact with the existing scaling theory will
              be made. (2) The investigators will construct a theory of the zero-temperature
              superconducting transition in finite-length wires and chains of Josephson
              junctions.  This work is motivated by experiments that show deviations from a
              thermally activated resistivity at low temperatures. (3) The investigators will
              calculate I-V characteristics for a ferromagnet - d-wave superconductor
              junction including the effects of spin-orbit coupling. Diagrammatic expansions
              and the Keldysh technique are among the variety of analytical techniques that
              will be used. 
%%% 
This award supports theoretical research and education on
              quantum mechanical fluctuations in superconductors at low temperatures.  The
              investigators will use advanced theoretical methods to study the role of
              quantum fluctuations in thin superconducting films, superconducting wires, and
              junctions involving superconductors. This research is fundamental and has
              potential impact on our understanding of quantum phase transitions in other
              systems.
***


