Title       : Synthesis and Characterization of New Transition Metal Pnictides and Pnictide
               Oxides and Their Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0120990

Award Number: 0120990
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Kauzlarich smkauzlarich@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the synthesis of new ternary transition metal pnictide
              and pnictide oxide phases. It combines exploratory synthesis with systematic
              structure-property studies. The primary emphasis is on property measurements
              and characterization of compounds involving alkaline earth or rare earth with
              transition metals and the group 15 pnictide elements, along with the suboxides
              of these mixtures. This group utilizes the Zintl concept to direct the
              synthesis of new magnetic and electronic compounds. The approach provides a
              good starting place for the discovery of new structures and properties. In
              order to explore new compounds and to measure properties, fluxes will be used
              to produce large crystals. In addition novel properties and structure-property
              relationship of these pnictide and layered pnictide-oxides will be
              investigated. The primary goal is to train students in solid state synthesis
              and characterization techniques. Students are involved in all aspects of new
              discovery and property measurements. Some of the experiments outlined in the
              proposal make use of national facilities such as the Advance Light Source and
              the National Center for Electron Microscopy at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. In
              addition, there is a strong collaboration with chemistry, physics, and
              materials science groups at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. This type
              of synergism provides the student with a well-rounded education and prepares
              them for the multidisciplinary science of today's industry. In addition, the
              education of undergraduates and outreach to the general public in the
              importance of materials synthesis to our future technological advances is
              included as a theme of the project. 

The development of new materials is an
              important cornerstone of new technologies. One of the fundamental issues in
              this development is the synthesis of new materials coupled with property
              measurements. Combining synthesis with state-of-the-art characterization tools
              with an aim towards discovering new magnetic, and electronic materials
              significantly enhances the chances of timely technological impacts. 

