Title       : Building a Scalable Biological Information Network - A Workshop Proposal to be
               held September, 2001 at the San Diego Supercompter Center, San Diego, CA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0120071

Award Number: 0120071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93106              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chaitanya K. Baru baru@sdsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alison Withey  (Principal Investigator former)
              Peter W. Arzberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9145,9169,9184,9217,BIOT,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Alison Withey at the University of California, San
              Diego to convene a workshop to investigate user requirements, enabling
              technologies, and costs for building scalable information networks for the
              environmental sciences.  The workshop, hosted by the Partnership for
              Biodiversity Informatics*, will assemble research scientists, directors of
              field stations and marine laboratories, as well as experts in computational and
              information sciences to discuss the technical requirements for building local,
              regional, and national-level networks designed to deliver continuous,
              integrated, high-quality data in real or near real time.  Each of these
              audiences will contribute to and learn from the information exchange. 
              Scientists will share their experiences in expanding site-specific science to
              broader spatial scales, and will discuss future information infrastructure
              needs in light of new sensors (field and satellite) and data collection
              capabilities.  Directors of field stations and marine laboratories will ground
              the workshop in the present-day realities of existing infrastructure and
              capabilities, and will contribute to a new vision for how field stations and
              marine laboratories can expand to meet the needs for a national capability for
              observing and understanding environmental complexity.  Computational and
              information scientists will present state-of-the-art developments in sensor
              technologies, networking, information delivery, and knowledge generation. 
              

Workshop presentations, discussion, and working group sessions will focus
              on three topics: 1) Enabling technologies and user requirements for data and
              information management and delivery, 2) Building distributed sensor networks:
              design and implementation issues, and 3) Building a scalable environmental
              information networks: from researchers to field stations to a national
              architecture.  

As environmental research becomes more complex and
              multidisciplinary, gains in our understanding of ecosystem biocomplexity can be
              furthered through the application of technologies that improve data management
              and delivery; enhance modeling and prediction capabilities; and facilitate
              communication among individuals, environmental sensors, computers, and
              databases.  This workshop will be the first attempt to envision a scalable
              national environmental information infrastructure that meets the needs of
              scientists working at local and broader scales, as well as decision-makers and
              educators that may require information at regional to national scales. 
              Consequently, the discussions and working group reports are anticipated to be
              of broad interest to many disciplines.  Workshop products will be made
              available to a broader community via a webcast and web archive of the
              presentations; a white paper of the proceedings and recommendations which will
              be posted online; and peer reviewed article(s) outlining present technical
              capabilities, the design of a future environmental information infrastructure,
              and a research and implementation plan that will enable this goal to be
              achieved. 


* The Partnership for Biodiversity Informatics (PBI) is a
              consortium consisting of the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC), the
              National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis (NCEAS), the Natural
              History Museum and Biodiversity Research Center at the University of Kansas
              (KU-BRC), and the Network Office of the Long Term Ecological Research Program
              (LTER).


