Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY: Wormnet: Reconstructing The Early Evolution Of Segmented Annelid
               Worms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0120646

Award Number: 0120646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1340000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Halanych   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1571,1689,1693,9169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              WormNet: Reconstructing the early evolution of segmented annelid worms 

K. M.
              Halanych, M. Martindale, E. Seaver, D. McHugh, and the Joint Genome Institute
              (J. Boore, D. Rokhsar)

EAR-0120646

Understanding metazoan phylogeny has
              been confounded by interpretations of the degree and nature of segmentation in
              body plans. In particular, the Annelida, commonly called segmented worms, has
              been central to debates on the role of segmentation in animal evolution. Recent
              evidence suggests that several non-segmented or partially segmented worm taxa,
              that were previously regarded as separate phyla, are within the annelid
              radiation. These recent results conflict with the only comprehensive
              phylogenetic analyses to date on the annelids, the morphological analyses of
              Rouse and Fauchald (1997). Furthermore, because annelids are one of the most
              evolutionarily successful "phyla" and because they diversified in the late
              PreCambrian to early Cambrian, understanding their early evolutionary history
              is paramount to understanding the evolution of animal life. 

	The proposed
              work has two goals: 1) Genomic approaches will be used to reconstruct the early
              phylogenetic events of the "Annelida", which includes several previously
              recognized phyla, and 2) Functional genomic techniques will be used to
              characterize the developmental mechanisms employed in segmentation in several
              key lineages.  Interpreting the segmentation, a hallmark of annelids, in the
              context of the phylogeny will allow novel insights on the role and plasticity
              of segmentation during animal evolution. This project has been called "WormNet"
              because it represents an interdisciplinary network of researchers, at four
              institutions, focusing on these goals in a manner that enhances education and
              outreach activities. 

	Additionally, this program is designed to jumpstart
              other areas of research in the major metazoan clade Lophotrochozoa (annelids,
              mollusks, lophophorates, and their allies). Publicly available cDNA and genomic
              BAC libraries will be produced, and data from approximately 130 completely
              sequenced mitochondrial genomes will provide needed markers for population
              genetic and systematic studies. Given that annelids are the most abundant and
              ubiquitous animal "phlyum" in the deep sea (which covers 70% of the planet),
              serve as bioindicators, have a role in bioremediation, and include
              up-and-coming model organisms, the importance of understanding their evolution
              cannot be understated.  


