Title       : U.S.-Hungary Mathematics Research on Cohomology and Deformations of Infinity and
               Lie Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a0120676

Award Number: 0120676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Penkava penkavmr@uwec.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Eau Claire
	      Park & Garfield
	      Eau Claire, WI  54701    715/836-2637

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5916,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This U.S.-Hungary research project between Michael Penkava of the University of
              Wisconsin, Eau Claire, and Alice Fialowski of Eotvos Lorand University,
              Budapest, features versal deformations of infinity algebras. The collaboration
              builds upon Penkava's strengths in infinity algebras and deformation theory and
              Fialowski's in deformation of Lie algebras.  A qualified undergraduate from the
              U.S. institution will participate.

Their joint research plan entails
              automated computing of the Lie brackets in the cohomology as a continuation of
              their study of versal deformations of Lie algebras equipped with an invariant
              inner product. They anticipate that the cohomology of the infinity algebra
              inherits a natural filtration and that this filtration can be used to give a
              definition of a graded dual space which is small enough to be useful in the
              construction of the versal deformation. Related work by this US-Hungarian team
              on application of generalized Massey products to computations of miniversal
              deformations of Lie algebras will be extended as well. The combined work is
              expected to improve current understanding of the structure of versal
              deformations of Lie algebras with invariant inner products as well as the
              homology of the graph complex.  If successful, the results may be useful in
              physics where the algebra of observables can describe physical reality, as a
              deformation quantization of the commutative algebra of classical physics.  
              

This mathematical research project fulfills the program objective of
              advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and
              Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research resources in
              areas of strong mutual interest and competence. 
