Title       : Life On a Limb: The Evolution of Locomotion in Arboreal Specialists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0120168

Award Number: 0120168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125156             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duncan J. Irschick irschick@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              An important goal in ecological and evolutionary physiology is to reveal the
              underlying mechanisms behind differences in habitat use.  Studies of locomotor
              capacity have played a key role in this goal because many species have evolved
              locomotor abilities in concert with the use of different habitats.  Most
              studies of locomotion are modeled after relatively simple terrestrial habitats
              (i.e., broad surfaces), and therefore are not ecologically realistic for
              arboreal species.  However, understanding how variables commonly encountered in
              arboreal habitats (steep inclines, narrow perch diameters) affect locomotion
              could provide general insights into specialization to different habitats.  The
              tremendous morphological and phylogenetic diversity of lizards exploiting
              arboreal habitats makes them ideally suited for studying arboreal locomotion. 
              We propose to build on prior work with a group of eight species of Anolis
              lizards because their phylogeny is well resolved and these species have been
              characterized as belonging to distinct ecomorphs that occur in different
              arboreal habitats.  The sprinting performance of these Anolis species has been
              correlated with limb length and the diameters of surfaces in laboratory
              studies, but virtually nothing is known regarding how the limbs are used on
              different surfaces and inclines.  Thus, in laboratory studies we will conduct
              three experiments: (1) Examine the effects of incline and surface diameter on
              the kinematics of steady-speed locomotion in three species of Anolis lizards. 
              (2) Focus on the effects of surface diameter on the kinematics of steady-speed
              locomotion in 8 species of Anolis lizards.  This second experiment will provide
              a comparative basis for understanding how surface diameter affects locomotion. 
              (3) Study how acceleration and performance is affected by surface diameter for
              a group of diverse Anolis species.  Together, these experiments will reveal the
              underlying mechanistic and behavioral bases for why some anole species are
              affected by incline while others are not.  Further, they will provide a
              valuable link between habitat use and quantitative functional morphology.  More
              generally, we will also test whether function, morphology, and habitat use have
              co-evolved among species, and whether locomotion in arboreal environments
              differs from locomotion in terrestrial environments.  The second goal will be
              achieved by comparing data from the proposed experiments to those recently
              performed on terrestrial lizard locomotion.


