Title       : PGE: PLN: Moving Mountains: A Strategy to Facilitate Appalachian Women's Pursuit
               of Science and Math Careers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0120762

Award Number: 0120762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce R. Kronberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : W Virginia Univ/Parkersbur
	      Route 5 Box 167a
	      Parkersburg, WV  261019577    304/424-8000

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              West Virginia University at Parkersburg will partner with Ritchie County High
              School and Williamstown High School to provide research experiences for female
              high school students in the Appalachian region known as the Mid-Ohio Valley.
              Mentoring and peer groups will be important components of the project.

In
              West Virginia, women are less likely to seek a college education let alone
              pursue a career in science or math. One of the most exciting experiences that a
              female high school student interested in the sciences can have is one that
              involves interaction with a teacher and peers in a group setting participating
              in a scientific project. This is particularly valuable for women students in
              Appalachia who have attended K-12 schools in isolated areas where there is
              little opportunity for advanced study of science, who have not had personal
              role models or do not picture themselves doing science. The research component
              is the key to the project's impact on high school students and their decisions
              regarding entering the sciences as a career. It will give students their first
              experience with original research, teach them how to deal with the open-ended
              nature of the research process, and give them the self-confidence to see
              themselves not just as students, but as actual researchers.

It is
              anticipated that lessons learned from the project will inform a full proposal
              for an expanded Women in Science program at additional public schools in
              partnership with WVU Parkersburg. The goal is to impact how young women
              perceive careers in science and mathematics and encourage their pursuit of a
              college education in these studies. 

