Title       : DEM - OPTIONS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0120860

Award Number: 0120860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $710938             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lorraine Jones ljones@mail.scs.k12.tn.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sheryl A. Maxwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Shelby County Schools
	      160 South Hollywood
	      Memphis, TN  381124801    901/458-7561

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              OPTIONS is a demonstration project designed to create small-scale learning
              communities that assist girls in achieving in advanced science and mathematics
              courses at the high school level, and encourage them to pursue science and math
              college degrees and business careers. The project targets high school girls,
              who have demonstrated average to above average abilities in math and science
              and who are enrolled in one of the seven Shelby County Schools (SCS) high
              schools.

In the OPTIONS program, 70 students per year for four years are
              forming learning communities. Teachers are studying how to craft proactive
              approaches to math and science for girls. The objectives of the program are to:
              1 ) increase the interest, confidence, knowledge and test scores of girls in
              science and math concentrations 2) train high school math and science teachers
              and guidance counselors in gender-equitable approaches to decrease barriers and
              assist to aid girls in pursuing science and math majors or careers; and 3)
              increase the number of all students who plan to enroll in classes, choose
              college majors, or pursue careers in science or math related fields.

In
              order to obtain the objectives, SCS is creating learning communities of
              students, teachers, and mentors who engage in specific after school,
              professional development, and summer camp activities. The program includes
              professional development workshops to modify teacher and counselor attitudes
              and skills; project-based, problem-solving exercises to stimulate girls
              interest in science and math; mentoring by professional women; exploration of
              college options; and internships at local corporations and
              organizations.

The project has broad implications. For educators, OPTIONS
              will identify factors for women that inhibit their academic pursuits and career
              choices in science and math areas, and begin building new approaches to
              encourage those choices. Participating female high school students will achieve
              a new understanding of the vast opportunities available in science and
              math-related industries and learn to work in a small group to solve real world
              problems. Corporations that rely on these disciplines will interact with
              educators in the design and evaluation of industry specific intern programs to
              prepare the next generation of workers and to generate enthusiasm for that
              work. Schools, school systems, and local communities will benefit from the
              increased emphasis on science and math classes and the career opportunities
              that come from that focus.

