Title       : Regulation of the Hydrologic and C Cycles by Native Shrubs in Soils of
               Sub-Sahelian Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0120732

Award Number: 0120732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1129259            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Dick richard.dick@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Modou Sene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S.A. N. Samba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mamadou Khouma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aminata N. Badiane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1692      BE: COUPLED BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1689,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

REGULATION OF HYDROLOGIC AND C CYCLES BY NATIVE SHRUBS
IN
              SUB-SAHELIAN AFRICA
R.P.  Dick PI, Oregon State University, Corvallis
              OR

Soil degradation in relation to desertification of Sub-Sahelian Africa is
              a major concern.  Farmers of semiarid land are being considered to be paid for
              practices that sequester C in soils, which could enable farmers in vulnerable
              ecological landscapes to adopt practices that promote sustainability and
              improve soil quality and degraded environments.  However, assessing soil
              degradation and the potential to sequester C is spatially and temporally
              complex in this semiarid landscape. In particular, we have identified a largely
              unrecognized component in the landscape of the vast semi-arid Sahel, namely
              woody shrubs (Piliostigma reticulatum and Guiera senegalensis) that voluntarily
              regrow in farmers' fields after the summer cropping season. These shrubs seem
              to be much more important than trees or other organic inputs such as animal
              manure at the landscape level in regulating C inputs/sequestration and
              hydrologic processes. Under current management farmers who cut and burn the
              shrub biomass each spring are not utilizing this organic matter effectively. 
              An intriguing ancillary theory is that these shrubs may do "hydraulic lift". 
              This has been documented in other semiarid regions and is the process of water
              movement from moist subsoil to dry surface layers using root systems as a
              conduit which can be released from roots to surrounding soil during periods
              when transpiration ceases (usually at night) This could drive rhizosphere
              processes in "dry" soil such as nutrient mineralization and mobility and
              possibly provide small amounts of water to shallow rooting crop species during
              dry periods.
The overall objectives are to (1) quantify annual C cycling and
              storage, water balance, and litter decomposition of two dominant shrubs of
              Sub-Sahelian agroecosystems; (2) couple indigenous knowledge to biogeochemical
              and hydrological results with the ecology of these shrubs; and (3) use modeling
              to determine the effect of alternative shrub management systems on soil C and
              soil quality at the landscape level.  The work has implications for large areas
              of Sub Sahelian West Africa that have similar agroecosystems to Senegal.  The
              approach will be multidisciplinary and the ecological research of these shrubs
              would be a basis for practical applications in agricultural nutrient and water
              management, and as a viable management tool to off set soil degradation and
              promote C sequestration to reduce global climate change.

