Title       : Collaborative Research on Distributed Control and Communication Design for
               Networked Dynamic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0120928

Award Number: 0120928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211872             (Estimated)
Investigator: John K. Hedrick khedrick@euler.Berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative research project between UC Berkeley and Stanford
              University to develop a validated analytical methodology for designing control
              systems where some of the feedback loops are closed over wireless communication
              links. The proposed work is an interdisciplinary effort between two very
              disparate research areas: wireless communications and control theory. This work
              will have a great impact on many fields where wireless communication is
              beginning to see an increasing presence such as transportation, manufacturing
              and remote sensing applications.

Most current controller designs assume that
              communication between the sensors and actuators and the central logic system is
              done over hard-wired lines providing essentially perfect transmission. Thus,
              the controller design typically assumes no rate constraints, delay, or loss of
              information. However, there are many applications where this communication must
              take place over imperfect wireless links where these imperfections can lead to
              loss of performance and even instability. There currently exists no unified
              theory for the design of closed loop control systems using wireless links. This
              proposal is aimed at developing such a theory.

The first stage of the
              proposed work will focus on characterizing the communications network carrying
              the sensor, actuator, and control information in terms of its rate constraints,
              and delay and packet loss statistics. The next stage will investigate joint
              optimization of the controller and communication system.

The research
              results will be presented at both communications and controls conferences. The
              final results will be incorporated into advanced graduate courses. A very
              important aspect of this project is the involvement of undergraduate students
              in the research. Both UC Berkeley and Stanford have active UROP (Undergraduate
              Research Opportunities Programs). The area of communication/control is very
              attractive to undergraduates and it is anticipated that undergraduates will
              participate in the project due to its interdisciplinary nature and its
              potential to impact real world problems.


