Title       : Center on Materials and Devices for Information Technology Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0120967

Award Number: 0120967
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18350001           (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry R. Dalton dalton@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7213      STC Class of 2002
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Science and Technology Center on Materials and Devices for Information
              Technology Research, University of Washington, Seattle is a multi-disciplinary
              and multi-institutional activity designed to support a goal-directed, sustained
              effort to broadly advance the science and technology of materials, devices and
              systems for advancing information technology. Center activities involve six
              universities, University of Washington (UW: lead institution), plus the U. of
              Arizona (UA), California Institute of Technology (Caltech), U. of Southern
              California (USC), U. of California at Santa Barbara (UCSB) and Berkeley (UCB).
              The STC emphasizes vertical integration of knowledge and applications that span
              the intellectual range in fundamental optoelectronic materials and engineering
              research from molecules to integrated devices and systems for improved signal
              generation and detection and for improved information transport, processing,
              and storage. Research is divided among four strategic thrust areas: 1)
              Electro-Optic and All-Optical Materials and Devices; 2) Infrared Organic
              Light-Emitting Diodes, Amplifiers, and Lasers; 3) Advanced Assembly and
              Patterning Approaches to Integrated Optics; 4) Theory.

The educational
              activity is planned around three primary elements: 1) Under-represented groups
              and institutions in the STC including Minority and HBCU partnerships, emphasis
              on undergraduate participation in research, and an aggressive outreach effort;
              2) A vertically integrated program on education in optical science, materials,
              and devices; 3) Integration of science, engineering, and business education.
              The Center includes assessment strategies for evaluation of the effectiveness
              of new approaches in their educational activities which have a strong web based
              component. The Center aims to create a vertically integrated, web-based,
              modular resource emphasizing optical science, materials and devices, offering
              1) resources for developing courses and for students' independent studies, 2)
              web-based courses, and 3) an STC-"IT" news-page (with links to industrial
              websites) describing new technical advances, job opportunities, conferences,
              professional courses, and academic curricula. The Center has a strong,
              collaborative program for fostering outreach to and participation by non-center
              researchers in research activities. Interaction with industry and Federal
              Laboratories will be implemented at several levels. Projects with early
              societal impact will be integrated with longer-term projects. For example,
              development of 3D integrated circuitry, the exploitation of photonic bandgap
              device structures, and the exploitation of controlled coupling to
              microresonators will be a theme of both short-term (e.g., electro-optic
              information processing) and longer-range (e.g., all-optical information
              processing) impact projects to advance knowledge, understanding, and technology
              performance in information technology. This center is projected to become a
              focal point in the U.S. for education of the workforce in the fields of
              telecommunication and information processing; photonics; and
              opto-electronics.


