Title       : Elementary, Secondary and Informal Education: The Sacred Balance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0120259

Award Number: 0120259
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1144841            (Estimated)
Investigator: David Suzuki kenscom@kensingtontv.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Lang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Amanda McConnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Wildlands Project
	      1955 W. Grant Road #145
	      Tucson, AZ  857451147    520/884-0875

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Wildlands Project is producing a four-hour television series for PBS and the
              CBC.  The television series, "The Sacred Balance," will feature geneticist and
              environmental scientist David Suzuki as he examines a new vision of the human
              place in nature. The series aims to enrich and expand the scientific world view
              by looking at traditional knowledge, myth, literature and art, and by
              incorporating aspects of human spirituality into the insights presented by
              science.  The aim of the project is to show that the world-view human beings
              have celebrated since ancient times is reemerging, transformed, from the
              laboratories of modern science.  Moving away from reductionist techniques,
              researchers from many different disciplines are studying diversity, whole
              organisms, systems and relationships that begin in the individual cell and
              extend to the entire planet.  The television series is designed to change the
              way the public acts in the world by demonstrating that what we do to the Earth
              we do to ourselves.  

Dr. Suzuki will work closely with an advisory
              committee in shaping the series.  The members of this committee
              include:

Lane Lubchenco:	Professor of Marine Biology and Zoology, Oregon
              State University
David Schindler: 	Environmental Ecologist, Department of
              Biological Sciences, University of Alberta
E. O. Wilson:	Biologist, Harvard
              University
Sylvia Earl:	Marine Ecologist and "Explorer in Residence" at the
              National Geographic Society,                                 Washington,
              DC
James Parks Morton:  	Former Dean, Cathedral of St. John the Divine,
              currently at the Interfaith                                                
              Center of New York

The television series will be supplemented by a new,
              interactive Sacred Balance website and a teachers guide.  Ancillary material
              also will include Dr. Suzuki's trade book, "The Sacred Balance."


