Title       : Computational Studies of Dynamical Phenomena in Nanoscale Ferromagnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0120310

Award Number: 0120310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Novotny man40@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Per Arne Rikvold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1652,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is an award to Mississippi State University with a subaward to Florida
              State University.  It is a renewal of an ongoing research program on state of
              the art computational studies of nanomagnetism.  As such, it captures the
              spirit of recent NSF initiatives on ITR and NSE, in that its impact will be
              felt on new algorithms for complex interacting systems, understanding magnetism
              on the nanoscale, and the design of new ultrahigh-density magnetic strorage
              systems.

One technological motivation of the research is the ongoing effort
              to increase the information storage density of magnetic recording media.  It is
              likely that ultrahigh-density magnetic recording media that can store one bit
              of information on one single-domain, nanoscale magnetic particle may become
              available in the next few years.  To achieve this goal with acceptable data
              integrity and read/write speeds at room temperature, it is necessary to improve
              the scientific understanding of magnetization-reversal dynamics in magnetic
              nanoparticles, molecules, and ultrathin films, at nonzero temperatures.  This
              will require large-scale numerical simulations of realistic models of
              technologically important magnetic materials.

This research project will
              further develop novel simulation algorithms for hysteresis and thermally driven
              magnetization reversal in models of nanoscale magnets.  The materials objective
              of the project is to improve understanding of dynamical phenomena in real
              nanoscale ferromagnetic materials at nonzero temperature over a large range of
              time scales.  

Previous work will be extended by conducting simulations of a
              wider range of real materials through increased emphasis on quantum mechanical
              systems and less strongly anisotropic materials.  These generalizations will
              include continuous spin models with finite spin anisotropy, systems with
              defects and quenched disorder, three-dimensional models and quantum spin models
              of magnetic molecules.  In order to study these models, novel algorithms
              capable of covering a wide range of time scales will be adapted and developed,
              in particular the Projective Dynamics and Monte Carlo with Absorbing Markov
              Chains algorithms previously developed on this project.  The studies of
              continuous spin models will also use Langevin Micromagnetics methods for
              finite-temperature simulations developed during the previous grant period. 
              Particular emphasis will be given to developing methods that enable these
              simulations to cover a wide range of time scales.  It is also proposed to use
              quantum density matrices to predict experimental EPR line widths for magnetic
              molecules and to provide ab initio transition probabilities for kinetic Monte
              Carlo and Langevin simulations.  The suitability of these algorithms for
              various parallelization paradigms will be studied and they will be implemented
              on scalable parallel computers.  The scaling properties of parallel simulation
              algorithms will be studied using mappings to non-equilibrium interface-growth
              problems that were discovered on this project.  These algorithmic and
              parallelization methods constitute the computational objectives of the
              research.   


%%%
This is an award to Mississippi State University with a
              subaward to Florida State University.  It is a renewal of an ongoing research
              program on state of the art computational studies of nanomagnetism.  As such,
              it captures the spirit of recent NSF initiatives on ITR and NSE, in that its
              impact will be felt on new algorithms for complex interacting systems,
              understanding magnetism on the nanoscale, and the design of new
              ultrahigh-density magnetic strorage systems.
***





