Title       : Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between
               NSF and SRC: Advanced CMOS for Mixed-Mode Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0120366

Award Number: 0120366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason C. Woo woo@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Behzad Razavi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chih-Kong Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1752,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0120366
Woo

The PIs propose to investigate the design of CMOS devices,
              circuits, and architectures in the sub-100nm regime with emphasis on
              high-performance mixed-signal, and RF applications. The thrust of this work
              will be device/circuit/architecture co-design targeting critical building
              blocks of mixed-mode systems. The goals are (1) to understand the fundamental
              device/circuit issues of deeply scaled CMOS, and (2) investigate and develop
              novel device engineering with novel thin film materials and new circuit
              architectures that will enable much superior speed, power, and noise
              performance.

Recently, there is much discussion concerning the scaling of
              MOSFETs into sub-100nm dimensions. Topics such as alternative high-k gate
              dielectrics, gate leakage, shallow junction formation, source/drain extension
              engineering, and channel doping engineering are under intensive investigation.
              Many fundamental device problems such as short channel effects (DIBL and VTH
              roll-off), off-state leakage current, parasitic capacitance and resistance, and
              gate tunneling current are currently being examined. It is apparent that
              sub-50nm transistors can be realized with very high performance limited
              primarily by parasitics such as series resistance and capacitance. The
              challenge is mainly how to reduce the off current. This is fundamentally due to
              the electro-static coupling between the channel region and the source/drain.
              Although the PIs can reduce the coupling by scaling the junction depth, the
              ultra-shallow junction implies high series resistance and worse transistor
              performance. In order to expand the device-design window and to
overcome the
              above-mentioned difficulties, novel device structures and new material systems
              need to be explored.

So far, most of the advance device technology studies
              have concentrated on digital applications despite the growing interest in RF
              CMOS and high-speed mixed-mode circuits for communication and multimedia
              applications. Until now, technology development does not adequately address the
              issues of concern to analog circuits. Device models are also not sufficient for
              accurate circuit simulation. In this project, they propose to investigate the
              design of CMOS devices, circuits, and architectures in the sub-100nm regime
              with emphasis on high-performance mixed-signal, and RF applications. They
              propose to study the "analog nonidealities" of short-channel devices, e.g.,
              gate current, nonlinearity, noise, intrinsic gain, variation of output
              impedance with the drain-source voltage. CMOS on SOI has been suggested as an
              alternative to bulk CMOS in sub-150nm regime. In the case of digital
              applications, the key advantage is probably in low-power circuits. For analog
              circuits, the choice of partially-depleted technology versus fully-depleted
              technology is still under debate. In the case of RF applications, the small
              parasitic capacitance of SOI CMOS is particularly attractive. However, many
              issues related to the floating body need to be clarified. In this project, the
              PIs will examine the many issues, such as noise, frequency performance, gain,
              and linearity of SOI MOSFETs for use in high-speed analog circuits. They will
              also examine novel sub-50nm device structures such as SiGe CMOS, low noise
              (buried channel) CMOS on SOI, high-performance LBJT as well as DTCMOS. In the
              case of SiGe, by having the smaller bandgap SiGe source/drain regions, the
              built-in potential is reduced and can substantially reduce the DIBL and other
              short channel effects. In addition, the higher mobilities can also improve the
              source/drain series resistances.

