Title       : International Summer School on Biocomplexity, June 24 - July 1, 2001 in Hanover,
               New Hampshire
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a0120792

Award Number: 0120792
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Metin Akay   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9263,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The biological sciences have the potential to become substantially more
              quantitative because emerging computational and mathematical tools could
              facilitate collection and analysis of vast amounts of biological data. New
              methods for computational analysis and mathematical modeling of complex
              biological processes and signals can be used for characterizing variability and
              uncertainty of biological data across scales of space and time. For example,
              such signals or measurements are direct indicators of the biological state of
              the corresponding cells or organs in an organism. There is an increasing demand
              for interactions among biologists, engineers, mathematicians, computer
              scientists and medical researchers in the use of these emerging technologies
              and methods to be able to develop a new interdisciplinary workforce that is
              able to understand and facilitate reliable quantitative approaches and answers
              to the major integrative biological challenges.
The main objective of this
              summer school is to expose undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral biological
              science and bioengineering students to the relatively new approaches of
              nonlinear dynamical analysis and biosignal interpretation in complex biological
              systems, and to facilitate rapid diffusion of these mathematical and
              computational tools in the biological sciences. These methods will be helpful,
              also, to both students and post-doctoral fellows in computer science and
              mathematics who are interested in pursuing research in biology and
              bioengineering, since the summer school provides exceptional insights into the
              fundamental challenges in biological sciences.
The summer school uses
              lectures, oriented toward biological science students, by expert faculty. The
              faculty will describe their research areas, and focus on ways to use the
              mathematical and computational tools to understand the underlying mechanisms of
              complex biological systems and processes. In addition to these lectures, the
              summer school will employ a two-hour panel discussion, with active
              participation of undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral fellows, focused on
              future developments in biocomplexity and their potential impacts on biology and
              medicine. In addition, tutorials and hands-on research projects using computers
              will allow students to explore real-world biological applications of the new
              computational and modeling approaches. Students will present the results of
              their projects in a culminating poster session,  which will facilitate
              discussion of both the biology and computational approaches.
The summer school
              will stimulate further interdisciplinary research and collaborations among
              engineers, mathematicians, computer scientists, and medical researchers, and
              will help in identifying new, challenging directions in complex biological
              science and bioengineering research. 

