Title       : Multiplex in Situ Visualization of the Drosophila Transcriptome in Blastoderm
               Embryos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a0120728

Award Number: 0120728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1350000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ethan Bier ebier@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pavel A. Pevzner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. McGinnis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1119,1689,9169,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0120728
Bier

A major challenge following the completion of genome sequencing
              is to determine the expression patterns of all genes during development and in
              the adult.  Obtaining this data is critical if we are to unravel the complex
              regulatory networks that regulate genome expression.  Although whole genome
              gene expression can be analyzed by current microarray techniques, this method
              lacks spacial discrimination and is relatively low resolution in time and
              magnitude, since by its nature, it measures average gene expression levels over
              large heterogeneous cell populations.  To understand the regulatory
              interrelationships between genes, many of which are regulated in highly dynamic
              and spatially restricted patterns, one must ultimately know how the genome is
              expressed on a cell-by cell basis throughout development. The most obvious way
              to obtain fine scale gene expression data at single cell resolution is by
              performing genome scale in situ hybridization experiments.  

Dr. Bier, Dr.
              McGinnis, and Dr. Pevzner will address this problem jointly by developing a
              multiplex in situ hybridization method that will greatly facilitate and enable
              the acquisition of genome expression data at single cell resolution.  In
              addition, this collaborative team will validate the method by applying it to
              two well defined hypothesis driven questions.  The specific goals of this
              proposal are to:  1)  Develop a multiplex RNA in situ hybridization labeling
              technique, 2) Analyze Hox gene regulatory networks repressing limb development,
              and 3)  Identify genes mediating cross-talk between signaling
              pathways.
	
Impact Statement: Because the same genetic systems create pattern
              during development in diverse metazoans, fine spatial and temporal scale
              analysis of these regulatory relationships in Drosophila will provide an
              essential framework for analyzing how these core genetic pathways have served
              as substrates for modification by natural selection during evolution to tailor
              body plans to different environments and ecological niches. This knowledge is
              essential for resolving deep structures of metazoan phylogeny and may reveal
              whether multicellular metazoans co-opted a polarity generating mechanism
              present in facultative colonial unicellular organisms to create metameric
              pattern along the A/P axis.  In addition, the methodologies we develop and the
              understanding we gain of cellular responses to developmental signals will form
              the basis for creating detailed  mathematical models of cellular states and
              will be critical for evaluating how adult organisms respond 

