Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY: Consequences of Greenhouse Warming for Biocomplexity and
               Biogeochemical Cycles: A Multidisciplinary Case Study Across the
               Paleocene-Eocene Boundary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0120727

Award Number: 0120727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2498392            (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Zachos jzachos@earthsci.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul L. Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott L. Wing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald R. Dickens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Bralower  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1692      BE: COUPLED BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1689,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Consequences of Greenhouse Warming for Biocomplexity and
              Biogeochemical Cycles: a Multidisciplinary Case Study Across the
              Paleocene-Eocene Boundary

Approximately 55 Ma, the Earth experienced a rapid
              and extreme episode of global warming that was the product of an unusually
              massive release of carbon into the ocean-atmosphere system. This event, known
              as the Paleocene Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM), had far reaching and
              significant impacts on global marine and terrestrial ecosystems that ranged
              from mass extinction of deep sea foraminifera to dispersal and subsequent
              radiation of plants and ungulates.  The combination of these climatic and
              biotic perturbations initiated dramatic changes in the planet's biogeochemical
              cycles that eventually worked to restore equilibrium to the global carbon
              cycle.  However, the recovery process took nearly 200,000 yrs. We propose a
              multi-institutional interdisciplinary program to investigate the effects of the
              Paleocene Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM) on the global biosphere and coupled
              biogeochemical cycles of carbon and nutrients. This project will bring together
              an international team of experts that includes 11 senior investigators from the
              US, and 5 from Europe, New Zealand, and China. Building on a foundation of
              existing work, this study will utilize an array of models to determine the
              coupling of inorganic and organic chemical processes, to evaluate the relative
              contributions of these processes in sequestering excess carbon, on short and
              long-time scales.  Empirical data representing marine and terrestrial systems
              will be generated and used to constrain and evaluate model results. We will
              evaluate and test existing hypotheses concerning the nature of first order
              effects and feedbacks of the PETM perturbation on the biosphere and coupled
              biogeochemical cycles.  There are many parallels between the events of 55 Ma
              and the present day in terms of forcing and response.  There are also many
              differences in the structure of biotic communities and the configuration of
              continents and oceans. Nevertheless, at a fundamental level, biogeochemical
              systems and the biosphere would have responded much as they do today.  As such,
              the PETM provides a unique and, possibly the only, opportunity to investigate
              the short and long-term effects of abrupt greenhouse gas induced warming on
              global environments.


