Title       : Exploratory Research: Complementary Development of New Chemical Sensor and Probe
               Microscopy Techniques for Environmental Research in Hydrothermal Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a0120007

Award Number: 0120007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91481              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Higgins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lewis J. Noe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carrick M. Eggleston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B. Patrick Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1689,9150,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this project are to develop the concepts for robust
              multiplexed arrays of sensors for the detection of inorganic and organic
              analytes as well as microorganisms and to develop instrumentation to quantify
              heterogeneous kinetics and molecule/surface interactions in complex,
              groundwater and surface water, and extreme ecosystems.  Electrochemical,
              Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) and Surface Enhance Raman Spectroscopy (SERS)
              method will be used as detection schemes for the quantification of inorganic
              and organic analytes in hydrothermal fluids.  The development of robust
              polymeric thin film sensors will be assisted by current Hydrothermal Atomic
              Force Microscopy (AFM) instrumentation.  The investigators will also further
              the development of the AFM instrumentation to enable intermittent-contact
              imaging of  "soft" materials and surface adsorbed molecules and organisms in
              hydrothermal conditions.  Groundwork will be laid for the development of a
              low-power, lightweight AFM for potential development into a field-deployable
              instrument.
%%%
The results from this project could lead to new methods for
              obtaining chemical and biological information from complex ecosystems. 
              Furthermore, the research will be used to enhance educational opportunities in
              this growing field of scientific discovery.  Students trained in these areas
              will be very competitive in the job market as these are areas of high priority
              in industry.

