Title       : Micro Scale Experiments and Modeling of MEMS RF-Switches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0120866

Award Number: 0120866
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299671             (Estimated)
Investigator: Horacio D. Espinosa espinosa@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry Baughn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0120866
Espinosa
A GOALI award supports study of materials properties and
              problems relevant to the integration of micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS)
              with IC components for wireless applications.  These systems offer unique
              advantages over other technologies because of their low power consumption, high
              sensitivity, physical size, and low cost.  The technology is ideal for next
              generation of cell phones, base stations for wireless systems, and
              highly-efficient software-controlled digital radio for military communications.
              In these applications the MEMS devices are typically used as filters or
              switches.  Filters with Q-factors of 94,000 can be employed to pre-select a
              communication band and a specific channel within that band.  Switches with
              insertion losses bellow 0.1 dB per switch can be used for electromagnetic beam
              steering in radar antennas, accomplished through phase shifting.  This feature
              enables antennas to transmit and receive signals without the need for physical
              reorientation. However, despite the large industrial interest, the technology
              is not yet commercially viable because a number of technical obstacles have to
              be overcome first.   Key among these are  packaging and mechanical modeling of
              MEMS materials at the micron scale. For instance, in the case of RF-switches,
              the effect of the environment can result in stiction of the membranes due to
              humidity or other sources. This requires the development of a cheap hermetic
              package. From a reliability standpoint, it is necessary to consider the
              plasticity limit and its temperature dependence with the materials involved.
              Temperatures as low as minus 50 degrees Celcius can be reached in satellite and
              airplane wireless applications while temperatures of a few hundred degrees can
              be present during device packaging. Another important failure mechanism is
              fatigue caused by excessive actuation cycles. Most of these devices are
              actuated trillions cycles pushing the design envelope and our current knowledge
              of material behavior beyond known parameters.

In this project the
              reliability of capacitive RF-MEMS switch materials and components will be
              investigated. The effect of temperature and number of cycles on material
              degradation as a result of defects generation and evolution will be examined
              for aluminum alloy and doped nanocrystalline diamond films. Likewise, the
              evolution of the built-in stresses will be identified with a nanoindentation
              technique for use in the SEM, recently developed in the PI's laboratory.
              Experiments will consist of the deflection of freestanding films, to assess the
              elastic and inelastic properties of the films, and fatigue analysis by means of
              successive electrostatic actuation. Evolution of built-in stresses and material
              microstructure will be assessed as a function of the number of actuation
              cycles. Modeling of the experiments will be performed at several length scales,
              from ab initio calculations and molecular dynamics to discrete dislocation and
              continuously distributed dislocation networks;  extensive simulations will link
              modeling and experiment.
***

