Title       : Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between
               NSF and SRC: Design of High-Speed Serial-Links in CMOS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0120372

Award Number: 0120372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Won Namgoong namgoong@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1752,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The focus of the proposed research is on high-speed serial-links, where the goal
              is to maximize
data rates between IC chips. As fabrication technology
              improves, the challenge in next-generation serial-link design is in handling
              transistor mismatches and on-chip noise, both of which are expected to grow
              sharply. Consequently, future serial-link architectures must be able to
              tolerate high-levels of transistor mismatches and on-chip noise. The general
              approach followed by most researchers is to use advanced circuit techniques to
              mitigate their adverse effects. In contrast, we propose to use signal
              processing techniques in addition to circuit techniques to overcome these
              problems. This integrated design approach motivates
a new class of high-speed
              serial-link architecture that is fundamentally more robust to
              transistor
mismatches and on-chip noise. The proposed architecture also enjoys
              many other important
implementation advantages, making it well suited for
              future generation high-speed serial-link systems.

This research will
              demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of the proposed architecture
for
              reception and transmission of broadband signals. We will provide a complete
              design frame-work based on a clear understanding of various design options and
              the corresponding trade-offs in performance and implementation complexity.
              Furthermore, we will demonstrate the feasibility and the advantages of the
              proposed architecture by realizing it on silicon. Our goal is to achieve faster
              data rates than the fastest published serial-link system. The concepts and
              techniques developed in the proposed research are not limited to serial-link
              systems. They are easily applicable to any high-bandwidth communication systems
              where the symbol rates exceed the achievable on-chip clock frequency. Some
              specific examples of such applications are ultra-wideband and high-speed
              satellite communication systems.



