Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Political Power Of Galindo Elites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  2001   
File        : a0120114

Award Number: 0120114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  2001   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11495              (Estimated)
Investigator: Garth L. Bawden gbawden@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Garth Bawden, Mr. Gregory Lockard will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. Through archaeological excavation at the site of
              Galindo, located in the Moche Valley of northern coastal Peru, he will examine
              the processes which gave rise to the Chimu Empire. This, the largest coastal
              polity in South American prehistory encompassed, at its height two-thirds of
              all irrigated land along the Pacific desert coast. The empire was ruled by a
              small group of powerful elites who resided in the capital city of Chan Chan,
              also located in the Moche Valley. Chan Chan was founded ca. AD 1000 and over
              the next four and a half centuries Chan Chan elites directed the conquest of
              over 1000 km of Pacific coastline. Their power and territorial ambitions came
              to an end only after a long and bitter war with the Inka, who finally prevailed
              and conquered the Chimu Empire ca AD 1470. Archaeological evidence and
              ethnohistoric documents have revealed much concerning the political power of
              Chimu elites. The origins of this power however must be sought earlier and
              because Chimu elites emerged at Chan Chan in the Moche Valley, this area holds
              the key to understanding this development. Through excavation at Galindo, which
              was occupied immediately before and was a direct precursor  to the Chimu, Mr.
              Lockard hopes to gain insight into this process. The site itself covers an area
              of approximately four square kilometers and a combination of physical and
              cultural features (walls and ditches) divide the site into at least six
              distinct zones. Survey of the site by Mr. Lockard has shown that architectural
              remains within each of these zones are relatively homogeneous and functionally
              differentiated from those of other areas of the site. Based on the method and
              quality of construction, surface area and artifactual content, they can be
              divided into low, moderate and high status residences and thus demonstrate that
              a hierarchical social structure existed at this time. Through a program of
              mapping and careful excavation to collect faunal and botanical remains, Mr.
              Lockard plans to reconstruct the Galindo social organization. It is quite
              likely that elites, at least in part, exercised power through the control of
              scarce goods and analysis of how food remains as well as other valuable
              materials are distributed should provide insight into this system. 

This
              research is important for several reasons. Complex societies arose
              independently in many parts of the world and through multiple case comparison
              it is possible to determine the controlling factors which underlie this
              development. Prehistoric Peru provides one example and Mr. Lockard's work will
              help to fill a major gap. The data he collects will be of interest to many
              archaeologists and the project will help to train a promising young
              scientist.

