Title       : High-Frequency Low-Noise Mixed-Signal Adaptive Equalizer Towards SOC Design of
               Data Transmission Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0120396

Award Number: 0120396
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jin Liu jinliu@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Fonseka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David K. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1752,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research proposes to design a 1GHz receiver equalizer in CMOS technology
              for system-on-chip (SOC) implementation of high-speed long transmission
              distance transceivers.  Analog FIR filter will be used as the equalizing
              filter, which has higher speed than the equalizing filters commonly used today.
              This proposal will address the challenges in designing high-speed FIR filters,
              including analog tap delay line and the learning algorithms. A low-noise error
              detection scheme is proposed and will be studied in terms of communication
              theory for better understanding and improvements. Potential application of the
              proposed equalizer in high-speed wireless data communications will also be
              studied. In addition, we propose to explore design for test methodology for
              low-cost test, diagnostics, and characterization of the proposed adaptive
              mixed-signal equalizer.

In data transmissions, the signal containing the
              data is attenuated when transmitted through media and the attenuation is a
              function of the transmission distance and frequency. Frequency dependent
              attenuation within the signal bandwidth causes inter-symbol-interference (ISI)
              in the received signal. ISI in turn causes errors in data recovery, thus limits
              the transmission distance and transmission rate. To reduce ISI, the frequency
              dependent attenuation must be compensated, or equalized.

Depending on the
              transmission media, the state of the art CMOS transceivers operate at the
              speeds ranging from 100-Mbit/s to about 10-Gbit/s. Currently, equalization is
              only used in lower speed (100- to 200-Mbit/s) data transmission over low-cost
              cables (around 130-meter UTP5 cables). For transmission bit rates in the order
              of Gbit/s, pre-emphasizing filters have been used
to boost high frequency
              components in the transmitter. Multiplexing techniques, such as
multilevel
              signaling and multi-phase clocks, allow the pre-emphasizing filters to operate
              at
several-hundred-MHz, while enabling multi-Gbit/s data transmission. But,
              pre-emphasizing
filter boosts the high frequency components of the transmitted
              signal and introduces strong
emission in the transmitter. To avoid emission
              problems, receiver equalizer is more desirable.
The main challenges of
              receiver equalizer are the design of high-speed equalizing filters and
              the
complexity of filter adaptation algorithm.

One of the broader impacts
              of the proposed activity is on providing trained mixed-signal
design engineers
              for the industry. There has been growing concern over the expected shortage
              of
graduating engineers specialized in the mixed-signal circuit design area.
              The proposed research
will strengthen the mixed-signal circuit design program
              in university for educating skilled design
engineers for industry.


