Title       : BE/CNH: Modeling Interactions Among Urban Development, Land-Cover Change, and
               Bird Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0120024

Award Number: 0120024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1128818            (Estimated)
Investigator: Marina Alberti malberti@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Waddell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Marzluff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Handcock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1691,5209,9169,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The interactions between urban development and ecological processes are
              extraordinarily complex.  Urban development evolves over time and space as the
              outcome of microscopic interactions of individual choices and actions taken by
              multiple agents.  These decisions affect ecosystem structures and functions
              through the conversion of land, fragmentation of natural habitat use,
              disruption of hydrological systems, and modification of energy flow and
              nutrient cycles.  Environmental changes at local and regional scales affect
              human well-being and preferences as well as the decisions people make.  This
              project will develop an integrated model of urban development and land-cover
              change in the central Puget Sound region that can interface with models
              representing a large set of ecosystem processes.  The focus of this project
              will be on linking urban development to bird diversity as a test case for an
              integrated modeling approach.  This approach builds on model traditions in
              urban economics, landscape ecology, bird population dynamics, and complex
              system science, each of which offers different perspectives on modeling urban
              ecological interactions.  The project will apply Bayesian networks and a
              multi-agent microsimulation approach because of the potential for those
              approaches to support complex inference modeling in problem domains with
              inherent uncertainty.  Instead of separately simulating urban growth and its
              impacts on birds habitats, this project will develop a framework to simulate
              metropolitan areas as they evolve through the dynamic interactions between
              urban development and ecological processes and link them through a spatially
              explicit representation of the urban landscape.

Assessments of ecological
              impacts of urban growth that are timely, accurate, and transparent are crucial
              to sound policy and management decisions.  Although extensive urban research
              has focused on the dynamics of urban systems and their ecological interactions,
              these diverse urban processes have yet to be synthesized into one coherent
              modeling framework.  Simulation models of urban and ecological dynamics have
              evolved in separate knowledge domains.  While both of these research areas deal
              with human-environmental interactions, they do so with very different emphases,
              scale, methodology and objectives.  This research will investigate how best to
              model complexity and uncertainty of coupled socioeconomic and biophysical
              processes in metropolitan regions and their interactions with the policy
              domain.  This project will emphasize the importance of explicitly representing
              human and ecological processes in modeling urban systems, including patterns,
              processes, and impacts.  Ultimately, this project will assist in identifying
              answers to questions related to the potential use of public policy to intervene
              in urban ecological systems in ways that may reduce ecological damage from
              urban processes while sustaining economically and socially viable urban
              communities for people.  The project therefore should help in the development
              of tools for policy makers to explore the links between human behaviors and
              environmental change.  This project is an award emanating from the FY 2001
              special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the
              Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.

