Title       : Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
               (PGE): Increasing the Participation by Women in Undergraduate Physics: What
               Works?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0120450

Award Number: 0120450
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131468             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara L. Whitten bwhitten@coloradocollege.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado College
	      
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80903    303/473-2233

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A team based at Colorado College is conducting a study of undergraduate physics
              departments with high and average participation by women, in order to learn
              what works in attracting and retaining women in the undergraduate physics
              major. Ten schools that offer a bachelor's degree in physics, but no graduate
              degrees, were selected. Both public and private schools are included, and at
              least two are HBCU's.

The project has several goals:
oTo study some of the
              many things that have been tried by the physics community and
learn what works
              to increase the number of women majoring in physics.
oTo investigate the
              unusual success of some primarily undergraduate institutions in
cultivating
              women physics majors.
oTo find examples of common errors in programs and
              practices that could be corrected
if they were recognized and understood.
oTo
              see whether and how innovations in physics pedagogy have improved the
              climate
for women.
oTo communicate our results back to the physics
              community.

A team consisting of two physics professors, one social science
              professor, and one
student assistant are collecting demographic information
              about the faculty and students at each department. The team is making a two-day
              site visit to each department, which includes interviews with students,
              faculty, and administrators, and visits to classes and laboratories. The team
              is investigating departmental climate, the quality of teaching and advising,
              the style of classes, and other factors that have been proposed to make physics
              departments more comfortable for women students. The high participation
              departments will be compared with the average participation departments to
              determine what works to recruit and retain women in the undergraduate physics
              major.

Results of this study will be reported in a peer-reviewed journal,
              and publicized in
talks, journal articles, and on the Web. It is hoped that
              the results of this project will help the physics community evaluate its
              efforts to attract more women, and find ways to further improve its
              efforts.

The physics community has been concerned about the low
              participation by women for a decade or so, and much progress had been made; the
              percentage of bachelors degrees awarded to women has more than doubled in the
              last twenty-five years. But physics continues to lag behind the other sciences;
              in 1998, 19% of bachelor's degrees in physics were awarded to women, in
              contrast to 40% of bachelor's degrees in mathematics and chemistry, and more
              than half in the life sciences. Several national initiatives are devoted to
              making physics more attractive to women and other members of underrepresented
              groups. In addition, individual physics departments are trying a variety of
              formal and informal programs to increase the level of participation by women.
              These efforts are unevenly distributed among physics departments, and
              departments vary widely in the percentage of women majors, some departments
              have as many as 40% women, and others are far below the national average.


