Title       : Travel Support for Participation by young U.S. Scientists in Assemblies of the
               International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0120073

Award Number: 0120073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Louis B. Brown                          
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine A. O'Riordan coriordan@agu.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Geophysical Union
	      2000 Florida Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200091231    202/462-6900

NSF Program : 1679      INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION ACT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The American Geophysical Union (AGU) will provide partial support for travel of
              more than ninety students and young scientists from the United States to
              participate in the major international Assemblies of five international
              geosciences associations under the International Union of Geodesy and
              Geophysics (IUGG): the International Association of Geodesy (IAG); the
              International Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy (IAGA); the
              International Association of Seismology and Physics of the Earth's Interior
              (IASPEI); the International Association of Hydrological Sciences (IAHS); the
              International Association of Meteorology and Atmospheric Sciences (IAMAS); and
              the International Association of the Physical Sciences of the Ocean (IAPSO). 
              All of these Associations are members of the International Union of Geodesy and
              Geophysics IUGG).  This effort will promote and encourage international
              communication, collaboration and coordination in the geosciences, especially
              among scientists at an early point in their career.  It is intended that this
              will lead to long-term international interactions among these scientists as
              they advance in their research careers in their respective institutions and
              countries.  The five Assemblies will address a wide range of important
              geosciences problems.  The AGU will advertise widely opportunities for applying
              for such support and will undertake a thoughtful and balanced review and
              selection process.


