Title       : Research for Mixed Signal Electronic Technologies: A Joint Initiative Between
               NSF and SRC: Novel RF Front-Ends For Future Mobile Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0120319

Award Number: 0120319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda B. Katehi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Saeed Mohammadi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1752,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Future mobile communications technologies are expected to provide a wide variety
              of services, high-quality audio, high-definition video and quick response
              control data, through wide-band access channels. Future systems will acquire
              multimedia capability and will facilitate the use of high-speed wireless local
              area networks (W-LAN) and Home  Broadcasting networks in place of traditional
              architectures. These systems will be designed to address user demands for
              broadband wireless communications and will drive the development of new
              microwave and mm-wave devices and circuits. Possible in-home application
              scenarios for both analog and digital transmission will require very compact,
              low-cost and high efficiency receive/transmit devices that can provide
              asymmetric data transmission from a home server to various appliances for
              quality
operation and control.  In response to the above technology needs,
              this program proposes to develop a novel RF front-end receiver architecture
              that consumes very little power, is highly compact, very low-cost and
              high-performance.

The proposed architecture is based on a CMOS on SOI
              implementation for both the RF and digital parts of the circuit and allows for
              an intimate integration of the circuit with the RF filters and antenna
              structure. The new receiver architecture will be based on the use of
              metamaterial substrates for the development of highly integrated filter banks,
              will rely on vertical integration for the development of highly compact
              three-dimensional wireless front ends, will have a novel antenna structure
              intimately integrated with the highly selective multi-frequency substrate and
              have a novel mixed signal digital IF circuitry. The design of the receiver will
              be accomplished through a holistic mixed circuit approach that accurately takes
              into account high frequency effects including dispersion, radiation and
              electromagnetic coupling. The modeling and simulation problem encountered in
              the implementation of the above vision is typical to mixed-signal RFICs.  The
              proposed technical approach represents a solution to the broader problem and
              has the potential to alleviate the design bottleneck at the analog/RF/ package
              interface.

The University of Michigan will use its own fabrication
              facilities together with the IBM Blue Logic Cu-11 CMOS on SOI 0.11m facilities
              to develop the proposed receiver. North Carolina State University will provide
              modeling and simulations necessary for the design of the receiver.  A prototype
              4-channel 5-10GHz receiver will be simulated, designed, fabricated, packaged
              and tested during the course of this work. In addition, 16-channel very high-Q
              electromagnetic bandgap filter bank will be designed, fabricated and tested.
              Moreover, topics such as manufacturing tolerance, temperature effects, filter
              tuning and frequency scaling will be studied.

The proposed work will be
              performed in close collaboration with IBM High performance logic development
              and RF Technology development. Graduate and undergraduate student research
              investigators in both Universities will execute the research tasks. A number of
              these students may spend part of their summer at IBM on internships to
              facilitate the collaboration and take the opportunity to interact with IBM
              scientists. Furthermore, the research outcomes of this effort, in terms of the
              design of the mixed-signal circuit architectures, will become the basis of a
              new senior/graduate-level course in high frequency circuits. Special effort
              will be placed in attracting
underrepresented students through the University
              of Michigan UROP (Undergraduate Research Opportunities) and Maria Sara Parker
              Programs specifically designed to provide research experiences to undergraduate
              and graduate female and minority students. The results of these efforts will be
              disseminated broadly via publications in scientific journal and/or
              presentations in technical conferences and the development of an interactive
              web site.

