Title       : DIS: A Guide for Recruiting and Advancing Women Scientists and Engineers in
               Academia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a0120774

Award Number: 0120774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jong-on Hahm jhahm@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Committee on Women in Science and Engineering (CWSE), National Research
              Council, of the National Academy of Sciences is preparing a guide to the best
              policies and programs that academic institutions have implemented to recruit,
              retain, and advance women in science and engineering in academia. The guide is
              meant to be a practical tool in the replication of successful programs at many
              academic institutions across the country.

CWSE will use both formal and
              informal networks to identify the most successful programs
for each level,
              e.g., undergraduate recruitment, reducing attrition in freshman and sophomore
              years, graduate student recruitment and retention, transition to postdoctoral
              fellowships. This will include contacting granting organizations, disciplinary
              societies, academic administration societies, faculty groups, and non-profit
              advocacy organizations. Programs from different size institutions, both public
              and private, will be reviewed. Identified programs will be asked to provide
              data on the increased participation of women resulting from the implementation
              of their programs. From this group a subset of programs will be selected for
              site visits. The project will include up to five site visits to institutions
              with successful programs to interview the students, faculty, and administrators
              involved. No institution will be identified by name in the guide.

The target
              audience for the guide includes college and university presidents, deans,
              provosts and other administration officials, department chairs, faculty, and
              other individuals with the interest and capacity for establishing a successful
              program that promotes the participation of women in science and
              engineering.

Other guides produced by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS)
              have had a wide impact. Tens of thousands of copies of previous NAS guides have
              been disseminated worldwide. On Being A Scientist, the NAS guide on science
              ethics, has been reprinted in several languages. The NAS guide on mentoring, on
              which this guide will be modeled, Advisor, Teacher, Role Model, Friend: On
              Being a Mentor to Students in Science and Engineering, is distributed by some
              institutions to all their faculty, and serves as the basis of their mentoring
              efforts. Many other faculty mentoring programs are based on the mentoring
              guide.

