Title       : A Unique Metabolic Response of Conifers to Environmental Compression Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1996     
File        : a9118386

Award Number: 9118386
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans J. Bohnert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent L. Chiang VCHIANG@MTUs.5bitnet  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wilbur H. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Lignin, a major plant constituent, is crucial to the efficient                 
              mechanical support and the defense system of plants.  The                      
              adaptability of plants to changes and stress in their environment              
              in order to survive is due primary to the existence of lignin.  For            
              instance, when a plant is forced out of it natural, equilibrium                
              position in space by an environmental compression stress, such as              
              bending, a unique growth pattern involving the formation of a high             
              amount and an abnormal type of lignin is initiated to reinforce the            
              cell wall architecture in order to restore the natural, equilibrium            
              orientation of the plant.  Collectively, the resultant tissues                 
              formed under such a phenomenon is called "compression wood".  We               
              have discovered a unique enzyme, 4-hydroxycinnamate:  CoA ligase,              
              whose activity is significantly induced in developing tissues of               
              loblolly pine seedlings subjected to compressional stress.  We                 
              propose a comprehensive study on this unique metabolic response to             
              the compressional stress by first investigating the molecular                  
              biology of this particular enzyme.  The overall long term project              
              goal is to illuminate the development of compression wood in                   
              compressionally stressed loblolly seedlings at the molecular level             
              and establish a model system which can be used to probe the                    
              underlying signals triggering the metabolic changes stimulated by              
              compressional stress.  The significance of this project is its role            
              as a foundation from which further investigation of how plants                 
              perceive and respond to both normal and altered environmental                  
              compression signals can be achieved at a gene level.
