Title       : Regulation of Antibody Diversity in Xenopus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1997  
File        : a9118753

Award Number: 9118753
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $559494             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Hsu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9178,9183,9251,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The overall goal of these studies is to gain further                         
              understanding of the mechanisms involved in regulating or                      
              generating antibody diversity.  The approach is to examine the                 
              switch in the spectrum of antibody diversity that occurs during                
              development.  Early in ontogeny, in the fetal/neonatal mammal or               
              in the Xenopus tadpole, the antibody pool is very limited.  The                
              sources of this restriction have to do, in part, with the enzymatic            
              machinery governing Ig assembly: there seems to be a paucity of                
              junctional diversity manifested by Lack of N-region sequence                   
              insertion and a more precisely defined site of recombination by                
              use of regions containing homology.  Antibody diversity increases              
              during development.  In Xenopus, the more heterogeneous adult-type             
              antibodies appear only with metamorphosis and whenever the process             
              of metamorphosis is contrived.  This clear separation of larval and            
              adult immunological states in Xenopus is a unique advantage that               
              allows more incisive examination of the differential regulation of             
              the genes involved in antibody repertoire generation.  The specific            
              aims of the proposed projects are:  1) to isolate Xenopus homologs             
              of mammalian genes involved in B lymphocyte differentiation (TdT,              
              RAG1, RAG2, Oct2); 2) to study the ontogeny of lymphopoiesis in                
              Xenopus using these markers, with focus on the onset and course of             
              expression in the larva and changes at metamorphosis; and 3) to                
              construct transgenic Xenopus carrying TdT in order to alter the                
              normal pattern of Ig diversification during development.                       
                                                                                             
              The ability of the immune system to survey and recognize a broad               
              spectrum of different antigens is based on the huge repertoire of              
              different immunoglobulin (antibody) variable region amino acid                 
              sequences and the binding specificities that result.  The Nobel                
              Prize-winning discovery, just a few years ago, that this diversity             
              is generated by a complex somatic gene recombination mechanism has             
              raised the fundamental question of how this recombination mechanism            
              is regulated.  In mammals, there is a difference in the amount of              
              recombination (and therefore in the diversity of the antibody pool)            
              that occurs in adults vs. newborns, with newborns having a much                
              more limited repertoire of specificities than adults.  This                    
              difference seems to be based on differences in the enzymatic                   
              machinery needed to effect the recombination events.   In frogs,               
              this difference is reflected by a change in the ability to generate            
              diversity at metamorphosis:  tadpoles have a very limited pool of              
              antibodies, while post-metamorphosis adult frogs have the more                 
              heterogeneous spectrum of antibodies.  This project will take                  
              advantage of this distinct difference in immunological states in               
              tadpoles vs. adult frogs, in order to study the differential                   
              regulation of expression of the genes involved in the somatic                  
              recombination events that result in the generation of antibody                 
              diversity.
