Title       : Sweet Taste Receptor Mutants in Hawaiian Fruitflies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1992      
File        : a9118858

Award Number: 9118858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda M. Kennedy lkennedy@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The sense of taste involves interaction of a taste molecule                    
              with a taste receptor cell, and the process of sensory                         
              transduction turns that event into a nerve signal to be sent to                
              the brain.  There are several possible ways in which a tastant                 
              molecule can interact with the receptor cell, and the molecular                
              mechanisms of sweet taste transduction are not known.  There are               
              some particular compounds known to suppress sweet taste, and                   
              these taste modifiers provide a useful tool to explore                         
              transduction.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This small exploratory project will use a novel genetic                        
              approach to study sweet taste transduction mechanisms.  The model              
              system used is the fruit fly of the genus Drosophila, which is                 
              very well known for genetic work.  Hawaiian species provide                    
              unusually large animals in comparison to most laboratory strains,              
              large enough to neurophysiological testing as well as behavioral               
              work.  Behavioral tests will be used to screen for flies that                  
              cannot taste specific sugars, and these variants will be bred and              
              the mutant strains maintained.  The mutant flies will be compared              
              to the wild types in terms of their behavioral and physiological               
              responses to taste stimuli and the sweet-suppressing compounds.                
              Breeding studies will determine the genetic basis for the                      
              responses.  Results will provide a new access to sweet taste                   
              mutant strains for molecular genetic studies, and will have an                 
              impact not only on taste physiology, but also on genetics, on                  
              evolutionary and environmental biology, and even on pest control               
              by information gained on the genetics of insect feeding behavior.
