Title       : Physical and Genetic Analysis of the lemA Gene of Pseudomonas syringae: A
               Positive Transcriptional Regulator of Lesion Formation and Toxin Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1994     
File        : a9118384

Award Number: 9118384
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Kyle Willis dkwillis@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We have cloned a positive regulatory locus, designated lemA, that              
              is required for two diverse aspects of plant disease: lesion                   
              formation by Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae on beam and the                 
              production of the phytotoxins tabtoxin and sytringomycin by several            
              Pseudomonas syringae strains.  In P. syringae pv. syringae, a                  
              functional lemA gene is required for lesion formation and for the              
              production of syringomycin and protease.  The lemA analog within P.            
              syringae pv. coronafaciens is required for tabtoxin production but             
              not lesion formation by this pathovar.  Analysis of the sequence of            
              this gene reveals extensive amino acid similarity of the predicted             
              LemA protein to a family of transmembrane transcription regulators.            
              In addition, northern blot analysis has shown that a transcript                
              from the tblA gene within the tabtoxin biosynthetic region is                  
              absent in derivatives of P. syringae pv. coronafaciens containing              
              a lemA mutation.  It appears, therefore, that the lemA gene                    
              functions as a positive transcriptional regulator of genes involved            
              in lesion formation and toxin production in P. syringae.  It is the            
              goal of this proposal to purify the enzyme encoded by the lemA gene            
              to test whether, as predicted by sequence comparisons, it is a                 
              plasma membrane proteins with an extracellular receptor domain and             
              a cytoplasmic protein-phosphylating domain.  We will use DNA                   
              fragments from the promoter region of the tblA gene to test the                
              potential for DNA binding by the LemA protein.  Using random Tn5lac            
              insertions into a P. syringae pv. syringae mutant containing a                 
              temperature-sensitive lemA mutation, we will identify lemA-                    
              regulated genes in P. syringae pv. syringae.  We have identified an            
              additional Tn5 mutation of P. syringae pv. syringae that does not              
              map to the lemA locus but which also eliminates lesion formation.              
              We will characterize this gene by DNA sequence analysis and examine            
              its potential regulatory linkage to lemA.                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              The plant pathogen Pseudomonas syringae has become a model system              
              for understanding how bacteria cause plant disease.  These studies             
              focus on a particular genetics locus, lemA, which is required for              
              two aspects of the disease process-lesion formation and toxin                  
              production.  The mechanism by which a single protein controls two              
              disease processes will be probed.
