Title       : Physiological Plasticity of the Auditory Thalamocortical System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9118872

Award Number: 9118872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: W. Otto Friesen                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194912             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raju Metherate   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Neural plasticity occurs in the auditory neocortex, and is thought             
              to underlie some forms of learning.  The goal of Dr. Metherate's               
              research is to understand the cellular bases of neural plasticity.             
              Neural plasticity is proposed to depend on the interactions between            
              auditory and neuromodulatory inputs to cortical nerve cells.                   
              Auditory information is delivered via projections from the auditory            
              thalamus.  This information is then modified by inputs from                    
              neuromodulatory systems to produce neural plasticity.  Dr.                     
              Metherate proposes the following mechanism:  primary auditory                  
              inputs, which contact close to the cell bodies of cortical neurons,            
              exert a strong influence over neuronal activity.  While secondary              
              auditory inputs relay plasticity information to distant parts of               
              cortical neurons, and exert less influence over neuronal activity              
              at the cell body.  Modulation of cortical neurons makes them                   
              electrically more "compact".  This allows the secondary inputs to              
              "reach" the cell body, facilitating the integration of primary and             
              secondary inputs, and lowering the threshold for plasticity to                 
              occur.  In this study, Dr. Metherate will record the activity                  
              elicited by primary inputs to determine the threshold for one form             
              of plasticity called long-term potentiation (LTP).  He will examine            
              modulation of neural activity, responses to secondary inputs, and              
              LTP threshold by stimulating two kinds of neuromodulatory inputs:              
              those from the nucleus basalis and locus coeruleus.  This exciting             
              project will advance the study of cortical plasticity by                       
              determining how parallel auditory pathways converge and interact               
              at the cortex, and how neuromodulatory systems regulate auditory               
              information processing.  Dr. Metherate's research is an important              
              model which has intuitive appeal in terms of cortical circuitry and            
              in relation to memory and other cognitive disorders such as                    
              Alzheimer's disease.***//
