Title       : Collaborative Research: Scientific Drilling in Hawaii: Physics and Chemistry of
               Mantle Plumes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1995     
File        : a9118573

Award Number: 9118573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $544930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. Thomas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                  This project involves drilling a 600 m pilot hole preparatory             
              to core-drilling a 4.5 km hole in the vicinity of Hilo, Hawaii, and            
              characterizing the returned core samples and well site using an                
              array of modern geochemical, petrological, and geophysical                     
              techniques.  The principal objectives of the holes is to obtain a              
              nearly continuous, ordered record of the output of an oceanic                  
              volcano over a long interval of its main shield-building phase of              
              activity.  Only small fractions of the output and history of any               
              individual Hawaiian volcano are accessible through surface                     
              exposures and it is unlikely that the interiors of these volcanoes             
              will ever be exposed except by deep drilling.                                  
                                                                                             
                   The primary scientific questions to be addressed concern the              
              nature of hot spots, in particular, the composition and origin of              
              the "plumes" they may represent, and how the upwelling material                
              interacts with the lithosphere and surrounding mantle material on              
              time scales of 105 to 106 years.  These problems are intimately                
              related to the nature of magma isotopic compositions and ages of               
              the lavas encountered in the drill core, and to invert this                    
              geochemical time series in conjunction with dynamical models for               
              plume behavior and melt generation to develop a comprehensive model            
              for the dynamics of the hot spot phenomenon at Hawaii.                         
                                                                                             
                   Other major scientific questions that can be addressed through            
              study of a unique sample suite of the sort expected from drilling              
              include:  How long is an individual Hawaiian volcano active?  What             
              is the nature of the submarine-subaerial transition and of the                 
              submarine section of a major oceanic volcano?  What are the                    
              mechanisms of growth and the rate of growth of a Hawaii volcano and            
              of subsidence due to the load on the lithosphere from the growing              
              volcano?  What are the magnetic properties of oceanic volcanic                 
              rocks as a function of depth and petrology and how do these relate             
              to magnetic surveys near seamounts?  What is the thermal structure             
              and state of preservation of igneous features in the interiors of              
              the flanks of Hawaiian volcanoes far from rift zones.
