Title       : Photolabile OligoDNA Probes of Ribosomal Structure and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1995     
File        : a9118072

Award Number: 9118072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry S. Cooperman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The ribosome is the unique site of protein biosynthesis in all                 
              cells, and as such a detailed understanding of its structure                   
              and function is of fundamental importance to the more general                  
              understanding of cellular function at the molecular level.  The                
              long term goal of work in this laboratory is to create a                       
              detailed structure-function map of the ribosome.  The work put                 
              forward in this proposal is an important part of this effort,                  
              since it provides a uniquely powerful approach for obtaining a                 
              detailed picture of the ribosomal components that neighbor                     
              specific sequences of rRNA within intact ribosomes and                         
              subunits.  Specifically, The PI proposes to exploit                            
              radioactive, photolabile, complementary oligoDNA probes of                     
              ribosomal RNA (rRNA) as photoaffinity labels to identify                       
              ribosomal components that neighbor targeted rRNA sequences                     
              within an intact ribosome or ribosomal subunit and to determine                
              how the identities of such components vary in different                        
              functional sites of the ribosome. The secondary structures of                  
              rRNA are well established.  The targeted sequences fall in                     
              single-stranded regions having particular functional or                        
              structural significance, including those known or suspected to                 
              be involved in the peptidyl transferase center, in the                         
              anticodon-codon recognition center, in 30S:50S subunit                         
              contacts, and in the binding of specific ribosomal ligands such                
              as protein factors that stimulate protein synthesis (e.g.,EF-                  
              G,IF3) and of antibiotics.  These studies will be carried out                  
              on the E. coli ribosome, which is by far the best                              
              characterized.  However, given the considerable conservation of                
              ribosome structure throughout evolution, the results obtained                  
              should also be useful for understanding ribosomes from other                   
              organisms.
