Title       : Functional Studies of Chicken Histocompatibility Antigens Bearing Ig V-like
               Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1992  
File        : a9118199

Award Number: 9118199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225042             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia M. Miller mamiller@coh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beckman Res Inst Cty Hope
	      1500 E. Duarte Road
	      Duarte, CA  910103000    /   -

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 Significant progress was made recently in defining the structure            
              of the highly polymorphic B-G antigens encoded within the major                
              histocompatibility complex of the chicken.  It has been determined             
              that B-G antigens are a family of molecules, divergent members of              
              which are expressed on cells in several different tissues in                   
              addition to erythrocytes, including immune system cells.                       
              Determination of the sequences of some of the B-G family members               
              has revealed the structural basis of B-G polymorphism, including               
              the presence of hypervariable sequence diversity within an                     
              immunoglobulin v-like domain.  B-G cytoplasmic tails are made up               
              of heptad repeats of diverse sequence.  B-G antigens have been                 
              found on the epithelia in the gut, cells in the liver, thrombocytes            
              (highly phagocytic cells in birds), some lymphocytes, and cells                
              within the stroma of the bursa and thumus.  The objective of this              
              project is to attempt to define the function (or functions) of the             
              B-G antigens in light of the newly recognized sites where B-G                  
              molecules are now known to be expressed.                                       
                                                                                             
              The B-G antigens have long been known as blood group antigens of               
              chickens.  Until recently, the B-G antigens were thought to be                 
              expressed exclusively on red blood cells.  They are now known to               
              be expressed in various cell types and tissues throughout the                  
              chick, at various stages of development.  Furthermore, they have               
              been shown through DNA sequencing work to have structural                      
              resemblance to immunoglobulin genes.  These new observations have              
              led to the hypothesis that the B-G antigens may play some role in              
              the chicken immune system.  The goal of this study is to explore               
              this hypothesis.  The results of this study have the potential to              
              shed new light on how the immune system of the chicken operates.
