Title       : US-Poland Research on Hormonal Control of Calcium Transport Across the Plasma
               Membrane in Hepatocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9118311

Award Number: 9118311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28486              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn F. Lanoue   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerzy Duszynski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1136,5953,
Abstract    :
                 This U.S.-Poland research project between Dr. Kathryn F. Lanoue             
              of Pennsylvania State University Hershey Medical Center and Jerzy              
              Duszinski of the Nencki Institute of Warsaw, Poland, is to identify            
              and characterize the transporter which catalyzes hormone dependent             
              influx of extracellular calcium into liver cells.  The researchers             
              will study fura-2 loaded hepatocytes in primary culture, using a               
              fluorescence digital imaging system in conjunction with whole cell             
              patch clamp microinjection techniques, to determine the current                
              voltage relationships of the putative calcium channel, as well as              
              the enthalpy of calcium influx and its Ph dependence.  Preliminary             
              experiments indicate the calcium transport into the cell is not                
              dependent on hormone occupancy of calcium mobilizing receptors in              
              the plasma membrane, or on IP3 levels in the cell but it is                    
              dependent on the extent of depletion of intracellular hormone                  
              releasable calcium stores.  Calcium depletion of these stores                  
              stimulates calcium entry into the cell, in a graded manner.  The               
              researchers will test the hypothesis that a calcium sensitive                  
              enzyme in the endoplasmic reticulum elaborates and releases to the             
              cytosol a metabolite which regulates plasma membrane calcium                   
              permeability.  They will design experiments to demonstrate the                 
              existence of such a diffusible metabolite and to characterize it.              
              The researchers plan to use an inhibitor of the calcium plasma                 
              membrane transporter as a means to monitor calcium transporter                 
              activity in hepatocyte plasma membrane vesicles loaded with fura-2.            
              They will use the vesicular assay system to screen the influence of            
              putative regulators and as a basis for later solubilization,                   
              reconstitution, and purification.                                              
              %%%                                                                            
              This project in biology fulfills the program objective of advancing            
              scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United                 
              States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool            
              resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.
