Title       : Regulation of Protein Synthesis in Developing Oat Seeds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1993  
File        : a9118656

Award Number: 9118656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian A. Larkins larkins@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott K. Boyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Genes for the oat storage proteins globulin and avenin are                     
              expressed in a differential manner during seed formation.                      
              The cause for this differential expression has been studied by                 
              Dr. Larkins as a component of his research on the biochemistry                 
              of seed storage proteins.  Preliminary evidence has narrowed the               
              control of expression to the translation step of the process.                  
                                                                                             
              The investigators propose to explore the molecular basis for the               
              differential synthesis of storage proteins in the oat system.  They            
              have constructed a series of transcription vectors encoding avenins            
              and globulins and will analyze the translation of synthetic mRNAs              
              in both wheat germ extracts and xenopus oocytes.  This analysis                
              may allow them to identify structural features of the mRNAs that               
              cause the preferential translation of the globulin transcripts.                
              They plan to prepare a tRNA-dependent in vitro translation system              
              and assess the role of the tRNA population of oat endosperm in                 
              storage protein synthesis. This will allow them to determine if                
              translation termination or protein transport play a critical role              
              in regulating storage protein accumulation.  A thorough knowledge              
              of how storage protein synthesis is controlled will give us insight            
              into the mechanisms regulating the growth and development of seeds             
              and provide a basis for future improvements in the nutritional                 
              quality of oats and other cereals  by genetic engineering.
