Title       : Stable Isotope Geochemistry at the Molecular Level: An Assessment of the
               Diagenesis of Organic Matter in Fossil Shells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1992   
File        : a9118011

Award Number: 9118011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178408             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael H. Engel AB1635@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Interpretation of the biochemistry of fossil systems based on             
              the stable isotope composition of bulk organic matter assumes that             
              intramolecular diagenetic reactions and interactions with the                  
              preserving environment have a minimal effect on the isotopic                   
              integrity of these systems.  A realistic assessment of biogenic                
              signals from fossils requires an appraisal of the limits of                    
              isotopic fractionation that can occur during diagenesis and the                
              development of independent criteria for evaluating the possible                
              exchange of components with the surrounding environment.  This                 
              project will begin to quantify the effects of hydrolysis and                   
              secondary diagenetic reactions (e.g. humification) on the stable               
              carbon and nitrogen isotope compositions of amino acid constituents            
              of peptides and proteins in fossils.  Our recent development of a              
              combined gas chromatography/isotope ratio mass spectrometry                    
              (GC/IRMS) methods for the direct stable carbon isotope analysis of             
              nanomole concentrations of amino acid enantiomers permits, for the             
              first time, an opportunity to monitor the effects of diagenetic                
              reactions on most of the protein amino acids.  We will continue to             
              test the possibility of using the stable isotope compositions of               
              the D- and L-enantiomers of individual amino acid constituents of              
              fossils as an independent check on the indigeneity of these                    
              components.  At present, the GC/IRMS method is limited to the                  
              analysis of stable carbon isotopes;  however we propose to modify              
              the system for the analysis of stable nitrogen isotopes.  The                  
              ability to monitor both  13C and  15N compositions of individual amino         
              acid enantiomers affords a powerful, independent check on the                  
              indigeneity of these components.  Finally, experiments are also                
              planned to develop GC/IRMS methods for the  13C analysis of                    
              carbohydrate constituents of fossil shells.
