Title       : Dynamics in Glassy and Disordered Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1993  
File        : a9118065

Award Number: 9118065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Sethna sethna@msc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dynamics in Glassy and Disordered Systems - The intent of this                 
              project is to continue previous studies of dynamics in glassy and              
              disordered systems, focusing on three areas.  The numerical enzyme             
              technique (previously developed by the PI) will be used to                     
              accelerate the dynamics of a two-component Lennard-Jones model, to             
              test and refine the PI's scaling theory of the glass transition.               
              The charge-density-wave depinning transition will also be studied,             
              in particular examining the sparse regime and phase-organization in            
              the avalanches which occur on the pinned side of the transition.               
              Finally, the study of logarithmic coarsening in Ising models                   
              without disorder will be shifted from three-dimensional to two-                
              dimensional, and the scaling and critical properties will be                   
              extracted from the simulation.  A major theme in the proposed                  
              research is development of the PI's ideas concerning Darwinian                 
              selection of numerical enzymes to accelerate Monte Carlo                       
              simulation.                                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              One of the principal areas of current research in statistical                  
              physics is the nature and formation of glassy states.  Despite the             
              lack of detailed understanding concerning the glassy state (even               
              the identification of glass as a well-defined thermodynamic state              
              is unclear), glass is the standard paradigm for random systems in              
              general.  Beyond the obvious benefit to be generated by obtaining              
              a better understanding of glass (one of our societies most                     
              important structural materials), the possibility of refining the               
              analogy between glass and other, closely-related systems as is a               
              relevant goal.  The techniques which are being developed for this              
              study (numerical enzymes) are quite new, and further investigation             
              of their properties, potential, and limitations is an additional               
              part of the project.  The impact of this new class of simulation               
              techniques on materials science is potentially very great.
