Title       : Nitrogen-intensive Plastic Responses to Herbivory: Primary Role for a Secondary
               Metabolite
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1992       
File        : a9118452

Award Number: 9118452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincent P. Gutschick                    
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian T. Baldwin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The growth of herbivores is recognized by most researcher to              
              be limited in large part by a plant's nitrogen content.  When a                
              plant is eaten, its remaining tissues exhibit a plethora of                    
              responses that include not only the dramatic increases in the                  
              concentrations of "secondary" metabolites (the putative induced                
              defenses which presumably contribute to a plant's resistance to                
              herbivory) but also a suite of physiological responses that                    
              include increases in photosynthetic rates( which presumably                    
              contribute to a plant's resilience to herbivory).  This proposal               
              examines how a plant integrates these two suites of responses and              
              thus asks how a plant resolves the potentially conflicting                     
              demands of its "defensive" and "civilian" biochemical responses                
              to herbivore attack.  This metabolic integration will be examined              
              in a species of plant (Nicotiana sylvestris) where both the                    
              "defensive" responses--the production of toxic alkaloids--and the              
              "civilian" responses--included photosynthetic capacity--make                   
              large demands on a plant's nitrogen budget.  Since nitrogen is                 
              frequently the important limiting element for plants growth, we                
              will choreograph the movement of nitrogen between alkaloid and                 
              protein synthesis in order to examine this metabolic integration.              
                   Research on pest-resistance in agriculture has been focused               
              on two fronts:  the chemical and physical of plants that confer                
              resistance to pest attack and the physiological attributes of                  
              plants associated with resilience to herbivory.  Little, if any                
              research has explored the integration of both the defense against              
              and the tolerance to herbivory.  And understanding of this                     
              integration is essential if we are to proceed beyond the                       
              "pesticide-approach" to plant protection.  This will be the first              
              project to examine chemical defense as an integral part of the                 
              physiological processes by which plants regrow those tissues lost              
              to herbivores.
