Title       : Issues in Heterogeneous Network Based Concurrent Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1994     
File        : a9118787

Award Number: 9118787
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anand R. Tripathi                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139349             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vaidy S. Sunderam vss@mathcs.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with concurrent computing on interconnected          
              collections of computer systems, including multiprocessors, vector             
              supercomputers, and specialized scalar machines.  Such a network               
              based, virtual concurrent computing environment is valuable both for           
              increasing overall resource availability and sharing, and for                  
              exploiting special capabilities of individual machines.  This project          
              will investigate critical issues in such a computing system, and               
              develop solutions that permit the effective and efficient utilization          
              of network based concurrent processing environments.                           
                                                                                             
              Analyses of high-performance applications, existing tools, and our             
              experiences with a prototype network based system have identified the          
              key areas that will be focussed upon in this research.  One concerns           
              appropriate methodologies and tools to assist in mapping portions of           
              the application to the best suited resources in a heterogeneous                
              environments.  Another area of importance concerns improving the               
              efficiency of communications facilities in networked environments.             
              Support mechanisms to enable efficient concurrent computing over               
              different network types, strategies for the implementation high level          
              concurrency primitives, and lowering the overheads of operating in             
              heterogeneous environments are issues that will be focused upon.  The          
              project will have a pragmatic orientation, and an experimental                 
              approach will be adopted.
