Title       : Processing the Polyprotein Precursor to Euglena LHCPII
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1994     
File        : a9118721

Award Number: 9118721
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Schwartzbach   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1168,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The transport of cytoplasmically synthesized proteins to cellular              
              organelles and insertion into membranes is a fundamental question              
              confronting biologists.  As a rule, chloroplast proteins are                   
              synthesized on free ribosomes and post-translationally imported                
              into chloroplasts while Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) proteins are                
              synthesized on membrane bound ribosomes and co-translationally                 
              imported to the ER.  Proteolytic precursor maturation and sorting              
              for transport to their final intracellular site occurs in the ER               
              and golgi.  Immunoelectronmicroscopy has localized the Euglena                 
              chloroplast protein LHCPII to the golgi apparatus during times of              
              active synthesis.  Euglena pLHCPII is a polyprotein synthesized                
              on membrane bound ribosomes.  Photoinduction of Euglena LHCPII is              
              translationally controlled at initiation or an early stage of                  
              elongation.  Taken together, these results suggest that Euglena                
              LHCPII is co-translationally transported into the ER and golgi                 
              apparatus prior to import into chloroplasts.  This contrasts with              
              the direct post-translational uptake of precursor proteins into                
              higher plant and green algal chloroplasts.  The purpose of this                
              research is to use in vivo pulse labeling and organelle                        
              fractionation as well as in vivo translocation studies into                    
              microsmes and chloroplasts (independently and sequentially) to                 
              delineate the steps required and intracellular compartments                    
              involved in the novel pathway Euglena utilizes for the transport               
              of cytoplasmically synthesized proteins to chloroplasts.                       
              %%%                                                                            
              The assembly of chloroplast membranes requires the synthesis and               
              transport of constituent proteins from various cellular                        
              compartments.  This research will delineate the cellular site of               
              synthesis of the photosynthetic enzyme complex "Light Harvesting               
              Chlorophyll-Protein II" and elucidate the mechanism by which it                
              is transported into the developing chloroplast structure.                      
              Information gained will increase our understanding of the                      
              biosynthesis and assembly of membrane-localized multienzyme                    
              complexes.
