Title       : Isotopic Evolution of Proterozoic Sediments and Seawater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1992   
File        : a9118628

Award Number: 9118628
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258156             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stein B. Jacobsen jacobsen@neodymium.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Recent investigation point to the latest Proterozoic (0.5-0.9             
              Ga) as being a time of vast evolutionary change.  Well-preserved               
              sedimentary successions in Namibia, Spitsbergen, South Africa and              
              China have been studied in detail as they contain important                    
              economic deposits and remnants of the first metazoan faunas.  In               
              addition, strong carbon- and strontium-isotopic variations are                 
              found in these sequences and may be useful for the correlation of              
              coeval strata world-wide.  We propose to continue research on the              
              isotopic variations in C, Sr and Nd in well-characterized and well-            
              preserved stratigraphic samples from the Nama, Polarisbreen and                
              Kango groups as well as the Doushantuo and Dengying formations to              
              better characterize the rate of isotopic change during the latter              
              part of the Proterozoic Eon.  Given a better knowledge of the rate             
              of isotopic changes in latest Proterozoic seawater our goals are               
              to:                                                                            
              1) trace the major mass fluxes in the exogenic geochemical cycle               
              and understand the relationship between the evolution of the                   
              sedimentary reservoir, the oceans and the atmosphere during the                
              Late Proterozoic, 2) determine rates of erosion, organic carbon                
              burial and hydrothermal alteration and their relation to global                
              tectonics, 3) investigate the relationship of strong isotopic                  
              variations to known events of glaciations, phosphorite and banded              
              iron-formation deposition, and 4) strengthen the tie between chemo-            
              stratigraphic and bio-stratigraphic correlations between these Late            
              Proterozoic successions.                                                       
                   During the Proterozoic, seawater Nd and Sr budgets appear to              
              have changed from dominantly hydrothermal inputs (as in the                    
              Archean) to dominantly continental (river) inputs.  Modeling of the            
              data obtained from this research will be used to constrain the                 
              changes in rates of hydrothermal circulation, continental erosion              
              rates, burial rates of organic carbon and variations in the mean               
              age of continental erosion products through the late Proterozoic.              
              Implications for the evolution of O2 and CO2 in the Earth's                    
              atmosphere will also be considered.  We have demonstrated with our             
              previous work that high resolution Sr and C isotopic curves may be             
              obtained for late Proterozoic sedimentary successions and are                  
              confident that this research will lead to major breakthroughs in               
              our understanding of Late Proterozoic evolution.
