Title       : Mechanism of Protein Biosynthesis in Animal Mitochondria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1995   
File        : a9118317

Award Number: 9118317
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda L. Spremulli linda_spremulli@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of the proposed research is to                           
              investigate the initiation of protein biosynthesis in animal                   
              mitochondria.  This process is unique in the animal                            
              mitochondrial system since initiation occurs at or within few                  
              nucleotides of the 5' end of the mRNA.  One animal mitochondrial               
              translational initiation factor has recently been                              
              purified. This factor (IF-2mt) is responsible for binding the                  
              initiator tRNA to ribosomes in response to the AUG codon.  In                  
              the present application, additional factors that are required                  
              for the assembly of the functional initiation complex on the                   
              mitochondrial ribosome will be investigated.  The components in                
              addition to IF-2mt, required for the binding of the initiator                  
              tRNA to ribosomes in the presence of a natural mRNA will be                    
              identified.  These factors will then be purified, characterized                
              and their roles in the initiation process investigated.                        
              Studies will be carried out to determine how the 5'end of the                  
              mRNA is recognized as the initiation signal in the animal                      
              mitochondrial system.  The role of proteins that interact with                 
              mitochondrial mRNAs and 28 S ribosomal subunits will be                        
              explored and the importance of mitochondrial membranes or                      
              membrane components will be analyzed.                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              Historically a tremendous amount of effort has been directed                   
              toward understanding the biochemistry and molecular biology of                 
              mitochondria.  This organelle is of prime importance in energy                 
              metabolism and cytoplasmic inheritance in eukarytic cells.                     
              Little is known about mitochondrial protein synthesis.  This                   
              proposal addresses the regulation of protein biosynthesis at                   
              the level of initiation.
