Title       : Use of Sedimentary Nitrogen and Carbon Isotopic Composition for Reconstruction
               of Past Surface Nutrient Utilization in Antarctic Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1993     
File        : a9118031

Award Number: 9118031
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294859             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Altabet   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger Francois  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A major continuing question in paleoceanography is how the                     
              paleohistory of the atmospheric carbon dioxide content is related              
              to the contemporaneous productivity of the oceans.  In the Southern            
              Ocean where nitrates are one of the major phytoplankton nutrients,             
              it is possible to estimate the regional paleoproductivity by                   
              investigating the variability of nitrogen isotopes in sediment                 
              cores.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              It is known that when nitrates are abundant in the euphotic zone               
              (as in antarctic waters today), phytoplankton discriminate against             
              nitrogen-15, resulting in biomass and sinking particulates                     
              isotopically lighter than the dissolved nutrient pool.  When                   
              nitrate concentrations decrease as a result of biological                      
              utilization, the sinking particulates become isotopically heavier.             
              It is expected that the downcore variations in nitrogen-15 reflect             
              time variations in the predominance of these surface processes.                
                                                                                             
              Other productivity or nutrient indicators, such as the                         
              Cadmium/Calcium ratio, carbon-13 in calcite, or opal accumulation              
              have presented conflicting interpretations of the paleodistribution            
              of both productivity and surface nutrients.  Sedimentary nitrogen-             
              15 is expected to specifically record past changes in biologically             
              mediated nutrient depletion.                                                   
                                                                                             
              This study will confirm the relationship between nitrogen-15 and               
              nitrates in surface waters using recently collected samples in the             
              Indian Ocean sector, and use sediment analyses to reconstruct                  
              surface nutrient utilization in several sectors of the Southern                
              Ocean.  Existing cores with established stratigraphy will provide              
              sufficient coverage of the targeted regions.
