Title       : Isolation and Analysis of Genes Required for Peroxisome Biogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9118062

Award Number: 9118062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Cregg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Grad Inst of S&
	      20000 NW Walker Road
	      Beaverton, OR  970068921    503/645-1121

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Peroxisomes are present in cells of virtually all eukaryotes and            
              are the subcellular location of many important metabolic reactions.            
              Little is known regarding basic mechanisms by which cells maintain             
              and propagate peroxisomes and direct specific sets of newly                    
              synthesized proteins to these organelles.  This laboratory has                 
              initiated a molecular genetic investigation of peroxisomes using               
              the methylotrophic yeast, Pichia pastoris, as a model system.  P.              
              pastoris was chosen because peroxisomes are required for its growth            
              on either methanol or oleate (an easily observed phenotype) and                
              because molecular genetic methods are well developed in this                   
              organism.  By isolating and examining a collection of methanol-                
              utilization-defective P. pastoris strains, 23 mutants in 8                     
              different genes have been identified that are peroxisome-deficient             
              (per mutants).  These mutants will be subjected to genetic,                    
              biochemical and cellular biological studies to elucidate their                 
              primary defects.  Selected mutants will also be used to clone PER              
              genes by functional complementation.  Information from predicted               
              amino acid sequences of PER products together with that from                   
              biochemical analysis of per mutants should yield important insights            
              into the function of specific PER proteins and into the mechanisms             
              that operate in peroxisome biogenesis.                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              Virtually all eukaryotic cells harbor membrane-bound organelles                
              called peroxisomes.  They are the site of hydrogen peroxide-                   
              generating oxidative reactions in cells.  Peroxisomal matrix                   
              proteins catalyze several important metabolic pathways; the                    
              specific pathways vary depending on the organism and/or organ or               
              tissue.  In plants, peroxisomes are involved in photorespiration               
              and, during germination of fatty seeds, contain enzymes responsible            
              for the beta-oxidation of stored fatty acids to acetyl-CoA, which              
              enters the glyoxylate cycle to form succinate, the metabolic                   
              building block.  Glyoxylate cycle reactions may even occur in the              
              peroxisome, in which case the organelle is called a glyoxysome.                
              In animals, peroxisomal enzymes play an essential role in several              
              anabolic and catabolic pathways, particularly in lipid metabolism;             
              these include synthesis of plasmalogens (ether-linked membrane                 
              glycerolipids), oxidative degradation of very long chain fatty                 
              acids, and certain aspects of sterol and bile acid metabolism.  A              
              group of human genetic disorders, invariably fatal in infancy, are             
              due to the absence of peroxisomes.  Despite the universal                      
              importance of peroxisomes for eukaryotic organisms, very little is             
              known about their biogenesis.  They are not part of the exocytic /             
              endocytic system of the cell (including lysosomes, endoplasmic                 
              reticulum, and Golgi apparatus), and they are also distinctly                  
              different from mitochondria and chloroplasts, which have double                
              membrane boundaries and endogenous genomes and protein synthetic               
              machineries.  The P. pastoris system, developed in this laboratory,            
              offers the opportunity of approaching the peroxisomal biogenesis               
              problem from several different angles at once (biochemistry,                   
              genetics, and cell biology).  This work will shed important new                
              light on how peroxisomes are assembled in eukaryotic cells.
