Title       : The Assessment of the Needs of Free-Standing Museums for the Computerization of
               Collections Management and Related Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1992      
File        : a9118843

Award Number: 9118843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $472316             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Thomas wthomas@nybg.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Dr. W. Wayt Thomas is a Curator at the New York Botanical                 
              Garden, and he has organized an ambitious two-year planning                    
              activity involving a Consortium of eight of the largest free-                  
              standing (i.e., non-University, non-Federal) natural history                   
              museums and botanical gardens in the U.S.:  the American Museum                
              of Natural History (New York), the New York Botanical Garden, the              
              Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, the Carnegie Museum               
              of Natural History (Pittsburgh), the Missouri Botanical Gardens                
              (St. Louis), the Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History,                 
              the Bernice P. Bishop Museum of Natural History (Honolulu), and                
              the California Academy of Sciences (San Francisco).  The Field                 
              Museum of Natural History (Chicago) and the Smithsonian's Museum               
              of Natural History are ex officio members of the Consortium.  The              
              Consortium proposes to engage the Mitre Corporation as an                      
              independent consultant for analysis of the data management needs               
              in each of the eight member museums, and for recommendations                   
              concerning hardware architecture and approaches to system                      
              software.  These needs would include databases of specimens, and               
              institutions, and general interoperability with the biological                 
              research community.  The results of the needs assessment and the               
              recommendations for system design would then be used in future                 
              proposals for large-scale computing hardware.                                  
                   Each of the Consortium  museums has initiated creation of                 
              computer databases for their specimen holdings, and the research               
              community will increasingly expect access the these data in                    
              easiest possible way.  This collective planning activity will                  
              highlight common needs and solutions that could be shared among                
              institutions, thereby ending the tendency for the museums to                   
              diverge in their data management practices, and increasing the                 
              level of interoperability among the nation's biodiversity                      
              reference collections.  The creation of the Consortium and the                 
              results of this project will provide benefits to the entire                    
              biological research community by coordinating the management of                
              data used by diverse scientific disciplines.
