Title       : Support of the U.S. National Committee for the Committee on Data for Science and
               Technology (CODATA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1993     
File        : a9118880

Award Number: 9118880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Blanpied                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64890              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Uhlir   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 5984      OFFICE OF TRANS-REGIONAL AFFAI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
              The globalization of science is occurring in                                   
              parallel with a rapid expansion in the speed and                               
              sophistication of information and data handling                                
              technologies, and their use for scientific purposes.                           
              Developments in these areas permit the planning and                            
              execution of large scale scientific programs.  Such                            
              programs, in turn, frequently require sophisticated                            
              data handling and processing techniques.  In view of                           
              the multilateral character of many large scale                                 
              scientific programs, the handling, processing, and                             
              transmission of scientific data has a major                                    
              international enterprise in its own right, one that                            
              is vital to those large scale programs.                                        
                                                                                             
              The Committee on Data for Science and Technology                               
              (CODATA) is a non governmental, multilateral body,                             
              affiliated with the International Council of                                   
              Scientific Unions (ICSU), whose principal objective                            
              is to facilitate worldwide communication on problems                           
              related to scientific data.  Like other members of                             
              the ICSU family, CODATA is comprised of non                                    
              governmental National Member Organizations.  The                               
              National Academy of Sciences (NAS) fulfills that                               
              function in the United States.  In the past, NAS's                             
              request to support US participation in CODATA has                              
              been limited to payment of dues, shared jointly by                             
              NSF, NIST, and DOE.  The NAS, in order to upgrade US                           
              participation, established a U.S. National Committee                           
              (USNC) for CODATA similar to those that guide U.S.                             
              participation in the ICSU unions.  NSF is being                                
              asked to pay one-third of the US annual dues for                               
              CODATA and to provide support for the development of                           
              recommendations to ICSU concerning access to data                              
              and its role in the Commission on International                                
              Geosphere-Biosphere Program (IGBP).
