Title       : A Large-Format CCD Camera for Lowell Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1994     
File        : a9118457

Award Number: 9118457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. W. Van Citters                       
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deidre A. Hunter Deidre.Hunter@lowell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Millis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lowell Observatory
	      
	      Flagstaff, AZ  86001    928/774-3358

NSF Program : 1218      ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES & INSTRM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective is the acquisition of a large-format, ultraviolet-               
              sensitive CCD and an appropriate set of image quality filters that             
              will enhance and extend the imaging and spectroscopic capabilities             
              of the Lowell Observatory.  For direct imaging, the detector will              
              provide a field of view sixteen times that of the largest available            
              detector at a 1.07-m telescope in direct imaging mode.  At the                 
              Perkins 1.8-m telescope the field size will initially be increased             
              only slightly, but there will be an order-of-magnitude gain in UV              
              sensitivity; increased coverage will be achieved when a planned                
              focal reducer or Newtonian focus is implemented.                               
                                                                                             
              By virtue of its increased areal and spectral coverage, the new CCD            
              will allow Lowell Observatory staff and visitors to undertake                  
              research that cannot at present be attempted.  Among the scientific            
              goals are:  studying the blue stellar content and the interstellar             
              medium of galaxies, determining luminosity functions and dynamical             
              properties of open clusters in our own Galaxy, investigating                   
              properties of the interstellar medium by means of high-resolution              
              spectroscopy of early-type stars, investigating the large-scale                
              comatic and tail structure of comets using narrowband photometry,              
              enhancing the discovery rate of Earth-approaching asteroids and                
              assessing their hazard to Earth, and searching effectively for                 
              Kuiper belt objects.
