Title       : Underground Metabolism and Development: Polyacetylene Biosynthesis in Asteraceae
               Roots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1992  
File        : a9118208

Award Number: 9118208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hector E. Flores plantpath@psupen.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1145,
Abstract    :
              The studies proposed here focus on the physiology and biochemistry             
              of the polyacetylenes, fatty acid derivatives which are present                
              mainly in the roots of Asteraceae.  Polyacetylenes show a wide                 
              range of biological activities (nematicidal, fungicidal and                    
              antiviral), and may play an important role in protecting plant                 
              roots against challenge from soil pathogens.  By transformation                
              with Agrobacterium rhizogenes, we have obtained "hairy roots"                  
              cultures of five genera in the Asteraceae.  These fast growing                 
              roots have shown stable, long-term production of root                          
              polyacetylenes and are therefore an ideal experimental system.                 
              Using precursor label incorporation, HPLC and GC-MS analysis, and              
              cell-free assays, we propose to establish the pathway for                      
              polyacetylene biosynthesis in root cultures.  Fungal and nematodal             
              bioassays have been developed, and will be used to monitor the                 
              biological activity of the polyacetylenes produced in rootcultures.            
              The de novo formation of polyacetylenes in root cultures can be                
              induced by treatment with fungal elicitors.  This approach will be             
              used to identiy the rate-limiting enzymatic steps in polyacetylene             
              biosynthesis, and test the proposed involvement of lipoxygenase.               
              Although roots normally grow heterotrophically both in isolated                
              culture and "in planta", we have found that they can also be grown             
              photosynthetically and photoautotrophically.  We will also study               
              the quantitative and qualitative effects of photosynthesis and                 
              photoautotrophy on root polyacetylene patterns. ***//
