Title       : Gene Regulation in Glyoxysome Biogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1992     
File        : a9118120

Award Number: 9118120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Harada jjharada@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Glyoxysomes are specialized peroxisomes that contain enzymes                   
              critically required for the mobilization of lipids. To study                   
              processes involved in the biogenesis of the organelle, Dr. Harada              
              is investigating the regulation of genes encoding isocitrate                   
              lyase and malate synthase, two glyoxylate cycle enzymes that are               
              associated exclusively with glyoxysomes. The genes are regulated               
              developmentally; they are expressed in seedlings, developing                   
              seeds, senescent organs, and in pollen but not in non-senescent                
              organs of the mature plant. Moreover, regulation of the genes                  
              occurs primarily at the transcriptional level. The proposal's                  
              long term goal is to define the physiological signals that                     
              regulate these genes, and, therefore, control glyoxysome                       
              biogenesis. An accompanying objective is to determine whether a                
              common signal regulates these genes at different periods of the                
              plant life cycle. Two primary approaches are proposed to address               
              these issues. First, Dr. Harada will localize cis-acting elements              
              and identify the DNA binding proteins that interact with these                 
              elements to obtain a mechanistic understanding of the regulation               
              of the genes. Second, he will identify mutants altered in the                  
              expression of the genes to begin to define components of the                   
              pathway regulating the genes. He anticipates that these                        
              complementary studies ultimately will provide insight into the                 
              physiological cues that control glyoxysome biogenesis.
