Title       : Investigation of Nanoparticle Formation Using a Plasma Expansion Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1993      
File        : a9118100

Award Number: 9118100
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $644461             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joachim Heberlein jvrh@me.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. McMurry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jose' L Martins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Girshick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1492      EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              It is proposed an experimental and                                             
              theoretical study of nanoparticle                                              
              synthesis using a plasma process.                                              
              Silicon carbide particle synthesis                                             
              will be studied as a model of                                                  
              systems which involve chemical                                                 
              nucleation of microcrystals.  The                                              
              experimental apparatus will consist                                            
              of a thermal plasma reactor into                                               
              which reactants are injected and                                               
              then expanded through a converging                                             
              nozzle.  Particles will nucleate in                                            
              the nozzle, and then will exit to a                                            
              free expansion so that coagulation                                             
              is suppressed.  The advantages of                                              
              this approach are that (1) the                                                 
              process is capable of generating                                               
              nanosize particles with narrow size                                            
              distributions; (2) the nozzle flow                                             
              environment can be                                                             
              well-characterized; (3) key process                                            
              variables such as cooling rates can                                            
              be controlled; and (4) the                                                     
              processcan be scaled for high-rate                                             
              industrial production.  A                                                      
              hypersonicimpactor located                                                     
              immediately downstream of the nozzle                                           
              will be used to collect particles as                                           
              small as 5 nm.  Particles will be                                              
              characterized by techniques such as                                            
              scanning tunneling microscopy and                                              
              high resolution transmission                                                   
              electron microscopy.  A theoretical                                            
              model will be developed which                                                  
              corresponds to the experimental                                                
              conditions, and which combines                                                 
              first-principles molecular dynamics                                            
              calculations of cluster properties                                             
              with a dynamic model for particle                                              
              nucleation and growth.  The                                                    
              knowledge and technology base will                                             
              be develop for nanoparticle                                                    
              synthesis in a plasma reaction, with                                           
              a broad range of applications for                                              
              advanced materials.
