Title       : Circadian System of Diurnal Rodents: Integrated Physiological/Behavioral
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1993     
File        : a9118467

Award Number: 9118467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia J. DeCoursey decoursey@biol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Daily biological timekeeping, best reflected in the perception of              
              lay persons in terms of human "jet-lag" or shift-work maladies, is             
              regulated by a composite interaction of neural pacemaker (SCN) and             
              environmental synchronizing agents. The pacemaker autonomously                 
              drives dependent biochemical, physiological and behavioral                     
              functions with free-running circadian period under constant                    
              environmental conditions close to but not exactly 24-hours, while              
              the environmental entraining or synchronizing agent corrects phase             
              and frequency of the pacemaker to local time. Much mammalian                   
              circadian research, particularly the physiological aspect, has been            
              limited to laboratory rats and golden hamsters. In an attempt to               
              distinguish differences between the circadian "wiring" of  diurnal             
              mammals and better known nocturnal mammals, the study will examine             
              selected key issues for three diurnal species in successive stages             
              of circadian function including sensory input from the environment             
              for entertainment, physiological properties of the SCN rhythm                  
              generator, and behavioral output.                                              
                                                                                             
              Physiological and behavioral circadian output measurements will be             
              employed in these three diurnal rodents to clarify circadian                   
              regulation in day-active mammals. The antelope ground squirrel, 13-            
              lined ground squirrel, and eastern chipmunk were chosen as model               
              species to minimize operational problems that have long hindered               
              progress of research on circadian behavioral function in diurnal               
              mammals, and also to assess circadian variation span in                        
              ecologically widely divergent desert, prairie, and forest species.             
              Issues will include the light-sampling process for entrainment in              
              lab and field, the role of environmental temperature as well as                
              cyclic body temperature in circadian function, and the delineation             
              of a "light-mimicking" phase response curve system (PRC) by use of             
              intraventricular injection of carbachol; the distribution of key               
              SCN neuropepetides (NP-II, VIP, SS, NPY) will be determined by                 
              immunocytochemical methods plus computerized image processing for              
              quantitative determination of co-localized immunoreactivity.                   
              Finally, in vitro and in vivo recording of SCN rhythmic output                 
              relative to other brain areas will also be investigated. The data              
              may serve as a useful model for better understanding the                       
              functioning of diurnal circadian systems of mammals, and more                  
              generally for envisioning the means by which the relatively simple             
              neuronal circuitry of the SCN is able to control contrasting                   
              nocturnal and diurnal circadian behavior modes.
