Title       : The Proterozoic Bushveld Catastrophe, South Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1994   
File        : a9118578

Award Number: 9118578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Snyder                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfgang E. Elston   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research is focused on (1) unique chemistry and quench                    
              textures of Rooiberg Felsite, the earliest member of the giant                 
              Bushveld Complex.  (2) progressive recrystallization (T>1,200oC)               
              of intensely strained quartzose sediments below the Rooiberg                   
              Felsite into a network of tridymite needles and (3) structure and              
              evolution of the Bushveld-Vredefort system.  Present data suggest              
              that multiple impacts of a disintegrating asteroid or comet caused             
              the Bushveld-Vredefort catastrophe; endogenic alternatives are                 
              possible but involve novel and unverified processes.  Vredefort                
              rocks furnish evidence for shock in the form of planar features in             
              quartz, shatter cones, pseudotachylite, coesite and stishovite.                
              Rocks in equivalent structural positions are not exposed in the                
              Bushveld Complex; elsewhere, recrystallization and incipient                   
              melting have destroyed earlier textures and minerals.                          
              Nevertheless, a search for shock features will continue in                     
              favorable localities, other field work will be carried out, and                
              detailed petrologic and geochemical studies will be made.  This                
              study has the potential to completely change long standing ideas               
              as to the origin of the world's largest layered mafic complex and              
              its very extensive ore deposits.
