Title       : Molecular Activation of Plant Cells by Rhizobium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1992     
File        : a9118158

Award Number: 9118158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Jacobs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                Cell cycle regulation will be studied in the                                
              roots of legumes at various intervals after infection with                     
              Rhizobium. Early stages of Rhizobium infection are followed by                 
              either an activation or derepression of mitotic activity in                    
              cortical cells of the root and culminate in the formation of the               
              root nodule, the site of nitrogen fixation in the plant/bacterial              
              symbiosis. The proposed experiments will focus on changes in the               
              expression, abundance and activity of the cell-cycle regulators,               
              p34cdc2 and B-type cyclin in cortical cells of pea roots after                 
              infection. The working hypothesis is that p34cdc2 or cyclin is                 
              limiting in the quiescent plant cells. Experiments are also                    
              directed toward the study of a protein kinase that appears to                  
              respond to extracellular signals such as those that are involved in            
              the early transduction events of infection by Rhizobium.                       
                                                                                             
              Changes in the regulation of mitotic activity of otherwise                     
              terminally-differentiated cells in roots of the garden pea will be             
              assessed after infection with the nitrogen-fixing bacterium,                   
              Rhizobium. During the earliest phases of root nodule formation,                
              there is a significant increase in mitotic activity in what had                
              been quiescent cells. The regulatory aspects of nodule formation               
              are not known. Experiments in this project are directed toward                 
              discerning the factors that limit mitotic activity in                          
              differentiated cells under normal conditions, through a                        
              biochemical, molecular and immunological analysis of known                     
              activators of cell cycle progression during and after the infection            
              process. This research problem is extremely important in plant                 
              biology, because insight into the signal transduction events that              
              result in changes in the patterns or rates of cell division are                
              central to almost all aspects of plant growth and development.
