Title       : A New Voltammetric Strategy for Investigating Reactive Iron-Sulfur Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1993      
File        : a9118772

Award Number: 9118772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fraser Armstrong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The aim of this study is to quantify complex reactivities of Fe-S              
              clusters in proteins.  These clusters perform numerous, diverse                
              functions in nature.  A novel methodology will be used, exploiting             
              the unmediated voltammetry displayed by ferredoxins (small proteins            
              containing one or two clusters) at graphite electrodes in the                  
              presence of aminocyclitols.  Ferredoxins co-adsorb with                        
              aminocyclitols forming electroactive films.  This makes possible               
              highly economical, detailed studies involving film transfer between            
              electrolytes containing reagents that react with Fe-S clusters.                
              Cluster oxidation levels are controlled, and reactions are                     
              monitored via voltammetric signals assigned to specific states by              
              EPR and MCD spectroscopy.  Some longstanding problems of studying              
              reactions of Fe-S clusters - very low reduction potentials, poor               
              spectroscopic signatures, instability and lability - are overcome.             
              Dr. Armstrong will characterize an unusual property of (3Fe-4S)                
              clusters, the ability to undergo reversible, multiple electron and             
              proton uptake.  This property represents a dramatic departure from             
              the current belief that the protein environment permits only very              
              conservative changes in cluster oxidation level.  He will examine              
              the equilibria and kinetics of reversible metal ion uptake by (3               
              Fe-4S) to give (M3Fe-4S) in various proteins.  The likely existence            
              of clusters containing such ions as Zn will be assessed.  He will              
              compare the redox and ligand binding properties of various (M3Fe-              
              4S) clusters.  He will study the course of cluster assembly in                 
              proteins, from trace levels of Fe and S, and examine the fidelity              
              of this process in the presence of competing ions such as Zn.                  
              %%%                                                                            
              This study, exploring the characteristics of this important class              
              of compounds, will help to enlarge our understanding of oxidation              
              -reduction and electron transfer in life processes.
