Title       : Systematics of an Ancient North American Lineage of Robinieae (Leguminosae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1991  
File        : a9118785

Award Number: 9118785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew T. Lavin mlavin@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this study is the revision of the fifteen species             
              currently referred to Lennea, Hybosema, Gliricidia, and                        
              Yucaratonia.  This will stabilize the generic classification of                
              this portion of the tribe Robinieae and better estimate the                    
              phylogenetic position of these species within it.  These species               
              form a distinctive element of the dry tropical forests in North                
              America; however, two species occur in tropical rain forest and one            
              occurs in South America.  Economic uses of these species are many              
              and include construction materials from the wood, livestock fodder             
              from the copious leaf production, and "living" fences around                   
              agricultural fields and private dwellings.  The culmination of this            
              study will be a monograph summarizing the classification,                      
              phylogeny, geographic distribution, and economic value of each                 
              species.  An analysis of taxonomically informative restriction site            
              mutations from the chloroplast genome will be combined with                    
              classical taxonomic methods.  Further assessing the phylogenetic               
              position of these species in the tribe Robinieae is important                  
              because an increased understanding of the phylogenetic                         
              relationships within Robinieae will have a bearing on our knowledge            
              of the origins and biogeography of the North American tropical                 
              flora.  Robinieae is one of the largest papilionoid tribes well                
              represented in tropical and subtropical North America.  Current                
              evidence suggests it may have been derived from Asiatic ancestors              
              during the Paleocene or Eocene rather than from South American                 
              ancestors in more recent times.  Such phylogenetic studies of other            
              plant groups centered in the North American tropics will be                    
              essential for understanding the origins of this biota.
