Title       : Structure/Function in Ligand-Activated Calcium Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1995       
File        : a9118267

Award Number: 9118267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Owen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thomas Jefferson Univ
	      1020 Locust Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19107    215/503-6976

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Transient shifts in the intracellular calcium concentration               
              can initiate a variety of developmental and physiological changes              
              in many nonexcitable cell types. This project is centered on the               
              involvement of calcium channels in lymphocyte and platelet                     
              activation. The calcium influx portion of the signal will be                   
              analyzed using a fluorescent probe of intracellualr calcium                    
              concentration. Experiments will test the hypothesis that calcium               
              movement is facilitated by a ligand-activated single-file channel,             
              with multiple calcium binding sites providing the specificity, and             
              that control of the plateau height in the cell is separate from the            
              number of channels that are activated initially to create the                  
              signal. Temperature dependence will show whether the influx is                 
              relatively independent of membrane fluidity, and competition                   
              between cations may provide evidence for multiple calcium binding              
              sites in the ion channel. An extension of Indo-1 methodology will              
              be used, employing whole spectra instead of only two fluorescence              
              emission wavelengths. This approach will extend the applicability              
              of the dye to multiple cations.                                                
                                                                                             
              Ionic movement across the plasma membrane has been attributed as               
              being causal in the activation of lymphocytes and platelets.                   
              Changes in the cytosolic level of calcium have been determined to              
              be essential to the activation of these cells. This project focuses            
              on the role of the class of membrane proteins known as channels in             
              the facilitated diffusion of calcium ions into these cells during              
              activation. The experiments will employ calcium-indicator dyes,                
              whose changes in fluorescence emission report on small and rapid               
              changes in the free concentration of calcium after the channels                
              open during cell activation. The major aim of this project is                  
              directed toward the characterization of the channels responsible               
              for the sustained increase in cytosolic calcium activity that, in              
              turn, underlies early stages of lymphocyte and platelet activation.
