Title       : Clathrin Light Chain Structure and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1993  
File        : a9118638

Award Number: 9118638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frances M. Brodsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Clathrin-coated vesicles are surrounded by a polyhedral lattice              
              of polymerized clathrin, composed of a 180 KD heavy chain and two              
              light chain subunits. LCa and LCb (25-29 KD).  The clathrin lattice            
              is attached to the vesicle membrane by interaction with adaptor                
              molecules, which sequester receptors with particular motifs in                 
              their cytoplasmic domains, allowing them to be sorted from other               
              proteins in the membrane.  The clathrin heavy chain is known to                
              provide the backbone for the clathrin lattice.  While functions for            
              the clathrin light chains have not yet been completely established,            
              it is known that they contain regulatory domains that influence the            
              recruitment, assembly and disassembly of clathrin within the cell.             
              All cell types express both forms of clathrin light chain and in               
              most cells the LCa form is dominant.  In contrast, cells with a                
              regulated secretory pathway contain more LCb than LCa, suggesting              
              that LCb may play a role in the specialized clathrin functions in              
              these cells.  The proposed studies investigate potential functional            
              differences between the LCa and LCb light chains, using PC12                   
              secretory cells as a model system.  A method for changing ratios               
              of clathrin light chains within transfected PC12 cells has been                
              established and the effect of this manipulation of light chain                 
              levels on secretory and endocytic processes will be determined.                
              A distinguishing feature of the LCb light chain is its ability to              
              be phosphorylated by a casein kinase, at a site which is not                   
              present in the LCa sequence.  The role of phosphorylation in                   
              clathrin function in secretory cells and in cells exposed to growth            
              factors and hormones which stimulate kinase activity will be                   
              investigated.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              In all cell types, clathrin-coated vesicles are responsible for                
              receptor-mediated endocytosis at the plasma membrane and for the               
              receptor-mediated sorting of lysosomal enzymes from trans-Golgi                
              membranes to a pre-lysosomal compartment.  In cells with a                     
              regulated secretory pathway, clathrin-coated membranes are involved            
              in the formation of secretory granules and in the rapid uptake of              
              plasma membrane following degranulation.  Thus, in addition to                 
              their constitutive functions of bringing nutrients into the cell               
              and maintaining the degradative pathway of the cell, clathrin-                 
              coated vesicles play an important role in the secretion and                    
              mechanism of action of hormones.  These studies will provide                   
              insight into functional differences between the clathrin light                 
              chains and how they influence clathrin-mediated membrane traffic               
              during secretion and hormonal stimulation.
