Title       : Targeting of Cyclic GMP-Dependent Protein Kinase in Smooth Muscle Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1994       
File        : a9118405

Award Number: 9118405
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stacia A. Sower                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Lincoln lincoln@vh.path.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The cells of eukaryotic organisms are organized to perform                     
              specialized functions.  For example, cells lining the stomach wall             
              are specialized to secrete gastric acid while cells that occupy the            
              middle layer of blood vessels are specialized to contract and                  
              relax, thereby closing and opening the vessel.  It is now known                
              that one of the major biochemical mechanisms for controlling the               
              activity of the enzymes that regulate these specialized activities             
              is a process called protein phosphorylation.  Protein                          
              phosphorylation involves one type of enzyme, called a protein                  
              kinase,  modifying another type of protein, called a substrate, by             
              attaching phosphate groups to its backbone structure.  Once the                
              substrate accepts the phosphate group, it is said to be                        
              phosphorylated and its activity or function changes.  The newly                
              phosphorylated protein can then change the activity of the cell.               
              In the case of the cells that regulate the blood vessel tone (these            
              are called smooth muscle cells), the protein kinase must act                   
              quickly to  phosphorylate substrates so that blood flow can be                 
              adjusted rapidly.  It is not known how protein kinases can act so              
              quickly in the smooth muscle cell, however.  This proposal will                
              test one hypothesis on how protein kinases in smooth muscle cells              
              rapidly phosphorylate proteins.  This hypothesis is called                     
              "targeting" which means simply that the protein kinase and the                 
              substrate are localized very near each other so that the process               
              may occur rapidly and efficiently.  We will utilize the techniques             
              of modern recombinant DNA technology and confocal laser scanning               
              microscopy (CLSM) to study how protein kinases situate themselves              
              in the cell so that they can be close by the substrate which they              
              phosphorylate.  This hypothesis is a new idea on how cells are                 
              structured, and challenges previous notions that the cell is merely            
              a "bag of enzymes" which "swim around" in search of substrate                  
              molecules.  The results of this study will shed light on the                   
              architecture of living cells and will hopefully provide a basis for            
              studying cellular events other than phosphorylation.
