Title       : Tissue-Specific Expression and Subcellular Localization of Maize
               Beta-Glucosidase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1992      
File        : a9118770

Award Number: 9118770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60066              (Estimated)
Investigator: Asim Esen aevatan@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Beta-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.21) catalyses the hydrolysis of aryl-               
              and alkaly-beta-D-glucosides, as well as cellobiose.  In maize, the            
              enzyme is encoded by a highly polymorphic locus, Glu1.  The main               
              objectives of the proposed research are to clone and characterize              
              the gene coding for the maize beta-glucosidase enzyme; to deduce               
              the amino acid sequence of the enzyme from the sequence of its                 
              gene; to determine in what organs and tissues this enzyme is found;            
              to determine where in the cell this enzyme is found, and to                    
              determine the natural substrates of the enzyme.  The gene will be              
              cloned into a multipurpose expression vector; and the desired                  
              recombinant clones will be indentified by immunoscreening.  The                
              natural substrates will be determined by extracting beta-glucosides            
              with alcohol from maize tissues and testing whether the extracts               
              contain a substance which will competitively inhibit beta-                     
              glucosidase hydrolysis of commonly used artificial substrates                  
              (e.g., p-nitrophenol-beta-D-glucopyranoside) which are readily                 
              hydrolyzed by beta-glucosidase to produce glucose.  Determining in             
              which tissues the enzyme is found will be done by infusing tissue              
              sections with chromogenic beta-glucosides (e.g., X-glu and 6-bromo-            
              2-naphthyl beta-glucoside), which produce colored precipitates when            
              cleaved by beta-glucosidase.  The location of the color can then               
              be observed under the light microscope.  Subcellular localization              
              will be done using immunocytochemical techniques.                              
                                                                                             
              The results of the proposed research will further knowledge of the             
              structure, location, function, and regulation of plant beta-                   
              glucosidases; they will contribute to studies directed at finding              
              the molecular basis for subcellular targeting and will aid in the              
              development of markers which would be useful in maize breeding.
