Title       : Nuclear Permeability in Proliferating and Growth Arrested Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1995      
File        : a9118410

Award Number: 9118410
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David G. Capco                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl M. Feldherr feldheer@anatomy.med.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9119,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 This laboratory recently found that the relative rate of signal-            
              mediated transport through the nuclear pores, as well as the                   
              functional size of the transport channel, decrease significantly               
              when proliferating 3T3 cells enter a period of growth arrest.  To              
              better understand the role of nuclear envelope permeability in                 
              regulating cellular activity, experiments are proposed to determine            
              1) if the growth-related effects on transport are limited to                   
              nonspecific changes (e.g., functional pore size), or whether the               
              specificity for different targeting signals is also affected, 2)               
              whether the size restrictions that limit nuclear uptake in growth              
              arrested cells also apply to nuclear efflux, 3) if the observed                
              permeability changes are due to alterations in cell shape,                     
              modifications in the composition of the pore glycoproteins, or                 
              variations in the activity of cytoplasmic transport factors, and               
              4) if growth factors are involved in the modulation of signal-                 
              mediated nuclear transport.  In order to analyze nuclear transport,            
              cultured cells will be injected with either various size colloidal             
              gold particles coated with proteins containing nuclear localization            
              signals, or fluorescent-labeled BSA conjugated with different                  
              targeting sequences.  Uptake into the nucleus will be analyzed by              
              electron or fluorescent microscopy.                                            
                                                                                             
              Communication and protein movement between the nucleus and the                 
              cytoplasm of an interphase eukaryotic cell is crucial to the cell's            
              ability to regulate such fundamental cellular processes as protein             
              synthesis,  gene expression, and cell cycle.  Movement of proteins             
              and nucleic acids back and forth across the nuclear envelope is                
              known to take place at discrete specialized structures called                  
              nuclear pores.  At least some materials move specifically through              
              pores via a system of "targeting sequences" and receptors which                
              recognize and facilitate such movement, although the detailed                  
              mechanism(s) by which these transport phenomena occur remain                   
              unknown.  This project will contribute significantly to                        
              understanding of the complex nature of nuclear targeting.
