Title       : Phosphorus, Carbon, and Nitrogen Dynamics in Perturbed Neotropical Dry Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1995   
File        : a9118854

Award Number: 9118854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $764348             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Sanford   (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Parton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victor J. Jaramillo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Boone Kauffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Tropical dry forests are the most endangered tropical ecosystem.               
              They are also poorly understood, particularly with regard to                   
              ecosystem structure, site productivity, nutrient cycling, and                  
              resilience following fire.  This study will investigate                        
              biogeochemical mechanisms in intact, and cut and burn tropical dry             
              forests at Chamela Biological Station, Mexico.  The research will              
              focus on pools, flows and losses of phosphorus, nitrogen and                   
              carbon, but with particular emphasis on phosphorus because of the              
              distinctive role of phosphorus as the limiting element for plant               
              growth in this system.  The principal investigators hypothesize                
              that: (1) a pattern of pulsed nutrient release occurs in soils                 
              under intact forest and that this pattern is substantially altered             
              following fire, (2) soil organic reactions mediated by plant and               
              microbial biological activity are fundamental for maintaining                  
              phosphorus availability in this system, (3) deforestation and fire             
              cause substantial, and nearly irreversible net losses of                       
              phosphorus, nitrogen, and carbon from the system, and (4) repeated             
              burning and/or very severe fires (high biomass consumption) will               
              result in declining long-term site productivity.  The researchers              
              will quantify nutrient dynamics and experimentally manipulate both             
              intact forest and fire severity to examine the mechanisms that                 
              control cycling and losses of these elements.  Results of these                
              studies will be used to validate and further develop simulation                
              models.  These models will be used in synthesis work, to examine               
              long-term patterns of forest productivity, and to estimate the                 
              effect of fire caused phosphorus, nitrogen and carbon losses from              
              this system.  The principle investigators are well-qualified to do             
              this work and the facilities are excellent.
