Title       : Small Grants for Exploratory Research: Rapid Heat Transfer Coefficient
               Measurement in a Computer Integrated Manufacturing Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1990       
File        : a9014814

Award Number: 9014814
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31680              (Estimated)
Investigator: John K. Eaton eaton@sierra  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              Determination of heat transfer coefficients for manufactured                   
              objects subjected to a flow field is an important engineering                  
              consideration for stress analysis and useful life prediction.                  
                                                                                             
              A new measurement technique to obtain pointwise heat transfer                  
              coefficients over complex geometric objects is proposed.  The                  
              method represents an alternative procedure to the traditional                  
              and time-consuming experimental technique which uses                           
              distributed heaters and temperature transducers implanted in a                 
              design prototype of a manufactured object to set and measure                   
              the thermal field at the surface of the object.  The new                       
              method has the potential to provide rapid determination of the                 
              heat transfer to, and temperature distribution on engineering                  
              devices, subjected to various flow regimes without the need                    
              for expensive and time-consuming instrumentation of the                        
              devices.  It is proposed as an integral step in a Computer                     
              Integrated Manufacturing scheme based on Computer-Aided-Design                 
              (CAD) of prototype engineering stems.                                          
                                                                                             
              The new method involves existing measurement tools and/or                      
              technology (CAD, multiple-event liquid crystals, a robotically                 
              controlled hot-air jet for the application of surface                          
              temperatures, and numerical thermal regime modeling), and                      
              these tools are applied iteratively to obtain the heat                         
              transfer coefficients.  In sequence:  1) a prototype                           
              engineering object is designed and manufactured via CAD;  2)                   
              the object is coated with liquid crystals so that optical                      
              measurements of surface temperature may be obtained;  3) the                   
              object is "painted" with a prescribed temperature distribution                 
              using the robotically-controlled hot jet;  4) the object is                    
              subjected to a flow field;  5) the new surface temperature                     
              distribution is determined optically;  6) a numerical model is                 
              used to calculate the surface temperatures using an estimated                  
              (best guess) distribution for the surface heat transfer                        
              coefficients;  7) if the numerical model predicts the same                     
              temperature distribution as that measured, then the estimated                  
              heat transfer distribution is correct.  If not, the sequence                   
              returns to step 3, and finally, after several iterations, the                  
              correct distribution of heat transfer coefficients over the                    
              object is obtained.
