Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Macromolecular Modeling of Polymeric
               Stabilization of Colloidal Dispersions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1991       
File        : a9014836

Award Number: 9014836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7620               (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne L. Mattice wlm@polymer.uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1773,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Wayne Mattice of the University of Akron and Dr. Donald                        
              Napper of the University of Sidney.  Polymer colloids are                      
              important industrial materials. They must be stabilized                        
              against coagulation to be effective. Steric stabilization,                     
              using block copolymers, is one means of suppressing coagu-                     
              lation. If the block copolymer is to be effective in steric                    
              stabilization, the anchoring block must bind tightly to the                    
              colloidal particle. One objective of this collaboration is to                  
              develop the new technology of Macromolecular Modeling so that                  
              it can provide insight into the local structure of the                         
              anchoring block in the immediate vicinity of the colloidal                     
              particle. An additional requirement for a block copolymer                      
              that will be effective in steric stabilization is that the                     
              stabilizing block must interact repulsively with both the                      
              anchoring block and the colloidal particle, and interact                       
              attractively with the dispersion medium (solvent). The second                  
              objective of the collaboration is to develop Macromolecular                    
              Modeling of the structure in the immediate vicinity of the                     
              junction between the anchoring block and the stabilizing                       
              block. It is in the vicinity of the junction that the                          
              interaction of the copolymer with the solvent changes from                     
              repulsive to attractive.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The project represents excellent collaboration between Dr.                     
              Napper, with his broad knowledge of the properties of                          
              sterically stabilized polymer colloids and Dr. Mattice's                       
              expertise in block polymers. The research represents a                         
              coordinated approach to make an important contribution to                      
              improved understanding of the interaction of anchoring and                     
              stabilizing blocks against coagulation in polymer colloids,                    
              an important industrial material.
