Title       : U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Population Dynamics and Ecological Stability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1991      
File        : a9014938

Award Number: 9014938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip H. Crowley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1121,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in population                   
              biology and ecology between Dr. Philip Crowley, University of                  
              Kentucky, and Dr. J.H. Lawton, Center for Population Biology,                  
              Imperial College at Silwood Park, Ascot, Berkshire, England.                   
              The proposed study will focus on two areas:                                    
              l)  the possible tendency for the abundances of individual                     
              populations or of groups of populations to stabilize, and on                   
              how best to detect, measure and conceptualize this stabiliza-                  
              tion process, and 2) the possibility that being sufficiently                   
              spread out in space or fragmented into partially connected                     
              sub-populations can reduce population variability and the risk                 
              of extinction.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The proposed projects represent attempts to facilitate the                     
              convergence of theory and data concerning the stability and                    
              persistence of natural populations.  Among the specific                        
              objectives of each project are:                                                
              1) Density-Dependence and Stability: to devise and improve                     
              statistically defensible and sensitive techniques for                          
              detecting density-dependence in density sequences for                          
              individual populations and 2) Metapopulation Stability and                     
              Persistence: to consider models of populations that consist                    
              of quasi-independent parts weakly linked by dispersal and                      
              buffeted by moderate environmental fluctuations and to                         
              conduct laboratory tests of the models' predictions.  The                      
              issues addressed in the proposed research are of fundamental                   
              importance in population and community ecology.  Though                        
              difficult to document empirically, density dependence is                       
              central to our understanding of how populations are regulated.                 
              Moreover, understanding persistence and measuring stability                    
              are becoming increasingly critical in an era of human-induced                  
              ecological stress and global climatic change. The Center for                   
              Population Biology at Silwood Park provides an outstanding                     
              environment for collaborative research in population dynamics.                 
              The expertise of Dr. Crowley and his British collaborators is                  
              complementary, and should serve to enhance the proposed                        
              research.
