Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperation on Direct Measurements of ResonanceStrengths Associated
               with Low Temperature Hydrogen Burning for Nuclei Near Mass 21
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1991     
File        : a9014622

Award Number: 9014622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8595               (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert J. Howard Albert.Howard@Mail.Trincoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity College
	      300 Summit Street
	      Hartford, CT  061063100    203/527-3151

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1230,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Albert J. Howard, Jr., of                        
              Trinity College, Connecticut, for a three month visit to                       
              Germany to collaborate with Claus Rolfs and his group at the                   
              Institute for Nuclear Physics of the University of Muenster.                   
              They will work jointly on several projects of mutual interest                  
              in nuclear astrophysics.  Professor Howard brings substantial                  
              experience in low energy nuclear physics experimentation;                      
              Professor Rolfs, too, is heavily involved in experimental                      
              research in complementary fields of nuclear astrophysics.                      
              They will investigate the role of low-temperature hydrogen                     
              burning in the creation of the elements in the vicinity of the                 
              Neon/Sodium and Magnesium/Aluminum nucleosynthetic cycles.                     
              Professor Howard will participate in established experimental                  
              programs currently ongoing in the German laboratories                          
              directed by Professor Rolfs in Muenster and Bochum.  This                      
              will involve direct measurements of individual resonance                       
              strengths associated with the (p,gamma) reaction on pertinent                  
              nuclei.  Such measurements can readily be made at the world-                   
              class facilities in the Bochum-Muenster area; a specialized                    
              gamma ray detector has just been developed there that will                     
              provide improved sensitivity for resonance studies of the                      
              type proposed.  Where the size of the Coulomb barrier                          
              prohibits or impedes direct measurement, Professor Howard                      
              will contribute his expertise in indirect determination                        
              involving measurements of angular distributions to obtain                      
              single-particle transfer strengths.                                            
                                                                                             
              During the past decade, it has become increasingly clear that                  
              low-temperature hydrogen burning may play an important role                    
              during a final stage of stellar nucleosynthesis.  This                         
              possibility emerges from a synthesis of observations involving                 
              meteoritic chronology, gamma-ray astronomy, and low-energy                     
              proton resonance strengths associated with the Aluminum                        
              nucleochronometer.  It now becomes important to determine the                  
              reaction rates for other critical reactions associated with                    
              this and nearby related processing cycles.  The proposed                       
              measurements will provide information crucial to the                           
              determination of the viability of this process for synthesis                   
              of nuclei in the atomic mass 20-30 region.  In particular,                     
              the results may shed light on the possibility that the final                   
              reprocessing of the elements occurred prior to the formation                   
              of the solar system.
