Title       : SGER: Distributed Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifiers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1990       
File        : a9014166

Award Number: 9014166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49834              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harish R. Sunak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              To date the Erbium Doped Fiber Amplifiers                                      
              (EDFAs) which have been used in lightwave                                      
              communications systems can be termed as                                        
              "lumped" (EDFA) amplifiers.  This is                                           
              because several tens of dBs of gain is                                         
              obtained in fiber lengths <50 m.  It is                                        
              evident that the signal experiences large                                      
              excursions in amplitude, which can cause                                       
              significant interchannel interference in a                                     
              WDM system.  What is needed is a                                               
              distributed amplification over the whole                                       
              length of the fiber, so that the gain per                                      
              unit length just cancels the intrinsic                                         
              fiber attenuation.  This will allow the                                        
              signal to be maintained at a high level                                        
              throughout the system, while reducing the                                      
              Amplified Spontaneous Emission (ASE) and                                       
              thus resulting in a higher Signal-to-Noise                                     
              Ratio (SNR) for the system.  The first, and                                    
              a somewhat preliminary, report of such                                         
              Distributed EDFAs (or DEDFA) was presented                                     
                                                                                             
              recently by a team at AT&T Bell Labs).                                         
              They showed that fibers can indeed be made                                     
              with the controlled, very low erbium doping                                    
              levels, 10-100 parts per billion (ppb)                                         
              averaged over the core, required for such                                      
              distributed amplification.  Further no                                         
              significant impurities or other defects are                                    
              introduced into the fiber, and the                                             
              environmental added losses, due to                                             
              radiation, will not impede their use.                                          
              Due to the importance of the idea of                                           
              DEDFAs, the theoretical study in this                                          
              proposal will aim at two part: (i)                                             
              optimizing the design of the DEDfa and (ii)                                    
              analyzing its performance in lightwave                                         
              communication systems, both direct-                                            
              detection and coherent-detection, so as to                                     
              determine the ultimate system that can be                                      
              built, with trade-offs involved.
