Title       : Support for Young Scientists' Summer Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1992       
File        : a9014959

Award Number: 9014959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Blanpied                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81704              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan McDonald 420-9225@mcimail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Acad of Arts and Sci
	      136 Irving Street
	      Cambridge, MA  021381929    /   -

NSF Program : 5931      INTERNATIONAL INFO & ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510205   International Economic Cooperation      
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The American Academy of Arts and Sciences in Cambridge, Mas-                   
              sachusetts, will support seven U.S. graduate students who have                 
              been accepted in the Young Scientists' Program at the International            
              Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Vienna, Austria,             
              during the summer of 1990.  IIASA is a non-governmental, multi-                
              lateral research organization whose research is supported by                   
              national member organizations (NMOs) from 16 countries, including              
              the United States, Canada, Japan, the Soviet Union, and most major             
              Eastern and Western European countries.  The U.S. NMO is comprised             
              of approximately 20 organizations and is chaired by the American               
              Academy.  IIASA's research programs deal with the behavior of                  
              large scale systems and include projects in environmental science,             
              population and demography, and economic change.  The Young                     
              Scientists' Program allows graduate students from member countries             
              to spend a summer at IIASA, working in the ongoing research                    
              projects of permanent and visiting senior scientists.  A multi-                
              lateral IIASA committee selects Young Scientists on the basis of               
              applications forwarded by the respective NMOs, paying particular               
              attention to the likelihood that candidates can make substantial               
              contributions to the research conducted at the Institute.  Each                
              NMO then seeks support for the candidates from its country who                 
              have been selected by IIASA.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Current political and economic changes are having important                    
              effects on the conduct of science and engineering research in                  
              Europe and are almost certain to influence future U.S. participation           
              in European research activities.  Of particular interest are: a)               
              the movement toward multilateral research as exemplified by                    
              European Community programs and renewed interest in existing                   
              multinational centers such as IIASA; b) the opening of Eastern                 
              Europe which is resulting in increased mobility for scientists                 
              from those countries and is facilitating access to their research              
              sites on the part of Western investigators; and c) acknowledgment              
              by Eastern European countries of the urgent need for research                  
              related to their severe environmental problems.  In view of the                
              rapidly changing European research context, it is important for                
              young U.S. investigators to gain working experience in Europe                  
              early in their careers and to meet and interact with their                     
              European peers with the expectation that life-long professional                
              bonds can ensue.                                                               
                                                                                             
              NSF's support for U.S. participation in the IIASA Young Scientists'            
              Program provides a cost-effective investment in the future,                    
              internationally-oriented careers of an outstanding group of U.S.               
              graduate students by: a) giving them working experience in an                  
              important multilateral research organization; b) providing                     
              opportunities for interactions on a sustained basis with senior                
              scientists and students from all over Europe; and c) involving                 
              them in critically important areas of research, such as environme-             
              ntal science and the economic restructuring of Eastern Europe and              
              the Soviet Union.
