Title       : Changing Values in Pesticide Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1991      
File        : a9014411

Award Number: 9014411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Pimentel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh Lehman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates and evaluates rationales for the use of              
              pesticide technology in the United States.  On the one hand,                   
              pesticides are regarded as valuable tools in food production and               
              in the protection of public heath, yet on the other hand, pesticide            
              use has given rise to serious concerns relating to both public                 
              health and the condition of the environment.  In light of these                
              concerns, people are calling for a reassessment of the risks and               
              benefits of pesticide use.  Surveys indicate the possibility of a              
              significant shift in public values, with demands for cheap and                 
              cosmetically appealing food conflicting with demands for no                    
              pesticides.  To evaluate the merits of these apparent conflicts,               
              it is necessary to obtain factual information from a wide range of             
              sources and to reassess the value judgments forming the basis for              
              policy decisions.  This study will attempt to obtain and integrate             
              information on fourteen diverse topics, ranging from the extent and            
              economic benefits of pesticide use to the environmental and social             
              costs of pesticides.  Knowledgeable scientists and scholars will               
              collect, assess, evaluate and summarize the latest scientific                  
              information about pesticide use.  They will consider how                       
              conflicting moral objectives can or should be reconciled; what role            
              public and private groups and organizations should play in                     
              determining pesticide policy; and what guidance should inform                  
              government agencies and regulations about pesticide use.  Findings             
              will be disseminated at a meeting in Washington, DC, and via a                 
              summary of the findings and a volume of the collected papers.                  
                                                                                             
              This research has an important and timely focus; its results will              
              be useful and accessible to a wide audience.  The qualifications               
              and track record of the principal investigators are excellent.  The            
              participants are highly qualified and well balanced.  The proposal             
              and addendum provide adequate information about the activities                 
              plan, and about the value issues that will be investigated.  The               
              proposal is recommended for support, with high priority.
