Title       : Global Time-Series Photometry of Collapsed Variable Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1993   
File        : a9014655

Award Number: 9014655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287000             (Estimated)
Investigator: D E. Winget dew@bullwinkle.as.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Pulsating objects are important to physicists because an analysis              
              of them gives information about the interior structure of the                  
              object; this is the principle underlying the study of seismic                  
              disturbances to determine the Earth's interior structure.                      
              Astronomers have discovered that the Sun and other classes of stars            
              undergo many types of "nonradial pulsations", and the analysis of              
              these observations is now responsible for the most rapidly                     
              developing disciplines of solar physics.  Many white dwarf stars,              
              which are the most common product of stellar evolution, undergo                
              many types of nonradial oscillations as well.  The large number of             
              pulsation modes in these stars, together with their simple                     
              "degenerate" state (which allows a model to be formulated with very            
              few physical variables), has moved the study of seismology of white            
              dwarfs to the forefront of variable star research.  The Principal              
              Investigator (PI) has used a previous, five-year Presidential Young            
              Investigator award to help underwrite simultaneous observing of                
              white dwarfs of unusual interest by a group of astronomers located             
              around the globe.  By pooling their observations they are able to              
              circumvent the severe data-gaps imposed by the Earth's day/night               
              rotation cycle and conduct observations for several days -- in the             
              best case over nearly 10 continuous days.  The PI and his                      
              collaborators have used such extraordinarily long data strings to              
              detect and identify over 100 independent pulsation modes in the                
              white dwarf PG+1159-035.  The identification of these pulsations               
              has permitted astronomers to estimate the mass of this star to                 
              within 0.4% (the most accurate determination of a stellar mass                 
              other than the Sun's), to estimate the star's rotation rate                    
              including the tilt of the star's rotational axis in the sky, and               
              to infer the presence of at least three regions of the star with               
              different chemical compositions.                                               
                                                                                             
              The NSF award will support a continuation of international                     
              observing campaigns on other white dwarfs of special interest.  The            
              study will emphasis emphasis in particular the details of their                
              chemical structure as well as the effect of rotation of the                    
              excitation of the NRP modes.  Eventually, these studies may also               
              permit the measurement of the change of some white dwarfs' sizes               
              with time.  This would allow in turn an accurate estimate of the               
              cooling rate of these stars as they evolve to "cold embers".  Such             
              cooling rates will permit an estimate of the ages of these stars.              
              Since these stars are among the oldest stars in the disk of our                
              Milky Way Galaxy, these ages will provide strong constraints on the            
              age of our Galaxy and hence of the Universe.
