Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Workshop: Ions and Water in Biological and Synthetic
               Membranes; 10-16 August, 1991; Honolulu, Hawaii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1991       
File        : a9014969

Award Number: 9014969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Deamer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1144,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a "U.S.-Australian Cooperative                         
              Workshop: Ions and Water in Biological and Synthetic Membranes"                
              to be held 10-16 August 1991 in Honolulu, Hawaii, and to be                    
              organized by Dr. David Deamer of the University of California-                 
              Davis and Dr. Bruce Cornell of the Australian Commonwealth                     
              Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO).                       
              Membranes play central roles in cellular processes, parti-                     
              cipating in energy transduction reactions, ion and nutrient                    
              transport, and homeostatic regulation of the intracellular                     
              environment.  In order to better understand such processes,                    
              it is essential to answer certain fundamental questions about                  
              membrane function and structure at the molecular level.                        
                                                                                             
              Both U.S. and Australia have significant scientific strength                   
              in the area of membrane biophysics. However, this expertise                    
              has grown up largely in isolation with only occasional                         
              interaction between the scientists of these countries in this                  
              field. For this reason, this workshop, in addition to                          
              promoting exchange of scientific information, has as a                         
              primary goal the development of new U.S.-Australian collab-                    
              orations to advance understanding of membrane structure and                    
              function. Themes of the conference include: molecular                          
              structure of membrane proteins and peptides; membrane                          
              lipidsand lipid-peptide interactions; and the bioenergetics of                 
              ion conductance. Exploration of these research themes has in                   
              several cases generated potential applications, particularly                   
              in pharmaceutical, biotechnological, diagnostic, and                           
              microelectronic industries. While the workshop will focus on                   
              furthering improved basic understanding of membrane function                   
              and structure at the molecular level, participation will also                  
              include experts who are developing commercial applications                     
              related to basic research in membrane biophysics.
