Title       : Dissertation Research: Development of Signature Whistles inFree-Ranging
               Bottlenose Dolphins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1990    
File        : a9014545

Award Number: 9014545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9095               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter L. Tyack ptyack@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0117000   Marine Mammal Protection                
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Bottlenose dolphins produce individually distinctive                           
              vocalizations called signature whistles.  The main objectives of               
              Ms. Laela Sayigh's doctoral-dissertation research are to examine               
              factors influencing the development of the signature whistle by                
              dolphin calves, and to learn the social functions of signature                 
              and non-signature (variant) whistles.  It may be possible to                   
              correlate sex differences in whistle production with the                       
              different roles males and females play in the social structure of              
              the community.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The dolphins to be studied are in a group of about 100 free-                   
              ranging bottlenose dolphins in waters near Sarasota, Florida.                  
              Data on age, sex, and matrilineal relationships are available                  
              from previous research on this group.                                          
                                                                                             
              Ms. Sayigh will observe and record undisturbed mother-calf pairs               
              in order to study the process of whistle development directly in               
              young calves.  To test for signature-whistle recognition between               
              mothers and older (independent) offspring, Ms. Sayigh will play                
              back recorded whistles while dolphins are temporarily corralled                
              in a large net.                                                                
                                                                                             
              These observations should reveal whether or not the behavior of                
              the mother contributes to a previously-observed difference in                  
              whistle development in male and female calves.  The research                   
              should also elucidate the social functions of signature and                    
              variant whisles, and perhaps provide additional insights into the              
              social relationships of bottlenose dolphins.
