Title       : Core Support for the Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1991 
File        : a9014760

Award Number: 9014760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $560000             (Estimated)
Investigator: None N. None   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad Sci-Nat Res Cnl
	      
	      Washington, DC  20418    /   -

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 5740,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The National Academy of Sciences/National Research Council                
              (NAS/NRC) will continue the activities of its Board on                         
              Atmospheric Sciences and Climate (BASC) during FY 1991-92.  BASC               
              and its constituent committees and panels will:                                
                                                                                             
              1.  Continue to provide scientific leadership and guidance to                  
              the federal government on important national and international                 
              issues in the atmospheric sciences and climate, and on the                     
              coordination between discipline-oriented activities within the                 
              atmospheric sciences and interdisciplinary programs such as the                
              International Geosphere-Biosphere Program (IGBP).                              
                                                                                             
              2.  Continue the activities of the Climate Research Committee                  
              (CRC) and, under the CRC, the Tropical Ocean-Global Atmosphere                 
              (TOGA) and International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project                   
              (ISCCP) Advisory Panels in providing guidance to the federal                   
              agencies on U.S. participation in the World Climate Research                   
              Program (WCRP) and on TOGA, ISCCP, WOCE, and other WCRP                        
              activities and on related national climate research activities.                
                                                                                             
              3.  Continue the activities of the Committee on Atmospheric                    
              Chemistry (CAC).                                                               
                                                                                             
              4.  Continue the activities of the Committee on Meteorological                 
              Analysis,  Prediction, and Research (CMAPR).                                   
                                                                                             
              5.  Continue the activities of the Committee on Solar-Terrestrial              
              Research (CSTR).                                                               
                                                                                             
              6.  Maintain a capability to respond rapidly and effectively to                
              requests by federal agencies and Congress for evaluations,                     
              guidance, recommendations, and support in the areas of                         
              atmospheric science and climate, either through its standing                   
              committees or by creation of ad hoc panels as required, and                    
              provide support to projects of U.S. national interest such as the              
              Second World Climate Conference.                                               
                                                                                             
              7.  Serve as a focal point for (a) coordination and provision of               
              scientific expertise for other National Research Council units                 
              whose activities impinge on atmospheric science and climate, and               
              (b) liaison with international atmospheric science and climate                 
              activities.
