Title       : Membranes of Archaebacteria and Acidophilic Thiobacilli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1993 
File        : a9014052

Award Number: 9014052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk E. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Parkson L. Chong  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Meharry Medical College
	      1005 Dr D B Todd, Jr Blvd
	      Nashville, TN  372083501    615/327-6200

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9130,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This project explores the membranes of the                                     
              thermoacidophilic archaebacteria and the acidophilic                           
              thiobacilli.  These bacteria live in harsh environments                        
              including low pH (2-4) and high temperature (50-70C).  Due                     
              to the unusual aspects of such environments it is                              
              hypothesized that they will have unusual membranes which                       
              allow them to survive at extremes of pH and temperature.                       
              In fact, it is known that the archaebacteria as a group do                     
              not have normal ester lipids but rather tetraether lipids.                     
              The foundation of the proposal is that the unusual nature                      
              of the membranes of these bacteria will provide lipids and                     
              ion transport proteins distinct from those in eukaryotic                       
              membranes.  These differences will be informative in                           
              understanding both the cell biology of these bacteria and                      
              the function of eukaryotic lipids and ion transport                            
              proteins.  This project proposes to use the expertise in                       
              two laboratories to study the lipids and proteins in the                       
              membranes of these bacteria.  This project comprises two                       
              sub-projects, one on ion transport proteins in Dr. Smith's                     
              laboratory and the other on lipids and lipid protein                           
              interactions in Dr. Chong's laboratory as outlined below.                      
                                                                                             
              Sub-project 1:  Identification and characterization the                        
              membrane ATPases associated with transmembrane ion                             
              transport in acidophilic thiobacilli and                                       
              thermoacidophilic archaebacteria.  The goals of this sub-                      
              project are to:                                                                
                                                                                             
              1. Screen the membranes of various strains of                                  
              archaebacteria and acidophilic thiobacilli for ion                             
              translocating ATPases using immunologic and enzymatic                          
              assays.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              2. Characterize the ATPase activities found in specific                        
              aim 1, with regard to inhibitor specificity, pH optima,                        
              cation transport and kinetic properties.                                       
                                                                                             
              3. Purify of some of the proteins associated with the                          
              ATPase activities described in specific aims 1 and 2.                          
              Particular emphasis will be placed on P-type ATPases.                          
                                                                                             
              Sub-project 2:  Characterization of the physical                               
              properties of membranes comprised of tetraether lipids                         
              isolated from thermoacidophilic archaebacteria.  In this                       
              sub-project:                                                                   
                                                                                             
              1. Steady-state and dynamic fluorometry will be employed                       
              to investigate the lateral motion of pyrene-labeled lipids                     
              and the rotational motion of diphenylhexatriene (DPH) and                      
              perylene in tetraether lipid membranes.                                        
                                                                                             
              2. The lateral and rotational motions of small molecules                       
              in tetraether lipid membranes as a function of pressure                        
              will be studied using high pressure fluorometry.                               
                                                                                             
              3. Fluorometry and conventional biochemical methods will                       
              be used to study the topology of archaebacterial (Na+,K+)-                     
              type ATPase in tetraether lipid membranes.
