Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Homogeneous Nucleation of Metal Vapors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1995   
File        : a9014192

Award Number: 9014192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14794              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Katz jlk@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1415,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Joseph L. Katz of Johns Hopkins University                 
              for collaborative research in chemical engineering with                        
              Professor Friedrich Hensel of Phillips University in Marburg,                  
              Germany.  They are cooperating in a study that involves the                    
              use of upward thermal diffusion chambers to measure the                        
              homogeneous nucleation of cesium and other metal vapors.                       
              Their research plan exploits the complementary strengths of                    
              the two research groups.  The German group led by Dr. Hensel                   
              is well known for their research on the metal-insulator                        
              transition and other properties of metal vapors.  They have                    
              state-of-the-art facilities where they are actively studying                   
              supersaturated mercury vapor.  Dr. Katz and his group are                      
              expert in the use of the diffusion cloud chamber and in                        
              nucleation theory.  They have a very active program using                      
              upward thermal diffusion cloud chambers for the study of                       
              homogeneous and other nucleations.  Most of the experimental                   
              work will be done in Marburg, with some data analysis and                      
              other support going on in Maryland.  Reciprocal visits of                      
              members of the two research groups will facilitate this joint                  
              work.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              Nucleation processes are extremely widespread in the natural                   
              world as well as in the laboratory.  However, our ability to                   
              predict the conditions that cause nucleation and the rate at                   
              which it occurs in typical processes is almost non-existent.                   
              Homogeneous nucleation of a liquid from its supersaturated                     
              vapor is particularly amenable to theoretical and experimental                 
              study.  The nucleation properties of metals are quite                          
              different from those of non-metals, and they are of growing                    
              importance as technologies develop to produce and use novel                    
              alloys or to use known metals in novel ways.
