Title       : Mechanisms of Homogeneous Hydrocarbon Activation and Functionalization by
               Transition Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1992  
File        : a9014531

Award Number: 9014531
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Flood Flood@chem1.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and                            
              Organometallic Program of the Chemistry Division, Flood will                   
              continue his studies of how transition metal complexes may form                
              and break C-H, C-C, and C-O bonds in homogeneous solution.  The                
              major emphasis will be careful and fundamental mechanistic                     
              investigations, which should be generally applicable to                        
              organometallic chemistry. These results should be useful in the                
              rational design of industrial catalysts for the transformation                 
              of hydrocarbons into useful compounds.                                         
                                                                                             
              Synthetic and mechanistic studies of the reactions of                          
              hydrocarbons in the coordination sphere of soluble complexes of                
              transition metals will be pursued.  The work will focus on                     
              intermolecular and intramolecular C-H activations, reversible                  
              alkene insertions into metal-carbon bonds, and                                 
              alpha-eliminations and insertions at metal-bound carbon and                    
              oxygen centers.  Metal, oxidation state, steric bulk and                       
              electronic effects of ancillary ligands, alkyl group structure,                
              charge, chelate ring size, and other factors will be                           
              investigated.  The possibility of stabilizing higher oxidation                 
              states and oxo-containing species will be tested by use of                     
              amine-ligated organometallic species rather than more                          
              conventional ligands.  Targeted systems include Os, Ir, and Pt                 
              complexes.  In all cases a thorough investigation of mechanisms                
              will be conducted through a variety of probes.
