Title       : U.S.-UK Cooperative Research: Regulation of the Plasma Membrane and Tonoplast
               H+-ATPases in Plants Exposed to NaC1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1990  
File        : a9014106

Award Number: 9014106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11070              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Hasegawa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1117,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Paul Hasegawa, Department of Horticulture, Purdue University,                  
              and Drs. T. J. Flowers and A. R. Yeo, School of Biological                     
              Sciences, University of Sussex, England.  The objective of                     
              the proposed project is to study the response of the plasma                    
              membrane and tonoplast ATPase to salt stress.                                  
                                                                                             
              Salinity is a major factor limiting agricultural production,                   
              since it reduces yields in land under cultivation. Salt                        
              tolerance in plants involves the integration of mechanisms at                  
              all levels of cytological and anatomical organization.                         
              Mechanisms of critical importance are those which function                     
              to regulate the rate of ion accumulation and mediate the                       
              effects of high ion accumulation, yet promote sufficient                       
              solute uptake for osmotic adjustment necessary for growth in                   
              the new osmotic environment. It is reasonable to envisage                      
              that the plasma membrane and the tonoplast have central roles                  
              in regulated solute accumulation and compartmentation.                         
              However, experimental results have not defined the physi-                      
              ological or biochemical roles of the plasma membrane and                       
              tonoplast in plasma membrane.  This project will focus on the                  
              plasma membrane and tonoplast H+ -  translocating ATPases                      
              because of their central roles in the generation of the H+                     
              electrochemical gradient across the respective membranes, which                
              mediates facilitated transmembrane solute import into the                      
              cell.  The objective of this project is to provide evidence                    
              regarding the significance of these H+ - pumps in the                          
              regulation of solute import into the plant during regimes of                   
              salt imposition.  This project will benefit from the                           
              complementary expertise of the US and British investigators                    
              in molecular biology and physiology of salt stress.  The                       
              results of this research may have important economic                           
              implications for agriculture.
