Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1990    
File        : a9014536

Award Number: 9014536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Burnham  (Student current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Community-based settlement is an important component in the               
              dynamics of Third World urbanization.  It consists of lower-income,            
              self-help housing characterized by occupant-builders who act together          
              in their collective best interests.  It stands in contrast to the more         
              common settlements of individuals who act singly in their own best             
              interests.  While studies of individualistic settlement of independent         
              family units abound, no empirical studies have been conducted on               
              community-based settlements.  This doctoral dissertation research is a         
              field-based study that will compare two individualistic and two                
              community-based settlements in Mexico City and Ciudad Juarez in order          
              to explore differences in occupant-builders' design motives, the               
              resultant housing designs, and subsequent levels of housing                    
              consolidation.  Data for the study will be collected by means of               
              participant observation, selected informant interviewing, heuristic            
              elicitation "games," and research evaluation of buildings.                     
                                                                                             
                   This research will provide valuable information for urban                 
              geographers, planners and developers, and architects about the                 
              expression of the social dynamics of self-help housing in the                  
              development of urban landscapes.  It will contribute to our knowledge          
              about the provision of adequate housing for thousands of families who          
              are moving from rural areas to rapidly growing cities in developing            
              countries throughout the world.  The project also will provide an              
              excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to continue to             
              develop independent research skills.
