Title       : U.S.-Nigeria Cooperative Research on Patterns of Predation and Taxonomic
               Diversification in Cenozoic Gastropod Assemblages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1993      
File        : a9014120

Award Number: 9014120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18595              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Kohn kohn@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5928      AFRICA AND ASIA,OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1125,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Alan J. Kohn,                       
              Department of Zoology, University of Washington, and Dr.                       
              Ingela Arua, Department of Geology, University of Nigeria,                     
              to pursue, for a period of 24 months, a program of                             
              cooperative research on patterns of predation and taxonomic                    
              diversification in Cenozoic gastropod assemblages.  The                        
              research will address the question: How did the complex                        
              communities in which Conidae are so prominent develop in                       
              time?  The collaborators will utilize material collected by                    
              the PI under prior NSF grants from assemblages ranging in                      
              age from latest Miocene to latest Pleistocene in the Ryukyu                    
              and Fiji Islands.  Their methods will include (1)                              
              multivariate analysis of morphometric and other shell                          
              characters and (2) species determination by reference to                       
              the analysis of type specimens and discriminating                              
              within-species variation from between-species differences.                     
                                                                                             
              This project focuses on one of the largest families of                         
              marine gastropod molluscs, the Conidae.  This family of                        
              mainly tropical marine snails is important because of its                      
              very high diversity, the broad geographic range of many of                     
              its species, its ecological role as a dominant predatory                       
              group, primarily in the shallow tropical seas of the                           
              Indo-West Pacific region, and its unusual danger to man.                       
              Its neurotoxic venom, normally used to overpower prey, can                     
              be fatal to man.  This project adds an international                           
              cooperative dimension to Dr. Kohn's research supported                         
              under NSF Grant No. BSR-8700523.  Dr. Arua's expertise                         
              gained during her studies of gastropod predation patterns                      
              in the Eocene of Nigeria will greatly benefit the project.                     
              This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science                      
              in Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase the                    
              level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers                     
              and their counterparts in developing countries through the                     
              exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and                         
              techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual                     
              benefit.
