Title       : Research in Infrared and Millimeter Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1992   
File        : a9014399

Award Number: 9014399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Beckwith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Recent advances in instrument technology have allowed astronomers              
              their first glimpses of the vestiges of young star formation,                  
              circumstellar disks around "T Tauri" stars.  A study of both these             
              disks and their central stars is expected to provide fundamental               
              insights into the early evolution of our own solar system.  The                
              Principle Investigator (PI) will continue previous research in                 
              which he has used infrared and millimeter wavelength interometer               
              arrays to resolve the disk around two T Tauri stars, including                 
              clumps of material having masses similar to the planet Jupiter's.              
              In this renewal program the PI will extend his studies to fainter              
              brightnesses and hence will be able to study a statistically stable            
              sample of young stars.  The goals are to understand which                      
              properties of stars influence disk properties and to examine how               
              the disks evolve in subsamples of progressively older stars.  A key            
              question will be to identify the importance of a star's being in               
              a "binary" (a pair of stars born at the same time and orbiting                 
              around one another).  Current ideas hold that the presence of a                
              close binary star will sweep away the matter from a star and                   
              prevent the formation of a disk and hence a system of planets.  The            
              PI will test early indications that closely-spaced binaries do not             
              have disks and that single or widely-spaced binaries do.                       
                                                                                             
              The PI will also extend his observational and data reduction                   
              techniques to the infrared-millimeter study of the center of our               
              Galaxy, as well as to shocks in interstellar gas created by the                
              collisions of external galaxies.
