Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Properties of Multipole Matrix Elements in
               Independent Particle Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1993  
File        : a9014953

Award Number: 9014953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18530              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Pratt rpratt@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 5942      KOREA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1250,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Richard H. Pratt,                   
              Department of  Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh,                
              to pursue with Dr. Sung  Dahm Oh, Department of Physics,                       
              Sookmyung Women's University, Seoul, Korea, for a period of                    
              24 months, a program of cooperative theoretical research on                    
              multipole matrix elements in independent particle                              
              approximation.  Issues to  be studied include the existence                    
              of trajectories of zeroes in the generalized oscillator                        
              strength, the sensitivity of resonances to exchange and                        
              vacancy features of potentials, the construction of quadrature                 
              expressions for such resonances, and the proof of the                          
              existence of zeroes  in general multipole matrix elements.                     
              These features also will be examined in the general                            
              multi-photon matrix elements.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This project involves cooperative research of two groups of                    
              investigators  who have complementary skills and facilities.                   
              The key collaborators are  highly respected scientists who,                    
              for a number of years, have cooperated in  the field of the                    
              research.  Their cooperation has been highly successful  and                   
              has resulted in several joint publications in refereed                         
              journals.  The  proposed study of multipole matrix element                     
              zeroes and resonances will shed  light on the deviations from                  
              simple point Coulomb behavior in the case of  electronic                       
              screening.  This project is relevant to the objectives of the                  
              U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to                          
              increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean                      
              scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific                    
              information, ideas, skills, and techniques and  through                        
              collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  This project                     
              adds an  international cooperative dimension to research of                    
              the PI under NSF Grant  No. PHY-9005763.  Korean participation                 
              is supported by the Korea Science  and Engineering Foundation                  
              (KOSEF).
