Title       : Orthodoxy and Innovation in Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1990      
File        : a9014427

Award Number: 9014427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58684              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank J. Sulloway   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 1353,
Abstract    :
              Why do scientists accept or reject new theories?  The primary                  
              goal of this research project is to determine the various                      
              background variables that influence attitudes toward                           
              innovation in science.  Professor Sulloway's research design,                  
              which is multivariate and epidemiological in nature,                           
              encompasses 80 variables and nearly 3000 participants in 28                    
              highly diverse scientific controversies.                                       
                                                                                             
              Based on preliminary research and multivariate modeling                        
              techniques, the most significant predictors of attitudes                       
              toward scientific innovation include (in order of importance):                 
              birth order, which mediates differential identification with                   
              parents and authority; time elapsed since the announcement of                  
              the theory; age; political and religious attitudes; personal                   
              contact with the originator of the new theory; and national                    
              differences.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Professor Sulloway is examining three areas of further                         
              research.  First, he is refining these statistical models by                   
              obtaining questionnaire data on the nature of each scientific                  
              controversy and the theoretical changes that ensued.  His                      
              questions are also aimed at testing various assumptions                        
              regarding the nature of scientific change that have                            
              preoccupied philosophers of science.  Second, he is developing                 
              specific models for individual debates that will allow the                     
              rigorous testing of historical hypotheses.  Lastly, he is                      
              completing data collection for this project.
