Title       : Silicon Technology, U.S.- Pakistan Symposium and Workshop, Islamabad, Pakistan,
               June 1991.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1993   
File        : a9014722

Award Number: 9014722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18508              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Nejat Veziroglu veziroglu@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This project is for support of seven                             
              U.S. scientists to participate in a U.S.-Pakistan                              
              Symposium and Workshop in Islamabad, Pakistan, in June                         
              1991 on Silicon Technology.  The Pakistani                                     
              Co-Chairperson is Dr. Atique Mufti, Director, National                         
              Institute of Silicon Technology in Islamabad.  The                             
              objectives are to disseminate recently acquired                                
              information and experiences in the utilization of                              
              silicon in Photovoltaics as well as electronic                                 
              applications in the last four years, to discuss                                
              relevant applications in Less Developed Countries                              
              (LDC's) and to identify areas for possible joint                               
              research.  The seminar will cover: status of silicon                           
              technology, including technical breakthroughs, and                             
              economic constraints.  The technical lectures will                             
              cover production procedures of silicon from various                            
              raw materials, growth of single crystal and float zone                         
              technology; status of amorphous silicon technology and                         
              its future; polycrystalline casting and ribbon                                 
              technology, manufacturing of silicon chips, materials                          
              and techniques for making thin film solar cells,                               
              heterojunctions, concentrations and hybrids; status of                         
              storage devices; and design of solar systems.  The                             
              final day will be devoted to workshops to identify the                         
              most effective means of technology transfer, and to                            
              facilitate the development of S.I. industry, and to                            
              identify areas for joint research.                                             
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This meeting will follow one that was held                             
              four years earlier which helped Pakistan in its                                
              emerging silicon technology research and applications                          
              in solar energy storage and utilization.  The meeting                          
              will be attended by scientists from several countries                          
              in South Asia and the Middle East.  It should help                             
              foster the interest in the research and development                            
              that support the use of solar energy in that region.
