Title       : Small Grants for Exploratory Research: Thermodynamic Constraints on Reactive
               Melt Processing of Multicomponent Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1990      
File        : a9014717

Award Number: 9014717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 2,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49872              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Doherty mdoherty@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              Reaction systems where both reactants and products are in the                  
              liquid and solid phase (no vapor phase present) are being used                 
              commercially to produce high molecular weight monomers or                      
              intermediates used in the production of specialty and                          
              commodity polymers.  Specific examples include bisphenol A,                    
              paradichloro-benzene and n-methyl phthalimide.  Other classes                  
              of materials that must be processed in the melt include                        
              elemental and compound semi-conductors such as silicon and                     
              gallium arsenide, and superconducting materials such as                        
              barium/copper/yttrium/oxygen systems.  One advantage of some                   
              of these two phase systems is that reaction and separation                     
              occur in the same unit, greatly reducing processing costs.                     
                                                                                             
              The structure and properties of multicomponent solid-liquid                    
              phase diagrams play and important role in determining the                      
              behavior of these unit operations (also referred to as melt                    
              processing units).  The PI plans to develop a broad                            
              comprehensive theory of multicomponent reactive solid-liquid                   
              phase diagrams that will produce practical rules for                           
              conceiving and designing melt processing systems.  These                       
              systems have unusual phase equilibrium behavior when reactions                 
              are present, including the appearance of reactive azeotropes                   
              in ideal mixtures.  These and other features normal azeotropes                 
              in non-ideal mixtures.  These and other features of the                        
              equilibrium behavior influence what can and cannot be achieved                 
              in reaction-separation systems.  The PI plans to use certain                   
              invariants from differential geometry to provide a complete                    
              classification of the phase behavior, and ultimately to                        
              predict it, from an incomplete knowledge of the equilibrium                    
              relations.  The ultimate goal is to develop a broad                            
              fundamental understanding of reactive melt processing that                     
              will lead to useful guidelines for the synthesis and design of                 
              such systems.
