Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Equilibrium and Dynamic Behavior of
               Systems Containing a Zwitterionic Surfactant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1994     
File        : a9014032

Award Number: 9014032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8250               (Estimated)
Investigator: Clarence A. Miller camill@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1414,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Clarence A. Miller of Rice                       
              University to collaborate with Professor Heinz Hoffmann of                     
              the Physical Chemistry Department of the University of                         
              Bayreuth, Germany.  They will carry out joint research on                      
              equilibrium and dynamic properties of surfactant systems                       
              that will build on and enhance their ongoing independent work                  
              on surfactant dynamics..  The two laboratories will share the                  
              work of determining equilibrium phase behavior of systems                      
              containing a particular zwitterionic surfactant in pure form                   
              plus various hydrocarbons and straight-chain alcohols.  Then                   
              each laboratory will conduct experiments suited to its                         
              specialized equipment to elucidate other behavior in systems                   
              containing the same zwitterionic surfactant under different                    
              chemical and physical conditions.  Dr. Miller's laboratory                     
              will use videomicroscopy to investigate the dynamic behavior                   
              that occurs when surfactant solutions contact oil.  Dr.                        
              Hoffmann's laboratory in Germany will measure rheological,                     
              electric birefringence and other dynamic response properties                   
              of pure phases for a number of systems.  Such techniques have                  
              never been applied to the L3 phase.  Comparing the results                     
              with theoretical models is sure to advance fundamental                         
              understanding of the microstructure of this phase.                             
                                                                                             
              The general objective of this joint work is to obtain a                        
              better understanding of certain phases in surfactant systems,                  
              especially the so-called L3 phase, an isotropic liquid phase                   
              which occurs in a variety of surfactant systems under                          
              conditions quite different from those where ordinary micellar                  
              solutions are found.  The collaborators will also examine the                  
              lamellar liquid crystalline phase, which exists over a wide                    
              range of water content and presumably has a wide range of                      
              rheological behavior.  Relating the morphology of this phase                   
              to the data on physical properties from the German measurements                
              should provide a better understanding of the manner in which                   
              new phases, such as the lamellar liquid crystal, form at the                   
              initial interface between aqueous surfactant solutions and                     
              oil.  Such knowledge will have a variety of practical                          
              applications.
