Title       : A Formal Approach to Real Time System Specification and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1993     
File        : a9014621

Award Number: 9014621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce H. Barnes                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $406738             (Estimated)
Investigator: Insup Lee lee@central.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan B. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9289,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to develop a formal framework for the         
              specification and analysis of real-time systems, and tools to support          
              them.  Since the correctness of a real-time system depends on not only         
              how concurrent processes interact but also the time at which these             
              interactions occur, the formal framework must be capable of modeling           
              delays due to process synchronization as well as contention for shared         
              resources.  While most current real-time models capture delays due to          
              process synchronization, they abstract out resource-specific details           
              by assuming idealistic operating environments.  On the other hand,             
              scheduling and resource allocation algorithms used for real-time               
              systems ignore the effect of process synchronization except for simple         
              precedence relations between processes.  To bridge the gap between             
              these two disciplines, a specification language called Communicating           
              Shared Resources (CSR), and a priority-based process algebra called            
              the Calculus for Communicating Shared Resources (CCSR) are being               
              developed.  CSR supports the high-level description of real-time               
              systems, whereas CCSR provides the resource-based computation model of         
              CSR and a prioritized strong equivalence for terms based on strong             
              bisimulation.  Based on CCSR's formal framework, three tools to                
              analyze process behavior will be developed: a simulator, a model               
              checker and a mechanical theorem prover.  The tools will be integrated         
              in a single analyzer to be used at different stages of proving that a          
              specification is correct.
