Title       : Research Training Group in Genetic Mechanisms of Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1994      
File        : a9014265

Award Number: 9014265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter W. Arzberger                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $798517             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Lynch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1115      RESEARCH TRAINING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1115,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for the establishment of a Research                  
              Training Group in Genetic Mechanisms of Evolution.  The faculty                
              group is a mixture of outstanding senior and junior investigators              
              who come from a variety of disciplinary backgrounds, but share a               
              common interest in the study of genetic mechanisms and their role              
              in the biology and evolution of organisms.  The funds will provide             
              stipends for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, will                  
              defray part of the cost of the trainees' research, will enable                 
              undergraduate students to participate research during the summer,              
              and will allow the trainees to attend scientific meetings.  In                 
              addition, funds will be used to purchase specialized research                  
              equipment to be used by trainees, to defray part of the cost of                
              trainees' research and to bring investigators from other                       
              institutions to Eugene for colloquia.                                          
                                                                                             
              In recent years, genetics has benefitted from the development of               
              powerful new techniques for genomic analysis.  These techniques                
              permit studies of genetic variability in laboratory and wild animal            
              populations that were previously impossible.  Similarly, they allow            
              relatively facile analysis of physical traits (phenotypes) that                
              result from the combined action of several genes.  This development            
              has provided an unparalleled opportunity for the study of the                  
              interplay of genetic variation, phenotypic variation and the                   
              environment that occurs during evolution.  To take the fullest                 
              advantage of this opportunity, investigators will need a                       
              fundamental understanding of the principles and practices of                   
              molecular biology, of population biology and of evolutionary                   
              biology.  This award provides funding for a training program that              
              will produce just such individuals.
