Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algorithms and Programs for Fourier Transforms and
               Crystallography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1990      
File        : a9014947

Award Number: 9014947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Cooley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IBM T J Watson Res Ctr
	      
	      Yorktown Heights, NY  10598    /   -

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will support                    
              mathematical research on general mathematical structures for fast              
              Fourier transforms algorithms.  The focus will be on computing                 
              the discrete Fourier transform for the general case.                           
              Applications to data possessing crystallographic symmetries will               
              be made.  Studies on related fast convolution algorithms will                  
              also be made.                                                                  
                   Data transformation and permutation algorithms will be                    
              produced. These be necessary for transforming data between stages              
              of the Fourier transforms and for reducing and expanding data for              
              input and output.                                                              
                   Algorithms will be adapted to machine architectures                       
              including those of vector, parallel and hierarchical memory                    
              machines.  They will take account of data flow, data permutations              
              and data access in large scale computations.                                   
                   Group theoretical methods will play an important part in                  
              this effort.  Included in the work is the goal of a systematic                 
              classification of the symmetries of all crystallographic groups.               
                   Algorithms and programs for others parts of the                           
              crystallographic calculation, particularly the refinement                      
              problem, will be produced.                                                     
                   Implementation of this work in one large general                          
              crystallographic program package and report on the efficiency is               
              planned.
