Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9014577

Award Number: 9014577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3530               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan D. Sauer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The distribution, ecology, and taxonomic variations of                    
              contemporary patterns of ornamental and ritual plant species are the           
              observable end product of no longer observable and often poorly                
              documented prehistoric and historic processes.  These patterns provide         
              a solid framework for reconstructing the past and for interpreting             
              current human-environmental relationships.  Although ornamental                
              and ritual flora have often been noted as important elements in the            
              cultures of modern Mexico and pre-Columbian Mesoamerica, they have not         
              been studied extensively.  This doctoral dissertation research project         
              will focus on the complex of culturally significant flora in four              
              ecologically and economically distinct Yucatecan Mayan communities.            
              Among the plants to be studied are Yucatecan species, pre-Columbian            
              domesticates, colonial-era introductions and species that have been            
              incorporated more recently.  The researcher will survey housegardens to        
              determine species and cultivars present, observe ceremonies to                 
              determine plant species used, and interview gardeners and ceremonial           
              participants.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                   This biogeographical study will contribute to a fuller                    
              understanding of Mayan ethnobotany and culture.  In addition, it will          
              address more general questions of plant domestication and human                
              ecology.  The project also will provide an excellent opportunity for a         
              promising young scholar to continue to develop independent research            
              skills.
