Title       : U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Spectroscopy of Faint Cataclysmic Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1990  
File        : a9014168

Award Number: 9014168
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven B. Howell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SAIC Science Appl Intl Cor
	      10260 Campus Point Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921211522    858/826-6000

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1215,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research in astronomy                    
              between Dr. Steven Howell, Planetary Science Institute,                        
              Tucson, Arizona and Dr. Keith Mason, Mullard Space Science                     
              Laboratory, University College London. The objective of the                    
              proposed project is to investigate a previously unstudied                      
              group of cataclysmic variable stars which may be members of                    
              the Galactic halo.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The  standard picture of a cataclysmic variable (CV) is a                      
              close binary system consisting of a late type main sequence                    
              star which transfers mass to a white dwarf companion. The                      
              material that leaves the secondary forms a disk around the                     
              primary star.  The intersection of this stream and the disk                    
              gives rise to a "hot spot", which can provide a large                          
              fraction of the system light.  If the white dwarf has a                        
              sufficiently strong magnetic field, the transferred material                   
              will be disturbed and even the formation of the disk can be                    
              retarded. The only direct method of finding the true                           
              location of these cataclysmic variables is through distance                    
              determination. The investigators are analyzing spectroscopic                   
              data, using software which they developed jointly at the                       
              Mullard Space Science Laboratory, to model and deconvolve                      
              the contributions  to the data from the various systems                        
              components.  This procedure will allow them to derive a                        
              distance for these stars.  If these binary systems are                         
              really located in the Galactic halo, they should have very                     
              different properties from their well studied counterparts                      
              located in the disk.  The results of this study will make an                   
              important contribution to understanding the true nature of                     
              cataclysmic variables and how these populations differ, as                     
              well as to understanding the structure and evolution of our                    
              Galaxy in general.  The project will benefit from the                          
              complementary expertise of the two investigators in the area                   
              of theoretical interpretations of binary stars.
