Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Stress-Induced Transformation and Crack
               Growth in Partially-Stabilized Zirconium Oxide-Based Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1991    
File        : a9014094

Award Number: 9014094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13522              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur H. Heuer ahh@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
              51        Engineering-Aeronautical                
Program Ref : 1772,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research in ceramics                     
              between Dr. Arthur Heuer, Case Western Reserve University,                     
              and Dr. Rolf Steinbrech, Institut fur Reaktorwerkstoffe,                       
              KFA, Julich, Germany.  The objective of the project is to                      
              investigate stress-induced transformation and crack growth in                  
              zirconia.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Transformation toughening in zirconia-containing ceramics has                  
              been an area of intense scientific and technological interest                  
              during the past decade, in view of the potential industrial                    
              applications of these materials in demanding conditions of                     
              fatigue and high temperature exposure.  One of the major                       
              findings during this period has been the importance of "resis-                 
              tance-curve" (R-curve) behavior. In this project, monotonic                    
              and low cycle fatigue, environmental effects on natural crack                  
              behavior at room temperature, and pre-cracking ("far-field")                   
              stress-induced transformation will be studied. The fracture                    
              mechanics testing will largely be conducted in Julich.  The                    
              work in Cleveland will emphasize microstructural characteri-                   
              zation of the fracture mechanics test specimens and the                        
              determination of transformation zones after testing, both                      
              specialties of Dr. Heuer.  In addition, in situ tests will be                  
              carried out involving transformation in the absence of                         
              microcracking, using low voltage SEM, optical interferometry,                  
              and micro-Raman spectroscopy.  The project will benefit from                   
              the past history of successful collaboration between the two                   
              investigators and their complementary expertise in fracture                    
              mechanics and microstructural characterization.
