Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: The Effects of Water Movement on
               Zooplankton Capture by Corals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1991     
File        : a9014970

Award Number: 9014970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24190              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth P. Sebens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1650,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Kenneth Sebens of Northeastern University and Dr.J.E.N. Veron                  
              of the Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS). Coral                    
              reefs are among the world's most diverse and scientifically                    
              intriguing marine habitats.  They are also endangered by                       
              human activities such as coastal modification, pollution,                      
              overfishing and global warming.  Research on coral reef                        
              ecology and the current status of coral reefs is extremely                     
              importantant at this crucial time in the world's biotic                        
              history. This project extends ongoing research on water flow                   
              effects on corals to field sites along the Great Barrier Reef                  
              in Australia.  The region offers the world's most extensive                    
              reef system, a great variety of waterflow conditions, and                      
              extensive diversity of coral growth forms and species. The                     
              hypothesis to be tested is that water motion has a positive                    
              effect on particle (prey) capture by corals, and thus on                       
              growth rates, and that these processes are strongly affected                   
              by coral growth form and polyp size. Knowledge of water flow                   
              effects on corals is important as basic information on coral                   
              biology, and may also help explain why coral reefs change                      
              when shorelines are modified, and what flow conditions are                     
              optimal for reef growth.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The project represents excellent U.S. and Australian                           
              collaboration.  AIMS is the world center for research on corals                
              because of its proximity to the Great Barrier Reef,its                         
              excellent ship and laboratory facilities, and its expertise                    
              in coral biology. Dr. Veron is one of the world's leading                      
              authorities on coral taxonomy, biology, and ecology. Dr. Sebens                
              brings to the project results and hypotheses generated by his                  
              studies on Caribbean coral reefs of the effects of water                       
              movement on zooplankton capture by corals. The project                         
              represents a coordinated and cost-sharing research approach                    
              with the potential to significantly advance understanding of                   
              coral ecology.
