Title       : US-Sweden Cooperative Research: Biochemical Studies of Pheromone Perception in
               Agrotis Segetum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1993 
File        : a9014102

Award Number: 9014102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn D. Prestwich GPRESTWI@ccmail.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5937      SWEDEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1117,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Glenn Prestwich, State University of New York at Stony Brook                   
              and two Swedish researchers from the University of Lund,                       
              Sweden:  Professor Christer Lofstedt of the  Ecological                        
              Center and Professor Tommy Liljefors of the Chemical Center.                   
              The objective of the proposed project is to investigate                        
              mechanisms of pheromone detection.                                             
                                                                                             
              Chemists and biologists have developed considerable sophisti-                  
              cation in the elucidation of pheromone structures, industrial-                 
              scale pheromone synthesis, and in the use of pheromones for                    
              mating disruption and integrated pest management, since the                    
              publication of the first pheromone structure over thirty                       
              years ago.  In contrast, current understanding of how                          
              pheromones work on a molecular level is still very rudimentary.                
              Dr. Prestwich and his Swedish colleagues have worked together                  
              over the past few years on the chemistry, biochemistry,                        
              ecology, behavior and sensory physiology of pheromone                          
              perception in the turnip moth Agrotis segetum.  Using                          
              pheromones prepared at Stony Brook, the investigators now                      
              propose to conduct:  1) biochemical studies of pheromone                       
              receptor and binding proteins, 2) computer simulations and                     
              electrophysiological evaluations of pheromone analogs, and 3)                  
              behavioral testing of physiologically active analogs.                          
              Dr. Prestwich will use molecular graphics programs at the                      
              University of Lund to evaluate conformations of pheromone                      
              analogs synthesized at Stony Brook, and will also use the                      
              routinely available supply of Agrotis segetum pupae and adult                  
              moths at Lund for biochemical experiments requiring live,                      
              staged insects. In addition, he will establish as routine a                    
              variety of biochemical techniques in the Lund laboratories                     
              and provide new structures for calculations and model testing                  
              by the Swedish groups.  This research will benefit from the                    
              complementary expertise of Dr. Prestwich and his Swedish                       
              collaborators in the chemistry of pheromone structure.  The                    
              results of this research will have important applications for                  
              future uses of pheromone technology, such as pest management.
