Title       : Research Careers for Minority Scholar in Condensed Matter Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1994    
File        : a9014688

Award Number: 9014688
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. McHenry                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336312             (Estimated)
Investigator: George S. Dixon george.dixon@okway.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9132,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Oklahoma State University will establish a Research Careers for                
              Minority Scholars project to increase the representation of Blacks,            
              American Indians, and Hispanics in the field of Condensed Matter               
              Physics.  The project will consist of three mutually supporting                
              phases.  (1)  An undergraduate research internship for students in the         
              summer between their Junior and Senior years.  This will introduce             
              them to the excitement of a research career on the forefront of                
              knowledge.  (2)  A "bridging summer" immediately following their               
              completion of the baccalaureate degree to provide a continuous path            
              from undergraduate to graduate study, continue their involvement in            
              research, and give them a head start toward completion of a thesis             
              problem.  This continuity is important since many U.S. students are            
              lost to research careers because they enter the job market at the B.S.         
              level.  (3)  Support for their first year of graduate study including          
              opportunities for them to serve as role models for minority                    
              undergraduates.  The project will emphasize research in the properties         
              of optical materials, an area with great industrial, as well as                
              academic, interest.  Oklahoma State University is one of the leading           
              American research centers in optical materials.  All phases of the             
              program will provide, through attendance at scientific conferences and         
              colloquia, the opportunity to interact with the larger scientific              
              community as well as OSU faculty, staff and students.  This will aid           
              the Minority Scholars in building their network within the physics             
              community that is so important in becoming successful and productive           
              research physicists.  Over the five years covered by this proposal the         
              program will approximately double the number of students from the              
              targeted groups who are preparing for research careers in Condensed            
              Matter Physics.
