Title       : US-Swaziland Cooperative Research on Synthetic Routes to Thiophospholipids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1990    
File        : a9014111

Award Number: 9014111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13340              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene F. Morris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Carolina Univ
	      
	      Cullowhee, NC  28723    704/227-7211

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1946,5929,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Gene F. Morris,                     
              Department of Chemistry, Western Carolina University (WCU),                    
              and Dr. Themba Tyobeka, Department of Chemistry, University                    
              of Swaziland (UNISWA), to pursue, for a period of 24                           
              months, a program of cooperative research on synthetic                         
              routes for the preparation of thiophospholipids.                               
              Phospholipids are a major class of compounds present in the                    
              cell membranes of most organisms.  Ultimately the goals of                     
              the synthetic schemes to be undertaken by these                                
              collaborators are (1) the production of 1- and                                 
              2-thiophospholipids, compounds in which sulfur has replaced                    
              oxygen on the first or second carbon atoms of the glycerol                     
              chain and (2) to study the role of phospholipids in                            
              membranes by substituting thiophospholipids which have                         
              similar properties and, unlike phospholipids, may be                           
              followed by continuous spectrophotometric analysis.  In                        
              addition to the chemical research to be undertaken, each                       
              collaborator will visit the other's university and provide                     
              consultation and lectures designed to strengthen each                          
              institution's program in chemistry.                                            
                                                                                             
              This project provides support for a long-standing                              
              relationship between WCU and UNISWA which now is in its                        
              eighth year.  During that period, each university has                          
              assisted faculty of the other in research activities.  The                     
              present project will allow the collaborators to complete                       
              the synthesis of thiophospholipids which was started when                      
              Dr. Tyobeka was a visiting faculty associate at WCU in                         
              1988.  This project is relevant to the objectives of the                       
              Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks to                         
              increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists                      
              and engineers and their counterparts in developing                             
              countries through the exchange of scientific information,                      
              ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on                     
              problems of mutual benefit.
