Title       : Genetics of Segregation Distortion in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1993  
File        : a9014779

Award Number: 9014779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359655             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry S. Ganetzky ganetzky@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Segregation distorter (SD) is a naturally occurring meiotic drive              
              system on the second chromosome of Drosophila melanogaster.                    
              Heterozygous SD/SD+ males transmit the SD chromosome in vast excess            
              over the normal homolog.  The basis of the distorted transmission              
              involves the induced dysfunction of the spermatids the receive the             
              SD+ chromosome but the underlying molecular mechanism is unknown.              
              The SD system comprises at least three distinct loci: Sd, E(SD) and            
              Rsp.  Our long term goals have been to characterize these loci with            
              the aim of elucidating the structure, function, and origin of SD               
              chromosomes.  Molecular analysis of Sd indicates that it is                    
              associated with a tandem duplication of a normal genomic segment.              
              The tandem duplication encodes an Sd-specific 4.2 kb transcript.               
              In addition, the duplication specifies a family of 2 kb transcripts            
              some or all of which are also present in Sd+.  Sequence analysis               
              of Sd and Sd+ cDNAs reveals that most members of the 2 kb family               
              share the same ORF.  cDNAs corresponding to the 4.2 kb transcript              
              have not yet been identified.  Our data suggest that the neomorphic            
              phenotype of Sd results from expression of a novel fusion protein              
              or from the ectopic or overexpression of a normal (Sd+) protein.               
              To elucidate the molecular nature of Sd in greater detail we                   
              propose to: isolate and characterize cDNAs corresponding to the 4.2            
              kb transcript; use anchored PCR techniques to characterize the                 
              complete set of transcripts in the 2 kb family and to compare this             
              array in SD and SD+ with emphasis on identifying any transcripts               
              that may be Sd-specific or expressed preferentially in testes;                 
              raise antisera against the common ORF for Western blot and                     
              immunolocalization analysis of Sd and Sd+ polypeptides;a nd isolate            
              and characterize Sd+ null mutations.  Insight into the segregation-            
              distortion system should enhance our understanding of a fundamental            
              genetic mechanism, meiotic drive.  But it is also clear that such              
              an understanding could be of great practical use in designing gene             
              vectors which have an insertion advantage.
