Title       : Exploratory Research and Development for use of the Server- Client Paradigm in
               Geographically Distributed Biological Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1990      
File        : a9014674

Award Number: 9014674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49290              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Marr   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A collaboration will be established between the National Center                
              for Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois,                 
              under the direction of Dr. Larry Smarr, and Computational                      
              Molecular Biology Group at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, under                
              the direction of Dr. Thomas Marr.  This collaboration will                     
              demonstrate how advanced computing technology and software tools               
              can be applied to solve a variety of problems in molecular                     
              biology.  Immediate attention will be directed to building a                   
              program interface and a user interface into geographically                     
              distributed biological databases.  The program and user                        
              interfaces will provide a unified environment for query,                       
              retrieval, and analysis of data residing on geographically                     
              separated computers.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Specifically, the project will involve building a Macintosh-based              
              front end system to permit relatively computer-naive scientists                
              interactive access into the full information content of the new,               
              relational version of GenBank, running on a remotely located                   
              server accessible over a T-1 internet connection.  In addition,                
              investigations will be made into the feasibility of using object-              
              oriented database technology for managing genomic data.
