Title       : U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research: Cell Biology and Enzyme Localization Research
               in the Marine Diazotroph, Trichodesmium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1991   
File        : a9014842

Award Number: 9014842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Carpenter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5937      SWEDEN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1650,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research in biological                   
              oceanography between Dr. Edward Carpenter, State University                    
              of New York at Stony Brook, and Dr. Birgitta Bergman,                          
              Institute of Physiological Botany, University of Uppsala,                      
              Sweden.  The objective of the proposed research is to study                    
              the physiology of nitrogen fixation in the pelagic                             
              cyanobacterium Trichodesmium.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This organism is significant in the biology of the world's                     
              oceans as a major contributor of new nitrogen to tropical                      
              and subtropical seas.  In the proposed project, Dr.                            
              Carpenter will study advanced techniques on enzyme                             
              localization, molecular biology and electron microscopy in                     
              order to address major unresolved questions concerning this                    
              enigmatic organism, in particular, how this non-heterocystous                  
              colony is able to fix nitrogen during the day under aerobic                    
              conditions. He will focus on:  1) the location and abundance                   
              of the enzyme nitrogenase through diel cycles, 2) the                          
              localization and abundance of N transforming enzymes GS and                    
              GOGAT, with the goal of understanding how fixed nitrogen is                    
              transferred from diazotrophic cells to vegetative cells, 3)                    
              the location of oxygen protective enzymes, such as uptake                      
              hydrogenases and superoxide dismutase, and 4) the location                     
              of other proteins involved in photosynthesis.  The two                         
              major Trichodesmium species, erythraeum and thiebautii,                        
              will be contrasted. The research will be carried out                           
              through the study of Trichodesmium samples at the Institute                    
              of Physiological Botany in Uppsala, jointly with Dr.                           
              Bergman.  The complementary expertise of the two                               
              investigators in immuno-localization at the LM and TEM                         
              level of key proteins in cynobacteria will contribute to                       
              the success of the proposed project.
