Title       : Solution of Inverse Problems in Electromagnetic and Optical Propagation Using
               Artificial Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  1992    
File        : a9014243

Award Number: 9014243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Goldberg                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leung Tsang tsang@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Akira Ishimaru  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jenq-Neng Hwang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In electromagnetic and optical propagation analysis,                           
              the forward problem denotes the calculation of fields                          
              and waves given the parameters of the media.  The                              
              inverse problem is to calculate the target or media                            
              parameters from given or measured fields and waves.                            
              In the past, study of the forward problem has been                             
              done extensively.  However there is a relative lack of                         
              systematic investigation of the electromagnetic and                            
              optical inverse problems because of the highly                                 
              nonlinear relations between fields and the media                               
              parameters.  With the use of recent Artificial Neural                          
              Networks (ANN), we have been successful in                                     
              developing efficient and speedy algorithms to solve                            
              nonlinear inverse problems in fields and waves.                                
              Specifically we propose to apply and develop ANN                               
              algorithms and query learning techniques for the                               
              study of the following:                                                        
                                                                                             
              1.  Inverse problems in microwave and optical                                  
              scattering in remote sensing of agriculture and ice                            
              and snow will be investigated.  Multiple scattering                            
              effects of discrete random media and rough surfaces                            
              will be included.  The ANN algorithms and query                                
              learning techniques will be applied to both synthetic                          
              data as well as satellite and aircraft remote sensing                          
              measurements.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              2.  Fast acquisition of design parameters in the                               
              parametric frequency selective surface designs based                           
              on neural network inversion will be investigated.                              
              Constrained inversion for iterative acquisition of                             
              2D/3D surfaces using bitmap representations will be                            
              included.  These techniques will also be applied to                            
              identify new surface elements that will provide                                
              unconventional frequency responses.
