Title       : Digital Measurements of Power System Quantities in Non-Sinusoidal Condition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1990      
File        : a9014961

Award Number: 9014961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Vittal                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47135              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elham B. Makram makram@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
              This is a Career Advancement award in the                                      
              Research Opportunities for Women (ROW)                                         
              program.  The advancement and wide                                             
              applications of electronic devices and                                         
              microprocessors in many areas significantly                                    
              contribute to electrical waveform distortion.                                  
              This created the need for basic research on                                    
              principles and methods of instrumentations of                                  
              electrical quantities in non-sinusoidal                                        
              situations.  Also, there are many situations                                   
              in large scale systems, where a disturbance                                    
              cause fluctuation in many fundamental                                          
              frequency and nominal voltage.  The                                            
              measurement of such fluctuations from highly                                   
              distorted waveforms will certainly contribute                                  
              to the fast detection of the disturbance.                                      
              Therefore, this proposal includes three major                                  
              tasks to be achieved.  First, to establish the                                 
              proper definition of the quantities to be                                      
              measured in non-sinusoidal situations.  The                                    
              confusion and discrepancy of distorted power,                                  
              active power, reactive power, and power factor                                 
              in non-sinusoidal waveforms will be addressed                                  
              in a scientific and experimental manner.  The                                  
              second task will be concerned with the                                         
              development of microprocessor-based optimal                                    
              estimation techniques for the measurement of:                                  
              waveform effective value, fundamental                                          
              component RMS value, time domain active,                                       
              reactive, apparent and distorted power.  Also                                  
              the development of microprocessor based                                        
              techniques for recursive estimation of                                         
              frequency deviation will be investigated.  The                                 
              third task deals with a hardware                                               
              implementation, a laboratory testing and an                                    
              investigation of the measurement technique for                                 
              active, reactive, and apparent power.  The                                     
              errors in each approach will be evaluated.
