Title       : U.S.- Austria Cooperative Research on the Evolution and Ontogeny of the
               Functions of Conjugated Catecholamines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1991       
File        : a9014035

Award Number: 9014035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14230              (Estimated)
Investigator: August Epple   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thomas Jefferson Univ
	      1020 Locust Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19107    215/503-6976

NSF Program : 5955      AUSTRIA
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1144,
Abstract    :
              This award will support cooperative research in comparative                    
              physiology between Dr. August Epple, Thomas Jefferson Medical                  
              College, and Dr. Sepp Porta, University of Graz, Austria.  The                 
              objective of this project is to improve understanding of the                   
              function of circulating catecholamine conjugates, and provide                  
              insights into the completely unknown ontogeny and evolution                    
              of these conjugates.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Recently it has become clear that the cardiovascular chromaffin                
              cells of many, and perhaps all, vertebrates produce a complex                  
              secretory "cocktail", whose messenger substances include, in                   
              addition to catecholamines, peptides and true opiates                          
              (codeine and morphine).  The interactions between these                        
              secretions are largely unknown, and they are the subject of                    
              ongoing research in Dr. Epple's laboratory in the US.  The                     
              complexity of these interactions is further enhanced by                        
              circulating catecholamine glucuronides and sulfates, substances                
              that have been studied for a number of years by Dr. Porta's                    
              laboratory in Austria.  Traditionally, these conjugates have                   
              been considered metabolites destined for excretion.  However,                  
              it now appears that at least some fraction of the conjugates                   
              1) are released by the adrenal medulla, and 2) function as                     
              messenger substances.  The proposed project will apply a                       
              phylogenetic/ontogenetic approach and will investigate three                   
              species, whose chromaffin cell systems represent three levels                  
              in the evolution of the adrenal medulla (lamprey, eel and                      
              rat), as well as the chicken embryo, whose chromaffin cell                     
              system resembles that of the lamprey.  The investigations                      
              will combine the experience of Dr. Epple's lab with lower                      
              vertebrates and the chicken embryo, and the technical                          
              expertise of Dr. Porta's lab in the analysis of the conjugated                 
              catecholamines.  The expected data should provide new basic                    
              insights into the ontogeny, evolution and function of                          
              conjugated plasma catecholamines as physiological regulators.
