Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: A Study of the Effect of Soil Nitrogen on
               Water-Use Efficiency in Eucalypts from Contrasting Habitats (Long-Term Visit)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1992     
File        : a9014902

Award Number: 9014902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay E. Anderson andejay@ucs.isu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Idaho State University
	      
	      Pocatello, ID  83209    208/236-3277

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a Long-Term Research Visit to the Australian           
              National University (ANU) by Professor Jay E. Anderson, Department of          
              Biological Sciences, Idaho State University.  The visit takes place            
              under the U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program.  While in                
              Australia, Professor Anderson will collaborate with Professor Graham           
              D. Farquhar, Research School of Biological Sciences, ANU, and Dr.              
              Michael P. Austin, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research             
              Organization (CSIRO).  The objectives of the project are (1) to                
              determine whether the observed distributions of three species of               
              Eucalyptus in southeastern Australia are related to differences in             
              the efficiency with which the different species use water, and (2)             
              to resolve whether variation in water use efficiency among species             
              results from inherent differences in photosynthetic or other                   
              physiological processes (including stomatal) involving the leaf, or            
              whether differences in ability to acquire nutrients, especially                
              nitrogen, from the soil are responsible.   The results are relevant            
              to agricultural and silvicultural selection programs aimed at                  
              identifying plant species and genotypes that are superior in water             
              use efficiency, as well as to efforts to understand mechanisms that            
              underlie the natural distribution of species.  Professor Anderson              
              will carry out this research while on sabbatical leave from Idaho              
              State University.  He will study eucalypts in Australia subjected to           
              gradients in mean annual temperature and in mean annual rainfall.              
              The effect of nitrogen level on plant growth, photosynthetic                   
              capacity, stomatal conductance, carboxylation efficiency, water use            
              efficiency, and nitrogen use efficiency will be studied.                       
                                                                                             
              Both the U.S. and Australian groups have experience in this area of            
              research.  Previous work by Professor Anderson and his group in                
              Idaho has shown that nitrogen fertilization improves water use                 
              efficiency among native species.  Professor Farquhar and his                   
              colleagues at ANU have been responsible for many advances in the               
              understanding of the efficiency of water use by plants, and have               
              provided both theoretical models and empirical evidence relating               
              carbon isotope discrimination in the photosynthetic process to water           
              use efficiency.  Dr. Austin, of CSIRO's Division of Wildlife and               
              Ecology, is a leading international vegetation scientist who has               
              studied eucalypt distributions in gradients of temperature and                 
              rainfall.  Experimental facilities at ANU, including an analytical             
              laboratory for performing isotopic and other analyses, will greatly            
              facilitate the carrying out of this research project.
