Title       : U.S.-UK Cooperative Research: Advanced Modeling Techniques for Brushless
               Doubly-Fed Electrical Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1990  
File        : a9014105

Award Number: 9014105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15815              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan K. Wallace wallace@ece.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1445,
Abstract    :
              This award will support cooperative research in electrical                     
              engineering between Dr. Alan Wallace, Oregon State University,                 
              and Professor Stephen Williamson, Cambridge University,                        
              England.  The objective of the proposed project is to                          
              investigate advanced modelling techniques for brushless                        
              doubly-fed electrical machines (BDFM's), a new development                     
              in adjustable-speed drive and variable-speed generation                        
              systems.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              At Oregon State University, two proof-of-concept machines                      
              have already been built and linear mathematical models have                    
              been developed, which give performance predictions which                       
              correlate with test results at specific conditions.                            
              However, the BDFM is intended for operation over a wide                        
              range of speed, frequency, and magnetic loading.  Under such                   
              conditions, saturation and hysteresis in magnetic materials,                   
              and skin-effects in large sectional conductors make linear                     
              models inadequate for design purposes.  The most advanced                      
              techniques to handle nonlinear analysis and design of                          
              conventional-cage rotors have been developed by Professor                      
              Williamson of Cambridge University.  These techniques, which                   
              periodically utilize finite element analyses of internal                       
              machine fields to determine revised values of linear model                     
              parameters, appear to offer the best chance of modification                    
              to cover the unique BDFM rotor configurations.  The US                         
              principal investigator proposes to adapt the Cambridge                         
              techniques for inclusion in Oregon State University's models                   
              of BDFM in order to develop detailed design for specific                       
              applications currently being selected at OSU. The results of                   
              this research will make an important contribution to the                       
              potential commercial viability of BDFM's.
