Title       : Preliminary Experiments on LAMDA Effect Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1990      
File        : a9014834

Award Number: 9014834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joann P. Roskoski                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : May 31,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Bearden   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              In a series of experiments during the summer of 1989 using laser               
              interferometry to study auditory transduction and motion, the PIs              
              observed that a small amount of light back-reflected into a He-Ne              
              gas laser cavity by a moving object produced a large and                       
              predictable of the laser's output intensity.  In company with                  
              many other laser experimentalist, the PIs at first deemed this                 
              observation as a chaotic nuisance effect to be avoided; further                
              investigation showed that this effect can provide an extremely                 
              valuable alternative to complex, high-precision Michelson or                   
              MachZehnder or other types of interferometry.  This new method,                
              using only an inexpensive gas laser and the target, is                         
              particularly useful for the measurement of motions and                         
              displacements from microns down to picometers.                                 
                                                                                             
              The effect, named LAMDA (Laser Amplified Motion Detection and                  
              Analysis), is linear for changes in target position of less than               
               8 of the laser light wavelength and has been observed easily for              
              motion as small as ~ 10  picometers.  LAMDA requires only a small              
              amount (106 - 0.1%) of back reflected light; this is easily                    
              obtained with diffuse scattering surfaces or from small changes                
              of refractive index at dielectric boundaries.  Although observed               
              in the PI's laboratory with He-Ne lasers, the effect should be                 
              present for all continuous wave lasers including diode lasers.                 
                                                                                             
              Being able to measure motion and displacement down to the                      
              picometer scale with the simplest of experimental arrangements,                
              an inexpensive laser and the surface to be measured, opens a                   
              whole new range of motion and vibration analysis, imaging,                     
              optical metrology, and optical data-storage possibilities.   1 It              
              is anticipated that LAMDA, when thoroughly understood and                      
              applied, will have an effect on many fields of scientific                      
              research and technology.  For the past several months we have                  
              begun to characterize in detail the mechanism and provide a firm               
              theoretical basis for this LAMDA effect.   2 To date, one of the               
              most interesting applications of LAMDA that we have found so far               
              is the possibility of using LAMDA's high z-resolution                          
              (picometers) as the basis for a light microscope having the                    
              ability to resolve finer detail than possible with normal                      
              Frauenhofer-diffraction limited microscope objectives (~200-                   
              400nm).  By utilizing the LAMDA effect in a scanning confocal                  
              microscope design, we hope to observe features of biological                   
              samples to a resolution of 10nm.
