Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Adaptive Robust Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1991   
File        : a9014152

Award Number: 9014152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5680               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Kosut   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Integrated Systems Inc
	      201 Moffett Park Drive
	      Sunnyvale, CA  94089    408/542-1816

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1454,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a visit by Dr. Robert L. Kosut of                          
              Integrated Systems Incorporated, Santa Clara, California, to                   
              the Australian National University, Canberra, Australia, to                    
              work with Dr. Prof. Brian D.O. Anderson of the Systems                         
              Engineering Department, Australian National University,                        
              Canberra, on adaptive robust control.  The authors will                        
              investigate the implications of the classical averaging                        
              analysis method to the design of nonlinear adaptive control                    
              systems.  In connection with this, they will study the                         
              problem of robust adaptive control, in which estimated                         
              inaccuracy regions for the estimated parameters play an                        
              important role in the design.  The researchers point out that                  
              while it is easy to construct an adaptive system by connecting                 
              a design rule and an estimator together, it is very difficult                  
              to ensure by analysis that the resulting adaptive system will                  
              provide acceptable performance.  They plan to eliminate                        
              problems from the start by digital control of nonlinear                        
              sampled-data systems.  They will investigate the performance                   
              of the resulting controller in the context of robotic                          
              mechanisms.  To perform this task, they will use: (1)                          
              averaging analysis of adaptive control systems; and (2)                        
              adaptive system synthesis via uncertainty estimation.  In                      
              both cases, they state current results obtained for linear                     
              systems, and argue how the same approaches will be used for                    
              nonlinear systems.
