Title       : Dissertation Research: Stable Isotope Analysis of Paleosols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1991       
File        : a9014160

Award Number: 9014160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley H. Ambrose Ambrose@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Stanley Ambrose, Professor of                       
              Anthropology at the University of Illinois, Urbana, Ms. Nancy                  
              Sikes will carry out a combined program of field and laboratory                
              analysis to collect data for her doctoral dissertation.  The twin              
              goals of her project are to develop techniques for reconstructing              
              past vegetation communities and then apply them to significant                 
              archaeological sites in East Africa.  She will focus on the                    
              analysis of carbon isotopes in organic components of soil.                     
              Plants utilize different metabolic pathways and as a result,                   
              contain different ratios of carbon isotopes.  Since such                       
              vegetation provides the main organic component in soil, different              
              soils may vary in isotope ratio based on the vegetation they                   
              sustained.  Preliminary analysis suggests it is possible to work               
              backwards from soil to plant community.                                        
                                                                                             
              Ms. Sikes will study a number of soils in East Africa.  Following              
              an altitudinal gradient she will note modern plant cover and then              
              collect associated soil.  After isotope analysis she will try to               
              determine different types of signatures.  On this basis she will               
              then study samples from two important archaeological sites:                    
              Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania and Olorgessalie which is located in                 
              central Kenya.  Long-term work at both sites has yielded                       
              extensive samples of early hominid cultural remains.  To                       
              interpret the activities which took place and, therefore, gain                 
              insight into hominid adaptations, it is necessary to establish                 
              the environmental context, and Ms. Sikes analyses should provide               
              a basis.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will help to               
              develop a technique of use in a wide range of archaeological                   
              situations.  It will also provide insight into how early humans                
              lived.  Finally, it will further the training of an extremely                  
              promising young scientist.
