Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9014535

Award Number: 9014535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9953               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Gaile   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  In developing countries with market economies, small-scale                
              enterprises are a growing part of rural nonfarm economic activity.             
              Women's participation in rural small-scale enterprises is gaining              
              increased recognition.  Despite the increased interest in rural women's        
              small-scale enterprise activity, little attention has been directed            
              toward the spatial dimensions that may constrain or encourage women's          
              enterprises.  This doctoral dissertation research will investigate the         
              impact of isolation from principal market centers on the establishment         
              and management of small-scale enterprises by women in Kenya.                   
              Adjustments that women make in managing small-scale enterprises as they        
              attempt to meet their obligations as providers for their families              
              through a combination of many different productive activities may be           
              related to their carrying out business transactions in more isolated           
              markets, such as periodic markets, or in village-level markets.  The           
              project will use questionnaires administered to women entrepreneurs in         
              rural districts.  Responses will provide a database for testing                
              hypotheses that examine differences in the operations of women's               
              small-scale enterprises in association with more isolated and less             
              sophisticated rural markets.                                                   
                                                                                             
                   By addressing influences of spatial isolation on women's economic         
              development, the project will add an innovative empirical and                  
              theoretical study to the growing body of geographical research on              
              development-related issues.  It will provide information to assist in          
              the formulation of specific policy plans for enhancing the more                
              complete participation of women in rural development.  The project also        
              will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to         
              continue to develop independent research skills.
