Title       : IAI Workshop: Planning of the Trade Convergence Climate Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1998     
File        : a9530154

Award Number: 9530154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54194              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Enfield   (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria C. Donoso  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Pilar Cornejo-Grunauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CATHALAC
	      P.O. Box 873372
	      Republic of Panama, PM  000000000    /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Enfield   This proposal will allow for the planning of a proposal for Phase II
              of the   IAI Start-Up Grant Program by institutions in the Caribbean and
              Pacific   Coasts of North, Central, and South America.  These institutions have
              the   common goal of studying the interactions between the sea surface  
              temperatures (SST) of the Pacific and Caribbean and the overlying trade  
              convergence regime of the troposphere and the resulting anomalous   excursions
              and intensity fluctuations of rain-producing processes.  The   ultimate goal is
              to study the detail of these processes, to examine the   relationships to the
              details of climate anomalies in the region and to   develop useful ways of
              forecasting the resulting climate fluctuations.  The   forecast activities will
              take into account the potential social and   economic impacts on human
              activities within the region so that the relevant   aspects of the climate can
              de identified and strongly targeted for   research.   The workshop will enable
              the core group of institutions in Colombia, Costa   Rica, Ecuador, Panama, and
              the United States to reach out to the other   institutions of the region to
              inform them of the goals of the project,   understand their needs and
              priorities, and coordinate with them to jointly   plan for the implementation
              of research and ultimately of useful forecasts.   This proposal assembles a
              diverse team of investigators from both academic   and governmental
              institutions in Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Panama, and   the United States.
               These countries are Member States of the IAI, an   initiative to stimulate
              cooperative research on global change issues among   the scientific
              institutions of the Americas.  The National Science   Foundation is the
              designated U.S. Government agency to carry out the U.S.   responsibilities
              within the IAI.   This proposal will allow for the planning of a proposal for
              Phase II of the   IAI Start-Up Grant Program by institutions in the Caribbean
              and Pacific   Coasts of North, Central, and South Americ a.  These institutions
              have the   common goal of studying interannual climate variability in the humid
                tropics in order to produce climate forecasts that are useful to society.  
              The workshop will enable the core group of institutions in Colombia, Costa  
              Rica, Ecuador, Panama, and the United States to reach out to the other  
              institutions of the region to inform them of the goals of the project,  
              understand their needs and priorities, and coordinate with them to jointly  
              plan for the implementation of research and ultimately of useful forecasts.   
              This proposal assembles a diverse team of investigators from both academic  
              and governmental institutions in Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Panama, and  
              the United States.  These countries are Member States of the IAI, an  
              initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among  
              the scientific institutions of the Americas.  The National Science   Foundation
              is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry out the U.S.  
              responsibilities within the IAI.  ***
