Title       : Molecular Thermodynamics of Protein Interactions; Applications to Protein
               Separations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9530793

Award Number: 9530793
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $739865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey W. Blanch blanch@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Prausnitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9530793  Blanch    Recovery and purification of proteins is of vital importance
              in biotechnology.  Design and optimization of separation and purification
              processes requires an understanding of the behavior of proteins in complex
              aqueous solutions, where salts, polymers or other solutes may be dilute or
              concentrated.  The objective of this proposal is to develop a separation
              processes.  We are concerned in particular with protein precipitation by salts
              and with protein crystallization;  however, protein solution behavior is also
              important in stability and formulation of therapeutic proteins, and in
              understanding intermolecular reactions.  This proposal is for continued support
              of a two-year NSF project OThermodynamics of Protein Precipitation in Aqueous
              SolutionsO.    The approach is to describe protein solution behavior on a
              molecular level, in terms of a two-body potential of mean force (PMF), which
              describes the overall interactions between two protein molecules.  The PMF is
              determined by the physicochemical properties of the protein, the nature of the
              solution and temperature.  From the PMF, thermodynamic solution properties may
              be obtained for predicting protein-precipitation phase-equilibrium  properties.
               It is planned to employ liquid-state integral-equation theory to develop new
              expressions for the compressibility and Helmholtz energy of protein solutions;
              from these expressions phase equilibria are obtained.    This modeling approach
              is coupled with an experimental program to determine the phase equilibria of a
              number of model proteins with particular attention given to selective
              precipitation of a target protein from a mixture.  In addition, specific
              protein interactions will be experimentally quantified.  Low-angle laser-light
              scattering and membrane osmometry will provide information on intermolecular
              forces and aggregation.  Specific protein-protein interactions will be examined
              by dynamic light scattering.  Electrostatic and hydrophobic contributions to
              the PMF will be probed by sy stematically changing amino-acid residues on the
              model proteins.  Specific ion-protein interactions will be quantified using
              differential refractometry Cl NMR and protein titrations.  ***    A further
              component of the proposed research is to examine solution conditions which
              favor protein crystallization.  The hypothesis that a crystallizing solvent
              results in weak attractive interactions between proteins, while strongly
              attractive conditions favor amorphous precipitation, will be examined by
              determining the osmotic second virial coefficients for a number of proteins in
              crystallizing solvents.  It is planned to investigate critically an idea
              supported by preliminary data, viz. that crystallization is most likely when
              the osmotic second virial coefficient of a protein is slightly, but not
              strongly, negative.
