Title       : Distribution, Sources and Sinks of Dissolved Organic Matter in the Southern
               Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1998     
File        : a9530609

Award Number: 9530609
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342538             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine Goyet cgoyet@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward T. Peltzer  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530609  Peltzer         This research project is part of the US Joint Global 
              Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at  (1) a better
              understanding of the fluxes of carbon, both  organic and inorganic, in the
              Southern Ocean, (2)  identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical 
              factors and processes which regulate the magnitude and  variability of these
              fluxes, and (3) placing these fluxes  into the context of the contemporary
              global carbon cycle.       This work is one of forty-four projects that are 
              collaborating in the Southern Ocean Experiment of the Joint  Global Ocean Flux
              Study.   The Southern Ocean Experiment is  a three-year effort south of the
              Antarctic Polar Frontal  Zone to track the flow of carbon through its organic
              and  inorganic pathways from the air-ocean interface through the  entire water
              column into the bottom sediment.   The  experiment will make use of the RVIB
              Nathaniel B. Palmer  and the R/V Thompson.       The five principal objectives
              of this component are  (1) to determine via shipboard measurement of both 
              dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and total organic carbon  (TOC), and the spatial
              and temporal distribution of  dissolved organic matter (DOM) in the Southern
              Ocean; (2)  to identify the sites of net DOM production and export; (3)  to
              estimate rates of net DOM production and export; (4)  to  estimate  rates of
              bacterial remineralization of DOM; and (5) to  place these rates in the context
              of the global carbon  cycle.       The net rates of DOM production and
              consumption will  be estimated by a combination of in situ measurements and 
              shipboard incubation experiments.  Large scale rates will  be calculated from a
               combination of simple box and advection-diffusion models.  Routine sample
              collection will be accomplished via small  water samples drawn from 10 liter
              Niskin bottles on the CTD  rosette.  This work will have an emphasis on making
              large-  scale surveys and repeating these surveys on a seasonal  basis, and
              will be conducted in collabora tion with a  complementary study that emphasizes
              process-oriented  measurements of bacterial remineralization rates.       The
              Southern Ocean  is the only JGOFS study site where  the vertical stability is
              low, and where intermediate and  deep water masses are being formed.  This
              situation allows  the direct observation of the rate at which DOM is 
              sequestered in the deep ocean.  ***
