Title       : IAI Workshop: Cooperative Pelagic Ecosystem Studies Between the Chilean and
               Hawaii Ocean Time-Series: Initial Phase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9530082

Award Number: 9530082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44262              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. Abbott mark@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ricardo M. Letelier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0521700   Marine Resources                        
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530082  Abbott  Hydrobiological time-series provide invaluable information to
              the scientific community for the understanding of the role of oceans in climate
              variability.  They also provide background information from which
              multidisciplinary process studies may be developed.  Two Joint Global Flux
              Study (JGOFS) sponsored programs, the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT) and the
              Chilean Time-series are actively working in the North and South Pacific,
              respectively.  These two programs present an ideal research platform for the
              ocean scientific community from which to develop comparative and cooperative
              studies.  However, because both time-series were generated by local
              initiatives, no exchange of information between these programs exists to date. 
              The PIs of this proposal propose to work actively toward the generation of a
              collaborative program by organizing a 1 week meeting in which researchers that
              use these time-series as a platform of research that will exchange results,
              methodologies, analyze the necessity of intercalibration exercises, explore
              avenues of collaborative research, and prepare a Phase II project proposal,
              based on common research hypotheses.  Both the Hawaii Ocean Time-series program
              and the Chilean Time-series initiative are trying to address common issues
              measuring a similar set of core parameters and utilizing similar techniques.
              They are both concerned with interannual climate variability, with the response
              of the pelagic ecosystems to climate change, and with the role of the ocean on
              global carbon cycle.  Furthermore, both programs have deployed bottom-moored
              sediment traps at the Oceanic Stations that provide a continuous record of
              temporal variability in the particulate downward fluxes.  Long term plans for
              these stations are to deploy automated instruments on a moored buoy to have
              continuous record of selected climatological and water column parameters. 
              These time-series programs provide background information on the temporal
              variability of the pelagic ecosystems structure  from which comparative studies
              and testable hypotheses may be developed.  However, comparative studies will
              require the coordinated effort between institutions participating in both
              time-series programs, and this is the purpose of the workshop during which
              scientists will discuss the main scientific issues and to formulate
              collaborative efforts for a Phase II proposal.  %%%  Hydrobiological
              time-series provide invaluable information to the scientific community for the
              understanding of the role of oceans in climate variability.  They also provide
              background information from which multidisciplinary process studies may be
              developed.  Two Joint Global Flux Study (JGOFS) sponsored programs, the Hawaii
              Ocean Time-series (HOT) and the Chilean Time-series are actively working in the
              North and South Pacific, respectively.  These two programs present an ideal
              research platform for the ocean scientific community from which to develop
              comparative and cooperative studies.  However, because both time-series were
              generated by local initiatives, no exchange of information between these
              programs exists to date.  The PIs of this proposal propose to work actively
              toward the generation of a collaborative program by organizing a 1 week meeting
              in which researchers that use these time-series as a platform of research that
              will exchange results, methodologies, analyze the necessity of intercalibration
              exercises, explore avenues of collaborative research, and prepare a Phase II
              project proposal, based on common research hypotheses.  The Chilean Time-series
              Stations are located in a region with marked temporal interannual variability
              resulting from the effects of ENSO.  The characterization and understanding of
              this oscillation is a major concern for Chilean fisheries and for the
              international community.  For example, Chile has become the fourth country in
              the world for total fish catch.  In 1994 an export return of US$ 1.35B was
              achieved and thus made fisheries one of the most important resources of the
              Chilean economy .  Results from the HOT program also suggest that ENSO events
              may be import in enhancing primary production in oceanic subtropical gyres.   
              Comparative studies will require the coordinated effort between institutions
              participating in both time-series programs and will require the development of
              intercalibration exercises of key parameters and standardized protocols.  To
              achieve the goals of this proposal, a team of scientists from the following
              countries will be assembled: Chile; the United States; Denmark; and Germany. 
              Chile and the United States are Member States of the Inter-American Institute
              for Global Change Research (IAI), an initiative to stimulate cooperative
              research on global change issues among the scientific institutions of the
              Americas.  The National Science Foundation is the designated U.S. Government
              agency to carry out the United States? responsibilities within the IAI.  ***
