Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Dynamics and Kinetics of Spatially Extended Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1998  
File        : a9530637

Award Number: 9530637
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Bunimovich bunimovh@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Bunimovich        The proposed research deals with the dynamics of
              spatially extended systems. The systems under study include nonlinear
              hyperbolic partial differential equations, lattice dynamical   systems (in
              particular, coupled map lattices), lattice gas cellular automata and the
              systems of interacting particles. The pattern formation problem will be studied
              as well as order-chaos transitions.  Most of the questions that will be
              addressed have their origin in   physics and hydrodynamics, and were
              transformed into the mathematical form by the principal investigator with
              collaborators during the last fifteen years. A broad approach will be used that
              combines methods of the ergodic theory, the theory of nonuniformly hyperbolic
              dynamical systems, stability theory of infinite dimensional dynamical systemq  
              and the theory of bifurcations.    The recent breakthrough in the understanding
              of a complex (chaotic) dynamics of systems evolving in time (dynamical systems)
              was connected with the studies of nonextended (point) dynamical systems whose
              dynamics can be completely described by measurements   performed at a single
              point of a real (physical) space. Evolution of extended systems such as the
              flow of fluids and gases, large systems of interacting elements in electronics
              (e.g. Josephson junctions) needs to be studied in space and time
              simultaneously.  The purpose of this research is to pursue the adequate
              approaches to study such space-time evolution and to develop algorithms to
              evaluate quantities that characterize space-time dynamics. The other novelty is
              the study of systems with dynamics which have both random and deterministic
              components (but not small, random perturbations of deterministic systems or
              vise versa). Most of systems in applications are of this type, e.g. in
              chemistry, artificial intelligence, in the management of warehouses etc.
