Title       : Global Controllability and Stabilization of Bilinear SystemsWith Applications To
               Large Power Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1998  
File        : a9530917

Award Number: 9530917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171473             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Mohler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9530917  Mohler         The aim of this research is to develop a new global 
              controllability and stabilization methodology for  multidimensional
              nonhomogeneous time-invariant bilinear systems  (BLS) with applications to
              large power transmission networks,  particularly Flexible AC Transmission
              Systems (FACTS).       A through understanding of the qualitative behavior of a
               dynamic system is the foundation of all the methods for  controllability and
              stabilization studies.  To this end, the  basis for this proposal is formed by
              a new method recently  introduced by the proposers to study the global
              qualitative  behavior of BLS.  Its core is a nonlinear decomposition technique 
              converting the study into the analysis of the qualitative  behavior of a finite
              number of the corresponding "basic"  uncontrolled systems. The work assumes the
              unboundedness of  (otherwise finite) control.  One of the goals of this
              proposal is  to refine this technique and to distinguish the conditions under 
              which the goal controllability can be achieved (in infinite time)  by bounded
              finite controls (which is the main practical  requirement).  The intent here is
              to focus on the 3-D case and to  give its complete solution in terms of
              eigenvectors and  eigenfunctions of the matrices involved.       In turns out
              that the aforementioned qualitative method fits  quite nicely to the analysis
              of some multidimensional nonlinear  dynamic systems controlled via multipliers
              (coefficients),    9530917  including large power transmission networks. The
              latter systems  are of great practical importance and were the subject of 
              intensive studies for numerous researchers and practical  engineers from the
              turn of the century. On the other hand, in  relation to the topic of this
              proposal, mostly additive damping  and local controllability were considered.
              The emphasis of this  proposed research is given to the global aspects of
              reachability  and controllability, and stabilization (these are closely 
              related) via multipliers/coefficients. This  type of control  structure is
              motivated by numerous adaptive system applications  such as FACTS, which play
              an important role in enhancing dynamic  performance of modern power systems and
              can increase transient  stability margins.  To our knowledge, very little is
              known about  the questions which this proposal addresses.       The research
              proposed here can be split into two parts.  We  start, on the other hand, with
              the analysis making use of  unbounded controls as traditionally assumed
              unavoidable in  general global studies.  On the other hand, taking into account
               that practical controls are normally finite and may be even of a  certain
              sign, we also introduce these assumptions for the  aforementioned unbounded
              controls.  The idea of this approach is  that if a global
              controllability/reachability/stabilization  result holds for unbounded (but
              finite, say nonnegative)  controls, then one can expect/show it to be true in
              the local  aspect (not necessarily small) for the real device of restricted 
              capability.  Yet it is of particular interest, however, to  distinguish, based
              on the proposed methodology, the cases when  the global result can be achieved
              by bounded controls.  ***
