Title       : A Laboratory Study of Till Deformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9530814

Award Number: 9530814
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Odile de la Beaujardiere                
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164285             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal R. Iverson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    Deformation of water-saturated sediment (till) beneath glaciers may, in
              effect, lubricate glacier beds.  Such deformation has been measured beneath a
              number of modern glaciers and may also have contributed to the fast flow of
              Pleistocene ice masses with a possibly profound effect on regional climate.    
                Support is requested to study with a rotary (ring-shear) device that shears a
              water-saturated till sample.  Because the device can deform a large sample to
              infinitely high strains, it can be used to test a much broader range of
              hypotheses than traditional soil testing devices.  For example, it has been
              used successfully to study stress concentrations in shearing sediment and the
              consequent evolution of till grain size.  Special features of the device allow
              continuous observation of the distribution of shear strain, measurement of
              local stresses normal to the direction of shear, and isolation of wall effects.
                 In experiments aimed at better understanding till rheology, both clay-rich
              and clay-poor tills will be sheared with the primary goal of determining the
              relation between deformation rate and the steady (residual) till strength.   In
              some experiments the effective normal stress will be varied to investigate the
              role of transient pore-pressure gradients on the apparent till rheology.  In a
              second set of experiments, the evolution of contacts, the preservation of
              structures (e.g. sublithified sand clasts), and the development of fabric will
              be studied to test field criteria for the identification of highly strained
              Pleistocene tills.  In addition, grain communication will continue to be
              studied with the additional important goal of quantifying the progressive
              degradation of selected diatom species as a function of shear strain.
