Title       : Southern Ocean JGOFS: Mesoscale Physical and Biological Processes at the Polar
               Front
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9530758

Award Number: 9530758
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $629000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Cowles cowles@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Barth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Richman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              95-30758  COWLES    This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean
              Flux  study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better  understanding
              of the fluxes of carbon, both organic and  inorganic, in the Southern Ocean,
              (2) identifying the physical,  ecological and biogeochemical factors and
              processes which  regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and
              (3)  placing these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global  carbon
              cycle.    The Southern Ocean is recognized as an important , yet poorly 
              resolved, region of the world ocean.  It is thought that this  region plays a
              critical role in global carbon dynamics, as well  as strongly influencing the
              flux of heat and salt between the  Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans. 
              Attempts to improve our  understanding of this region and its role in the
              global carbon  budget depend on our ability to adequately assess those
              processes  which control or constrain the rates of carbon fixation and air- 
              sea exchange of CO2.  Recent observations in the Southern Ocean  suggest that
              mesoscale variability in physical, chemical and  biological properties limits
              our ability to provide accurate  large-scale estimates of important rate
              processes.  Our  understanding of carbon flux in the Southern Ocean thus
              depends  upon resolution of connections between mesoscale and large-scale 
              processes.    The mesoscale dynamics of the Polar Front region of the Antarctic
               Circumpolar Current will be investigated using an instrumented  towed vehicle
              (SeaSoar) to resolve the physical and biological  fields over horizontal
              spatial scales of 1-150 km, with 2m  vertical resolution within the upper 400m.
               High resolution  surveys of physical and biological properties will be made
              during  three cruises in the Polar Front (Oct `97, Dec-Jan `97/'98, Mar  `98).
              Towed instrumentation will document the physical and  biological structure
              associated with mixing and interleaving of  mesoscale features.  The high
              resolution surveys of physical  properties will  allow the determination of the
              relationship  between lateral processes and local vertical mixing.  Resolution 
              of these mesoscale circulation features will be critical for the  evaluation of
              the properties measured at discrete sampling  stations, and will provide the
              regional context for evaluation of  carbon flux at given locations.   
              Objectives are:  1) determine the characteristics and spatial scales of the 
              physical and biological fields in the Polar Frontal region of the  Antarctic
              Circumpolar Current system;  2) evaluate the role of mesoscale circulation in
              mixing heat,  salt, and biogeochemical properties into and out of the euphotic 
              zone;  3) determine, using bio-optical indices, the spatial scales of 
              photoadaptation of the autorophic assemblage in the Polar Front  region;  4)
              incorporate mesoscale patterns of physical and biological  property
              distribution into a high resolution regional ocean  circulation model.
