Title       : IAI Workshop: Global Change Assessment in Temperate Agricultural Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9530099

Award Number: 9530099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos O. Scoppa dircirn@  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Centro De Invest Recu Geo
	      
	      Buenos Aires Argentina,   00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              0511603   Societal Aspects                        
              65        Agricultural                            
              82        Economics                               
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530099  Scoppa   The purpose of the workshop is to create an international
              network with research institutions from Brazil, Uruguay, and Argentina to study
              the effects of global change on Agriculture as a way to understand future
              social and economic transformations.  The objectives to be achieved include
              establishing a research network among MERCOSUR participants in collaboration
              with North American scientists attempting to solve questions related to the
              effects of global change on temperate agricultural systems and its
              socioeconomic consequences; to promote a common systems research methodology;
              to define the capabilities of each country to develop the research program
              proposed; and to propose an integrated project employing a systems approach for
              studying global change and ENSO effects on temperate agricultural systems, for
              comparing these effects across hemispheres in the light of management and
              climate contrasts, for assessing the socioeconomic consequences and the
              feasibility of actions leading to adaptation or mitigation, and to promote the
              capabilities of the MERCOSUR Research Center to develop and/or generate models
              for solving regional issues.     To achieve the above mentioned objectives, the
              PI will hold two workshops and two meetings in order to complete the proposal's
              final product of an IAI Phase II proposal.  The IAI Phase II proposal is to
              create a project on the adaptation and mitigation of temperate agricultural
              systems to global change impacts within the contact of creating an IAI research
              center (RC) within the IAI research network.  Scientists from Argentina,
              Brazil, Canada, United States, and Uruguay will be involved in both Phase I and
              Phase II.     This workshop will facilitate the preparation of a proposal for
              the IAI Phase II proposal with the objective of coordinating projects on the
              adaptation and mitigation of temperate agricultural systems to global change
              impacts within the context of creating a research center within the IAI network
              at the Instituto Nacional de Te cnolog a Agopecuaria (INTA) and the National
              Research Center on Natural Resources (CIRN), both of which are located in
              Argentina.  INTA is an institution devoted to research and extension of
              technologies addressed to the agricultural sector. The CIRN's principal
              objective is the study of conservation, evolution and transformation of natural
              resources.  Scientists from Argentina, Brazil, Canada, United States, and
              Uruguay will be involved for the workshop of this proposal and for the project
              planned for the IAI Phase II.     This cooperative effort between North and
              South American scientists will allow improved insights into the functioning of
              temperate agroecosystems and the impact upon them of global change arising from
              comparative analyses.  The use of common methodologies will be promoted as well
              as exchange of soil, climate, experimental and satellite data between the
              cooperative countries in the Phase II project.  The results of Phase II will be
              made available in reports for policy makers.  The participating countries,
              Argentina, Brazil, Canada, United States, and Uruguay, are Member States of the
              Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI), a U.S. initiative to
              stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific
              institutions of the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is the U.S.
              Government agency designated to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI.
                 ***
