Title       : Physical and Biological Controls of CO2 Levels in the Southern Ocean: A
               Multi-Tracer Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1996    
File        : a9530824

Award Number: 9530824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul D. Quay pdquay@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Parker MacCready  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530824  Quay         This research project is part of the US Joint Global 
              Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1)  a better
              understanding of the fluxes of carbon, both organic  and inorganic, in the
              Southern Ocean, (2) identifying the  physical, ecological and biogeochemical
              factors and  processes which regulate the magnitude and variability of  these
              fluxes, and (3) placing these fluxes into the context  of the contemporary
              global carbon cycle.       This work is one of forty-four projects that are 
              collaborating in the Southern Ocean Experiment, a threeyear  effort south of
              the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to track  the flow of carbon through its
              organic and inorganic  pathways from the air-ocean interface through the entire
               water column into the bottom sediment.   The experiment will  make use of two
              ships, the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer and the  R/V Thompson.        The Southern
              Ocean has been implicated, by ocean  models, as an important region of oceanic
              uptake of  anthropogenically produced carbon dioxide.  There is  however,
              little data to corroborate these model predictions.  There are three
              characteristics of the Southern Ocean that  likely have a major impact on the
              strength of this region as  a carbon dioxide sink: deep waters upwell close the
              surface,  high wind speeds cause rapid air-sea exchange of heat and  gases, and
              biological productivity occurs both in the open  ocean and at the ice edge. 
              The interplay between these  three processes controls the surface carbon
              dioxide  concentrations and thus the direction and magnitude of air-  sea gas
              exchange.         This project will use a combination of chemical  measurements
              and a wind-driven circulation model to  determine how deep water upwelling in
              this region exchanges  carbon dioxide with the surface layer, and how air-sea 
              exchange and biological productivity offset the effects of  upwelling on the
              surface carbon dioxide levels.       The measurement and modeling activities
              will yield a  quantitative explan ation of how the air-sea flux of carbon 
              dioxide in the Southern Ocean is affected by circulation,  gas exchange and
              biological productivity.  The model results  will be used to predict how the
              surface carbon dioxide  levels and the ratio of carbon isotopes in the
              dissolved  inorganic carbon pool of the ocean respond to changes in 
              circulation rates and pathways caused by different  atmospheric conditions. 
              These results will help  reconstructions of past conditions of CO2 levels in
              the  Southern Ocean that are based on proxy measurements in  marine sediments
              and continental ice cores.  ***
