Title       : Management and Scientific Service in Support of the U.S. JGOFS Southern Ocean
               Process Study: Hydrography, Coring and Site Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2001   
File        : a9530398

Award Number: 9530398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2075188            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              95-30398  Anderson    This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean
              Flux  Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better  understanding
              of the fluxes of carbon, both organic and  inorganic, in the Southern Ocean,
              (2) identifying the physical,  ecological and biogeochemical factors and
              processes which  regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and
              (3)  placing these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global  carbon
              cycle.    The overall objectives of JGOFS are to determine and understand 
              processes controlling the time-varying fluxes of carbon and  associated
              biogenic elements, and to predict the response of  marine biogeochemical
              processes to climate change.  The Southern  Ocean is critical in the global
              carbon cycle, as judged by its  size and the physical processes which occur in
              it (e.g., deep and  intermediate water formation), but its present quantitative
              role  is uncertain.    JGOFS objectives for the Southern Ocean study are as
              follows:    1)  to constrain the fluxes of carbon (organic and inorganic) and 
              to place these fluxes in the context of the contemporary carbon  cycle;  2)  to
              identify the factors and processes which regulate the  magnitude and
              variability of primary productivity and the fate of  biogenic matter;  3)  to
              determine the response of the Southern Ocean to natural  climate perturbations;
              and  4)  to predict the response of the Southern Ocean to climate  change.   
              In order to successfully address these objectives, a large field  program has
              been designed to provide various investigators the  opportunity to test
              specific hypotheses which relate to these  broadly-defined objectives.  We
              expect the field test to begin in  September 1996, and last through March 1998
              using two ships, the  R.V. Palmer, and the R.V. Thompson.  As most of the
              investigators  will use hydrographic and nutrient data from these cruises, this
               proposal requests funds for the support of the analysis of  nutrient
              concentrations during these thirteen crui ses.  A team of  oceanographic
              experts from a variety of institutions has been  assembled to complete these
              analyses; furthermore, the data will  be scrutinized for errors and provided in
              a timely fashion to all  PI's in the project, as well as to the relevant
              oceanographic  data storage facilities.  The hydrography and coring groups have
               been put together using the successful model for the Arabian Sea  JGOFS study,
              and in conjunction with the nutrient data (supported  under a separate
              proposal), will form a large portion of the  Southern Ocean JGOFS database
              which both field investigators and  modelers will use to clarify the role of
              the Southern Ocean in  the global carbon cycle.
