Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Oscillatory Integrals and ConvolutionOperators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9530537

Award Number: 9530537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48782              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel M. Oberlin oberlin@math.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Oberlin    This is a project in Fourier analysis. It is concerned with
              problems related to certain operators and to certain oscillatory integrals
              which are naturally associated with those operators. The operators are given by
              convolution with measures on curves in Euclidean spaces. In the simplest case
              the oscillatory integrals are one-dimensional integrals with an   exponential
              integrand having polynomial phase function. These integrals arise naturally as
              the Fourier transforms of the measures defining the convolution operators. The
              questions of interest here have been fairly well understood in dimensions 2 and
              3 since about 1985. The investigator has recently had some success with these
              problems in 4 dimensions. The goal of this project is to continue that work by
              extending the range and scope of the methods employed in dimension 4.     Pure
              mathematics is traditionally divided into the areas of analysis, algebra, and
              topology. This is a project in analysis. Very roughly, the roots of analysis
              are to be found in calculus. (The roots of algebra are found in high school
              algebra, and those of topology are in geometry.) The objects of study in
              calculus are functions, derivatives, and integrals.   The derivative of a
              function is an extremely important tool- when it exists. But not all functions
              have derivatives. The existence of a function's derivative is tied up with the
              idea of that function's smoothness. A smoothing operator is a device which
              transforms a function into a closely related but smoother function.
              (Applications of mathematics to the   real world, e.g., problems in fluid
              mechanics like airplane design, almost always make the tacit assumption that
              the functions involved possess a certain degree of smoothness. When, as is
              often the case, the actual function is not that smooth, it must first be passed
              through a smoothing operator. Smoothing operators are also extremely useful in
              communications theory, where they are associated with the processes of noise
              removal and image enhan cement.) Most smoothing operators are of a type known
              as convolution operators. The motivation for this project is the desire to
              understand better certain of these convolution operators. The oscillatory
              integrals of the title are just tools which aid in this understanding.
