Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Discrimination and Juror Comprehension in
               Capital Sentencing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1997     
File        : a9530102

Award Number: 9530102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19180              (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig W. Haney psylaw@ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9530102  Haney  This dissertation improvement project will expand upon the
              preliminary work of the P.I.s on the problems in the quality and degree of
              comprehension of jurors in interpreting capital penalty sentencing
              instructions.  The previous research established key areas of confusion
              surrounding California's pattern instruction.  The present research will
              explore the influence of comprehension on racial bias and a bias favoring death
              verdicts in capital sentencing.  It will use an experimental design to explore
              the effects of racial variables on the decision making processes of penalty
              jurors to test the hypothesis that jurors' inability to comprehend and apply
              sentencing guidelines contributes to the documented racial disparity in death
              sentence imposition.  It is hypothesized that what is interpreted by mock
              jurors as aggravating and mitigating circumstances will be influenced by race
              of victim and defendant.  It is also hypothesized that comprehension problems
              will be worse for items related to mitigation, and that this will create a bias
              in favor of a death verdict among the subjects.  %%%%  This dissertation
              improvement project will expand upon the preliminary work of the P.I.s on the
              problems in the quality and degree of comprehension of jurors in interpreting
              capital penalty sentencing instructions.  The previous research established key
              areas of confusion surrounding California's pattern instruction.  The present
              research will explore the influence of comprehension on racial bias and a bias
              favoring death verdicts in capital sentencing.  It will use an experimental
              design to explore the effects of racial variables on the decision making
              processes of penalty jurors to test the hypothesis that jurors' inability to
              comprehend and apply sentencing guidelines contributes to the documented racial
              disparity in death sentence imposition.  It is hypothesized that what is
              interpreted by mock jurors as aggravating and mitigating circumstances will be
              influenced by race of victim and defendant.   It is also hypothesized that
              comprehension problems will be worse for items related to mitigation, and that
              this will create a bias in favor of a death verdict among the subjects.  ****
