Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Non-Reflecting Boundary Conditions Based on Far Field
               Expansions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9530937

Award Number: 9530937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alvin Bayliss a-bayliss@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9530937  Bayliss    The effectiveness of non-reflecting boundary conditions for
              wave   propagation problems which are based on far field expansions of the  
              solution will be developed, implemented and assessed.  Primarily transient  
              wave propagation problems will be considered, although many of the   techniques
              will also be applicable in the frequency domain. The boundary   conditions are
              based on first deriving convergent or asymptotic expansions   of the solution
              valid in the far field and then constructing differential   operators which
              annihilate the leading order terms in the expansions.    Generally these
              operators require specification of an origin from which   outgoing waves are
              assumed to emanate.  Techniques will be developed in   which interior
              information is used to improve the performance of the   boundary condition.  In
              particular, adaptive boundary conditions will be   developed in which the
              origin is estimated dynamically and locally from   properties of the solution
              in the interior.  Techniques to increase the order of   the boundary condition
              without increasing the order of the differential   operator will also be
              developed.  This will be done by incorporating   inhomogeneous terms into the
              boundary operator, again using properties of   the computed solution in the
              interior.  Finally, far field expansions and   associated boundary conditions
              suitable for damping layers will be   developed, thereby allowing a reduction
              in size of the layers.    The numerical computation of waves, for example,
              acoustic and    electromagnetic waves, will be considered.  These problems are
              typically   governed by equations specified in regions which are unbounded in
              at least   one direction. In order for the problem to be formulated on a
              computer it is   necessary that the unbounded region be replaced by a bounded
              region.    Furthermore, it is necessary that some boundary condition be imposed
              at the   edge (boundary) of the bounded region.  This boundary condition should
                ideally simulate the ori ginal unbounded problem.  However, in general the  
              boundary treatment will not be a perfect simulation of the unbounded   problem
              and there will be spurious reflections emanating from the   boundary.  These
              reflections will propagate into the interior region and   seriously degrade the
              accuracy of the computed solution.  Thus, it is   essential for accurate
              computation that these spurious reflections be   minimized.  Boundary
              conditions will be considered based on properties of   the waves in the far
              field, i.e., far from the sources where the waves are   generated.  Currently
              for any given computation the boundary conditions   are generally determined in
              advance, i.e., at the beginning of the   computation, and are not changed as
              the solution evolves in time.  Thus,    the boundary conditions make no use of
              information about the waves in the   interior. Methodologies will be developed
              in which interior information can   be used to improve the performance of the
              boundary conditions.  In this   approach, the boundary conditions will change
              as time evolves, adapting to   the nature of the solution by making use of
              interior information.  It is   anticipated that the resulting boundary
              treatment will allow a significant   reduction in spurious reflections.  Thus,
              the proposed new boundary   conditions offer the prospect of significant
              improvement in efficiency and   accuracy for the computation of wave
              propagation problems.  Applications   to acoustic, electromagnetic and elastic
              wave propagation will be   considered.
