Title       : IAI Workshop: To Implement a Research and Training Network for Plant-Soil
               Interactions in the Semi-Arid Tropics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1998     
File        : a9530225

Award Number: 9530225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46780              (Estimated)
Investigator: Holm Tiessen tiessen@sask.usask.ca  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Saskatchewan
	      
	      Saskatoon,   00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530225  Tiessen   The network to be established concerns biogeochemical cycles
              in semi-arid tropical ecosystems and derived agricultural systems.  It aims at
              the establishment of a research center for researah, training and education
              from existing links between three research institutions in Canada, Brazil and
              Venezuela, and an expansion of these links within Brazil and to Bolivia and
              Mexico.  The phase I proposal is for a workshop to bring together present and
              future participants of the network, assemble present knowledge (and gaps) on
              the interactions of biogeochemical cycles and vegetation; unify research and
              training approaches, and prepare a Phase II proposal.   The workshop will be a
              short course on soil-vegetation interactions in the biogeochemical cycling of
              important nutrient elements, and on the nutrient and climatic limitations to
              plant production in the semiarid regions.  The material presented is to be
              collated in a form suitable for training and education material for
              participants and their institutions.  This will serve as an example of the
              capacity building activities which will accompany the research of the IAI Phase
              II Proposal.  In addition, common research approaches will be formulated, and
              there will be planning for an exchange of researchers and teachers establish
              the network to be supported by Phase II.  The longer term goal is for this
              network proposed for Phase II to be extended to form an IAI Research
              Consortium.   The network to be established concerns biogeochemical cycles in
              semi-arid tropical ecosystems and derived agricultural systems.  The phase I
              proposal is for a workshop to bring together present and future participants of
              the network, assemble present knowledge (and gaps) on the interactions of
              biogeochemical cycles and vegetation; unify research and training approaches,
              and prepare a Phase II proposal.  The goal of the Phase II proposal is the
              establishment of a research network, with the aim of facilitating terrestrial
              ecosystems research with a strong prac tical component, that may serve as a
              tool for planning and guidance for sustainable land use related to agriculture
              and watershed management.  In addition, the PIs hope to create a network for
              training and education, improve the research and teaching capacities of the
              institutions involved, and provide a focus for investigations with importance
              to the envionmentally sound management of large areas of the South American
              semi-arids.   This proposal involves researchers from three research
              institutions in Canada, Brazil and Venezuela, and it plans an expansion of its
              links within Brazil and to Bolivia and Mexico.  The proposed collaboration will
              play a role in the provision of vital ecosystem understanding.  In addition,
              findings on the interaction of trees and soil fertility will be examined with
              the aim to establish a data base on fertility-biology interactions, with
              relevance for the use of indigenous species of agroforestry.  The above
              mentioned countries are Member States of the IAI, an initiative to stimulate
              cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific institutions
              of the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is the designated U.S.
              Government Agency to carry out the U.S. responsibilities within the IAI.    ***
