Title       : Measurement of Combustion Effluent Aerosols from the South Pole Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1996  
File        : a9530428

Award Number: 9530428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony D. Hansen TonyHansen@MageeSci.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Magee Scientific Company
	      1829 Francisco Street
	      Berkeley, CA  94703    /   -

NSF Program : 5106      ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                          Abstract                                     
              Anthropogenic activities in Antarctica have the potential of  producing both
              contemporaneous and long-term environmental  impacts on pristine surroundings. 
              One of these impacts arises  from the emission of "black" or "elemental"
              carbonaceous aerosols  from the exhaust of diesel-powered generators and
              vehicles used  to support Antarctic operations.  When deposited on the snow and
               ice cover, this pollutant may be preserved indefinitely.  Its  high optical
              absorption will alter the surface albedo and the  radiative properties of
              surface cover.  Its ability to  catlytically promote certain chemical reactions
              may lead to  modifications of snow and ice chemistry.  Its absorbed content of 
              fuel-derived organic species such as polycyclic aromatic  hydrocarbons and
              other toxics may have a deleterious effect on  marginal biota and near coastal
              stations.  Previous work showed  that extremely small, but detectable,
              concentrations of black  carbon aerosol are brought to the South Pole station
              in the  background atmosphere in amounts consistent with models of long-  range
              transport;  however, this program terminated in 1990.  A  1986 study of surface
              snow and ice showed a clear plume of soot  description downwind of the station.
               This project proposes to  install more modern equipment both upwind and
              downwind of the  South Pole station to re-establish the background aerosol 
              measurements and to provide a direct assessment of the station's  emissions. 
              The results of this work will contribute to the  determination of the station's
              environmental impact resulting  from combustion-derived emissions.  This
              information may be used  as input to mitigation and abatement strategies.  The
              upwind data  will contribute to the global monitoring record, and to 
              assessments of the global circulation of anthropogenic emissions  capable of
              influencing atmospheric optics and chemistry.
