Title       : Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1997   
File        : a9530680

Award Number: 9530680
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $485820             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter G. Wolynes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Peter Wolynes is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his theoretical research in   the area of
              nonequilibrium statistical mechanics.  The proposed work   focuses on new
              models of energy flow in gas phase molecules, biomolecules   at low
              temperatures and clusters, as well as the study of reaction   kinetics in
              biomolecules.  The energy flow work is analytical theory   using techniques
              borrowed from the theory of quantum transport in   disordered systems combined
              with a mesoscopic approach that examines how   intramolecular dynamics changes
              as the size of the molecular system grows   to approach a macroscopic limit. 
              The biological reaction dynamics is   largely computational and deals with
              tunneling phenomena in biomolecules,   focusing on ligand recombination in heme
              proteins.  A third area of study   involves intermittency and microscopic
              theories of statistics of single   molecule reaction dynamics which will be
              useful in interpreting recent   experimental studies involving the spectroscopy
              of single molecules.  The application of statistical methods to study the
              physical behavior of   systems containing many particles at equilibrium is 
              well developed, but   similar application to nonequilibrium  systems such as
              those undergoing   chemical reaction is a major current frontier of physical
              chemistry.    Professor Wolynes is developing statistical techniques to obtain
              useful   information about such reacting systems, particularly those undergoing
                biological transformations or those interacting with solvents in solution  
              reactions.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
