Title       : IAI Workshop: Hydroclimatology and Dynamics of the Rio dela Plata System and the
               Patos-Mirim Complex and their Influence on the Fluxes and Productivity of the
               Adjacent Shelf Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1998  
File        : a9530155

Award Number: 9530155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49524              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustavo Nagy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Caruso Consortium
	      
	      Montevideo,       /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0521800   Shelf & Esturine Ecosystem              
              92        Science Policy                          
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530155  Nagy   The main objective of this proposal is the planning for the
              development of a regional research program to improve our understanding of the
              Rio de la Plata System and Patos-Mirim Complex.  This program will be focused
              on the inputs and fluxes in these systems, and on the influences of their
              outflow on the productivity and salt budget of adjacent shelf waters.  The
              research program will also involve the design of an integrated system to
              monitor hydrological, meteorological and oceanic variables, as well as a
              framework to archive and disseminate data in a timely manner to scientists in
              the region and elsewhere.  Finally, the research program will involve the
              development, adaptation and validation of various models that would provide not
              only insight on the systems, but also a forecasting capability useful for
              resource management or policy making.     The basis of this proposal is an
              integrated approach, that takes into account the physical relationships between
              the hydrology and climatology in this region for the assessment of its response
              to the variability of fluxes at different time and space scales.  To accomplish
              this, three principal themes have been identified that will constitute the axes
              of discussion:  modeling, monitoring, and process studies.  The scientific
              objectives will be related with one or more of these topics.     The planning
              process involved in this proposal will include a survey of ongoing research
              activities, plans, interests, and capabilities in the region, so that
              activities can be coordinated, and overlapping or redundant efforts avoided. 
              In this effort, this proposal will benefit from ongoing IAI activities.  This
              proposal will involve three workshop to facilitate the participation by a wide
              spectrum of regional scientists in the preparation of an IAI Phase II proposal.
                  This project proposes the planning of an interdisciplinary and integrated
              research program, focused on the study of fluxes of the Rio de la Plata system
              and the Patos-Mirim Complex, a nd their influence on the hydrodynamics and
              biological processes of the adjacent shelf waters.  The scientific and
              technical support, the specific objectives and the appropriate methodologies
              will be discussed in the context of an integrated approach comprising the
              efforts of the countries involved:  Uruguay, Brazil, and Argentina. 
              Extra-regional partners from the United States also participate in this
              planning effort.  At the end of the one-year period, an IAI Phase II proposal
              will be completed.   This proposal assembles a diverse team of investigators
              from both academic and governmental institutions in Uruguay, Argentina, Brazil,
              and the United States.  These countries are Member States of the IAI, an
              initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the
              scientific institutions of the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is
              the designated U.S. Government agency to carry out the U.S. responsibilities
              within the IAI.  ***
