Title       : Polar Sea Convective Instabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2000    
File        : a9530530

Award Number: 9530530
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland W. Garwood garwood@nps.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Naval Postgraduate School
	      Code 09
	      Monterey, CA  93943    408/656-2099

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    The major scientific objective of this proposed four-year study is to
              understand the coupled ocean mixed layer-ice system response to the passage of
              atmospheric storms.  The most intense surface cooling and wind stresses in the
              Arctic are associated with these storms, and their long-term cumulative effects
              on the heat and water budgets for the Arctic Ocean cannot be predicted without
              including (i) realistic mixed layer physics, (ii) ice thermodynamics, and (iii)
              three-dimensional wind-driven ocean circulation.  The investigator has shown in
              previous work that oceanic instabilities may lead to significant deep oceanic
              convection and possible formation of bottom water.  The initial energy source
              to trigger these instabilities may be provided by transient atmospheric
              forcing.    Numerical models will be developed including a three-dimensional
              simulation of the upper ocean (temperature, salinity, circulation, and ice)
              response to passage of atmospheric storms.  This numerical model will consist
              of an existing ocean primitive equation model with embedded turbulence-closure
              mixed layer and an ice model with realistic thermodynamics and mechanical
              properties.  The embedded mixed layer will include previously-neglected physics
              to predict the onset of conditional instabilities and possible formation of
              deep water.    The realistic prediction of deep convection is necessary to
              understand the start of the global conveyor belt and the role of the oceans in
              climate change.  A major deficiency in earlier ocean models has been the lack
              of adequate convection physics to realistically predict the correct temperature
              and salinity properties for the convectively-produced deeper water masses.  The
              proposed modeling program, including realistic storm forcing and realistic
              ocean convection will directly tie atmospheric forcing and ice thermodynamics
              to mixed layer dynamics and the start of the global conveyor belt in the
              Greenland-Iceland Seas.  The results will lead to more realistic
              parameterization of subgri d scale convection of heat, mass, momentum,
              nutrients and tracers in basin and global oceanic models.
