Title       : Knowledge Pollution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1996     
File        : a9530174

Award Number: 9530174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Nickles   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The fallibility of scientists and technologists and the fragility of their
              results is attested by science studies experts.   But how fragile are they? 
              Can we `break` or otherwise eliminate a piece of knowledge should we want to? 
              Could we eliminate some physical knowledge necessary to making the bomb, say,
              without seriously disturbing the rest of modern physics and technology?  If so,
              how?  To rephrase the question, can we imagine future scientific developments
              that would undermine our present ability to make nuclear weapons or to make 133
              MHz Pentium processors?  The difficulty of finding affirmative answers to such
              questions may give us exactly the opposite impression, that such scientific and
              technical knowledge is so firmly entrenched that we could not eliminate it even
              if we wanted to.  Here the progress of knowledge begins to resemble a ratchet
              wheel that irreversibly locks each technical advance in place.  Once achieved,
              knowledge comes to seem indestructible, at least by epistemically interesting
              means, and the progress of this sort of knowledge appears to be cumulative. 
              Dr. Nickles argues that `knowledge pollution` or, more prosaically, the
              organization and control of knowledge, is a fruitful theme or tool with which
              to explore many philosophical, historical, and sociological issues related to
              the growth of modern science.  It may be viewed as a probe by means of which to
              quasi-experimentally study scientific research itself.  But it also applies to
              problems of knowing too much, that is, problems of knowledge or information
              management at the frontiers of scientific and technological research. 
              Difficulties at the frontier are as much a matter of knowing too much as
              knowing too little.  Dr. Nickles' central claim is that the problem of inquiry
              cannot be solved without simultaneously solving the problem of dis-inquiry. 
              Traditionally, the question has been how systematic `scientific` inquiry is
              possible at all, how to get from zero knowledge to any knowledge at all;
              whereas in fact, researchers typically are overwhelmed by potentially relevant
              `knowledge,` and the problem is to eliminate, suppress, or filter out all but
              the most salient bits for the task at hand.  Even to formulate a good, doable
              problem requires such reduction.  It is perhaps trivial to say that every
              methodology, institutional arrangements, and piece of research can be
              illuminated by looking at it in terms of knowledge organization and control -
              how knowledge is accredited, stored, retrieved, distributed, suppressed, etc.
              by individuals, communities, institutions and technologies.  The second central
              claim or hypothesis of this project is that the `knowledge pollution` approach
              throws important new light on these issues.  Dr. Nickles is undertaking a
              series of critical studies from the knowledge-management perspective, on
              various aspects of scientific research and their treatment in previous
              methodological writings.  His focus is on selected problems at the frontier,
              e.g., problem formulation and heuristic appraisal, as well as on related issues
              of the cumulativity of knowledge and the unity of science.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
