Title       : Numerical Modeling of Mesoscale Airflow Over Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1998  
File        : a9530662

Award Number: 9530662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341533             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale R. Durran durrand@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9530662  Durran        Mountains exert a profound influence on the earth's
              weather and climate. The  Principal Investigator will investigate two types of
              terrain-induced atmospheric phenomena  through a series of numerical
              simulations. One focus of this effort will be to investigate the 
              three-dimensional response of the cross-mountain flow to mountain wave
              generation and  breakdown. The second focus will be to determine the relative
              importance of gap winds and  downslope winds in the generation of strong
              orographically-forced surface winds.        Atmospheric scientists have long
              been aware that orographically generated gravity  waves may exert an important
              drag on the atmosphere. Early discussions of this phenomena  date back to the
              late 1950's. Continued interest in gravity wave drag (GWD) has been fueled  by
              experiments with high-resolution general circulation models, which suggest that
              the  inclusion of GWD parameterizations in such models can significantly
              improve the simulated  climatology of the zonally averaged westerly winds and
              the surface pressure fields. GWD  parameterizations are now standard features
              in most high-resolution general circulation and  medium-range weather forecast
              models, yet the nature of the mesoscale atmospheric  response to GWD forcing
              remains largely unexplored. Recent results obtained by the  Principal
              Investigator under prior NSF support suggest that the mean-flow deceleration
              that  develops in response to gravity wave drag is spread over a surprising
              large spatial domain  upstream and downstream from the mountain. These results
              also suggested that a different  diagnostic variable, the pseudomomentum, could
              provide a better description of the local  response to gravity wave drag. The
              Principal Investigator's previous results were obtained  using a
              high-resolution two-dimensional numerical model.  These investigations will be 
              extended to three dimensions using a newly developed 3D nested-grid model. As
              part of the  proposed research, the Principal Investigator  will also derive
              expressions for the  pseudomomentum in 3D compressible stratified flow using
              Hamiltonian fluid dynamics.        Strong surface winds can be generated by the
              interaction of the synoptic-scale flow  and topography through two different
              mechanisms: gap winds and downslope winds. Gap  winds are produced when air is
              forced through a narrow break in a mountain barrier.  Examples of this occur in
              the Columbia River gorge and in the mistral, which blows through  the Rhone
              valley of France. Strong downslope winds may be generated when the air flows 
              across mountains without significant cross-mountain gaps; examples include the
              Rocky  Mountain Chinook and the Croatian Bora. In still other cases, such as
              the strong easterly  winds that blow from the Cascades toward the town of
              Enumclaw, Washington, the  distinction between gap winds and downslope winds is
              not so clear. Previous research with a  shallow-water model has suggested that
              the gap wind mechanism is more effective on large  spatial scales (very broad
              mountain ranges pierced by a gap) whereas the downslope wind  mechanism is most
              effective on small spatial scales (narrow ridges). These early results will  be
              extended to three dimensions and to a variety of more realistic atmospheric 
              configurations, using the new 3D nested grid model. As before, the goal will be
              to  characterize the large-scale forcing with a minimal number of dynamical and
              terrain-shape  parameters and to systematically investigate the sensitivity of
              gap winds and downslope  winds to variations in these parameters. Possible
              synergetic combinations of the two wind  regimes will also be investigated. 
              ***
