Title       : History of Quaternary Ice Sheets on Arctic Islands, Phase 1: Integrated Approach
               Using Dating of Terrestrial Glacial Deposits, Glacially Abraded Bedrock and
               Marine Shorelines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1998     
File        : a9530857

Award Number: 9530857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marek G. Zreda marek@hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      The extent of arctic ice sheets during the last glaciation is among the
              most controversial issues in arctic glacial geology, paleoglaciology and
              paleoclimatology.  One of the main reasons is our inability to accurately date
              terrestrial deposits that define ancient ice margins.  The in situ accumulation
              of cosmogenic nuclides can be used to approach this problem.  In this study,
              cosmogenic surface exposure dating methods will be used to reconstruct the
              history of the last arctic ice sheets.    The main goals of the proposed
              integrated study are to provide clear evidence either for or against the
              existence of the Innuitian Ice Sheet in the late Quaternary, to reconstruct the
              history of the last ice sheets, from their birth until today, and to determine
              the duration of ice-free period before the last glaciation started.  The
              investigation will obtain cosmogenic surface exposure ages for glacial deposits
              and polished bedrock in northwestern Greenland, eastern Ellesmere Island and
              several small islands between them, western Ellesmere and eastern Axel Heiberg
              islands, Devon, Baffin, Cornwallis, Somerset, Bathurst, Prince Patrick and
              Ellef Ringness islands.  They will also obtain cosmogenic and radiocarbon ages
              for raised marine shorelines in order to reconstruct the history of sea level
              changes at these locations.    The results will provide the much needed
              chronologic control for the late Quaternary glaciations in arctic islands.  The
              results will also have important implications for paleoclimatologic studies
              because of a possibility to establish whether or not there was a connection
              between the Arctic Ocean and Baffin Bay during the last glaciation.
