Title       : IAI Workshop: Dendrochronological Studies in Tropical South America with Special
               Emphasis on Bolivian Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9530443

Award Number: 9530443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47135              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose Boninsegna Phone 054 61 287029                     ntcricyt@criba.edu.ar  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst De Nivo Glaciologia
	      
	      Mendoza Argentina,   00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530443  Boninsegna  This Phase I proposal will expand dendrochronological
              studies to tropical   and subtropical regions of South America with special
              emphasis on the Bolivian forests.  It will also provide technical support to
              Bolivian researchers interested in dendrochronological studies.  Most Bolivian
              trees are also found in other Latin American countries, and consequently, the
              proposed studies will be relevant to foresters and climatologists within all of
              the tropical Americas.  This Inter-American Institute for Global Change
              Research (IAI) Start-Up Grants Phase I proposal has as it objective to conduct
              a survey of the Bolivian woods to evaluate their dendrochronological potential
              as well as training of scientists in tropical South America.  The exploratory
              survey will include the evaluation of tropical trees growing under different
              climatic (seasonal versus non-seasonal) and topographic (upper Andes versus
              lower Amazonian Basin) conditions in Bolivia in order to determine their
              dendrochronological characteristics.  In addition, under this Phase I proposal,
              personnel from the Laboratorio de Dendrocronolog=EDa of Mendoza, Argentina,
              will teach two 15-day seminars on dendrochronology at the Universidad Major de
              San Sim=F3n at Cochabamba, Bolivia, and the Universidad de San Andr=E9s, La
              Paz, Bolivia.  Scientists from Bolivia and other Latin American countries will
              be invited to work at the Laboratorio de Dendrocronolog=EDa in Mendoza as
              visiting scholars.  The seminars will focus on the following topics:  wood
              anatomy; dendrochronological sampling strategies; cross-dating; tree-ring
              chronology development; and time-series analysis.  The result of Phase I will
              be a Phase II Proposal with the objective of developing a tree-ring chronology
              network in western tropical South America.  %%%  This Inter-American Institute
              for Global Change Research (IAI) Start-Up Grants Phase I proposal will expand
              dendrochronological studies to tropical and subtropical regions of South
              America with special emphasis o n the Bolivian forests.  It will also provide
              technical support to Bolivian researchers interested in dendrochronological
              studies.  Most Bolivian trees are also found in other Latin American countries,
              and consequently, the proposed studies will be relevant to foresters and
              climatologists within all of the tropical Americas.  Much has been documented
              about Northern hemisphere climatic variations, but comparatively little data is
              available for the Southern hemisphere.  A complete understanding of the
              climatic behavior of one hemisphere is not possible without knowledge of
              behavior in the other hemisphere. Meteorological records from instruments in
              the Southern hemisphere reach back only a relatively short time, and are far
              more sparse than those in the Northern hemisphere.  When working with records
              that represent such short time scales, trends lasting decades to centuries are
              difficult to evaluate with statistical confidence. However, one may rely on
              indirect sources, or "proxy data," in order to study climatic variations before
              the   present century.  Tree-ring series can provide long and reliable recopds
              lasting from several centuries to millennia with annual and in some cases
              seasonal resolution.  The fields of dendrochronology and dendroclimatology have
              been making striking advances during he past twenty years, and their scientific
              bases are well documented.  This proposal will expand dendrochronological
              studies to tropical and subtropical regions of South America with special
              emphasis on Bolivian forests as well as the training of scientists in
              dendrochronological studies.  This proposal assembles a team of scientists from
              Argentina, Bolivia, and the United States.  These countries are Member States
              of the IAI, an initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change
              issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas.  The National Science
              =46oundation is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry our the Unite= s
               States responsibilities within the IAI. ***
