Title       : IAI Workshop: First Implementation Meeting of the Large-Scale
               Biosphere-Atmosphere in Amazonia (LBA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9530289

Award Number: 9530289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos A. Nobre nobre@cptec.inpr.br                     Phone 55-125 61. 2822  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Center for Weather
	      Rodovia Presidente Dutra, KM.40
	      Cachoeira Paulista-SP,       /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530289  Nobre   The Center for Weather Forecasting and Climate Studies (CPTEC)
              of the Instituto National de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE) from Brazil proposes,
              jointly with the Instituto National de Pesquisas de Amazonia (INPA), the
              Universidade de S o Paulo, the Universidad Nacional Agraria La Molina (UNALM),
              Lima, Peru, and the Universidad Mayor de San Andres (UMSA), La Paz, Bolivia,
              and with the collaboration of scientific institutions from the Amazon countries
              (Brazil, Peru, Bolivia, Ecuador, Colombia, and Venezuela), a coordinated
              participation of representatives of several research institutions, universities
              and hydro meteorological services in the First Implementation Meeting of the
              Large-Scale Biosphere- Atmosphere Experiment in Amazonia (LBA).  LBA is a major
              international, multi-institutional, interdisciplinary biosphere-atmosphere
              experiment planned for 1997-2000 in Amazonia.  Scientific Planning for LBA has
              reached a critical stage in which there is currently a clear need for
              scientific and research institutions of the Amazon countries to interact and
              propose research activities on the framework of LBA, as well as to develop a
              long term strategy to optimize research cooperation addressing the regional and
              global effects of large scale and land surface conversions.   During the
              proposed meeting, the participants will review the Scientific Plan and work out
              many unresolved scientific, institutional and logistics aspects.  The proposed
              workshop will enhance scientific collaboration among Amazonian research
              institutions and will create a framework for training, and will define the
              details of an IAI Phase II proposal.     The overall objective of  the Phase I
              activities is to produce a Phase II proposal which actually will address
              critical research aspects of the LBA Experiment itself.  The experiment has the
              international support of the World Climate Research Program, the International
              Hydrology Programme of UNESCO, the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme
              (IGBP), US agencies and th e European Union (EU).  Phase II activities will
              result in an international regional cooperation between Amazon countries and
              with other countries in the Americas, which would be strengthened by the
              realization of Phase I (the proposed meeting).   A comprehensive integrated
              Science Plan for LBA has been produced by a core group of scientists.  It will
              be distributed by the end of October 1995.  The final LBA Science Planning
              Meeting scheduled for February 1996 in Brasilia will provide a forum for
              critical appraisal, and revision of the LBA Science Plan.  The proposed First
              Implementation Meeting of LBA will bring a greatly enhanced regional component
              to LBA.  The Amazon countries are expected to provide facilities, scientific
              and technical personnel and students to participate in the research activities,
              along with the other research groups from North America and Europe.  This
              meeting should result in a comprehensive, broadly supported LBA Implementation
              Plan with a strong regional component for the Science Plan for LBA.   The LBA
              experiment directly addresses two of the IAI's scientific research themes: 
              Tropical Ecosystems and Biogeochemical Cycles; and Ocean/Land/Atmosphere
              Interactions in the Inter-Tropical Americas.  Due to the common scientific goal
              of the IAI and the LBA experiment, the IAI can facilitate the communications
              between scientists participating in LBA, and can play an active role during the
              LBA's implementation and execution phases.  In addition, the development of the
              LBA proposal can serve as an important facilitator for the establishment of IAI
              research centers related to the IAI scientific research theme, Tropical
              Ecosystems and Biogeochemical Cycles.     The LBA plan currently has many
              elements of an IAI Start-Up Grants Phase II proposal, and the Phase I workshop
              will enhance the scientific collaboration among Amazonian research
              institutions.  The participating countries of Bolivia, Ecuador, Colombia, Peru,
              and Venezuela are Member States of the IAI, a U.S. initiative to  stimulate
              cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific institutions
              of the Americas.  In addition to these participating countries, the proposed
              workshop will include participants from the LBA Science Planning Committee and
              representatives of agencies and national and international programs such as
              NASA; NOAA, NSF, ESA, INPE, CNPq, IGAC, GCTE, and GEWEX (They will have funding
              from other sources to participate.).  The U.S. National Science Foundation is
              the Government agency designated to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the
              IAI.    ***
