Title       : IAI Workshop: IAI Research Center on Interannual Climate Variability in Central
               and Southern South America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1997 
File        : a9530064

Award Number: 9530064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44770              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario Nunez mnunez@cima.uba.ar  (Principal Investigator current)
              M Nicolini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Centro de Investigaciones
	      
	      Buenos,       /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              0511602   Inadvertent Weather Effect              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Nunez   This proposal will assemble a team of scientists for a three day
              workshop   in Argentina to discuss the organization of a proposal to the IAI
              for a   Research Center to investigate the modeling and prediction of the ENSO 
               phenomenon and its regional consequences for Southern South America.  The  
              Research Center would consist of the following core institutions:  CIMA,   the
              Center for Marine and Atmospheric Research of the University of Buenos   Aires
              in Argentina; CPTEC, the Center for Weather Prediction and Climate   Studies of
              the National Space Research Institute of Brazil; the Cooperative   Institute
              for Climate Studies of the University of Maryland; and the   Cooperative
              Institute for Research in the Environmental Sciences of NOAA in   Colorado. 
              This proposal explicitly includes participants from Argentina, Brazil, and  
              the United States.  The workshop will also include other participants from  
              Uruguay and Paraguay.  These countries are all members of the IAI, an  
              initiative to stimulate global change research among the scientific  
              institutions of the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is the  
              designated U.S. Government agency to carry out the U.S. responsibilities  
              within the IAI.  %%%   This proposal will assemble a team of scientists for a
              three day workshop   in Argentina to discuss the organization of a proposal to
              the IAI for a   Research Center to investigate the modeling and prediction of
              the ENSO   phenomenon and its regional consequences for Southern South America.
               The   Research Center would consist of the following core institutions:  CIMA,
                the Center for Marine and Atmospheric Research of the University of Buenos  
              Aires in Argentina; CPTEC, the Center for Weather Prediction and Climate  
              Studies of the National Space Research Institute of Brazil; the Cooperative  
              Institute for Climate Studies of the University of Maryland; and the  
              Cooperative Institute for Research in the Environmental Sciences of NOAA in  
              Colorado.   This proposal explicitly in cludes participants from Argentina,
              Brazil, and   the United States.  The workshop will also include other
              participants from   Uruguay and Paraguay.  These countries are all members of
              the IAI, an   initiative to stimulate global change research among the
              scientific   institutions of the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is
              the   designated U.S. Government agency to carry out the U.S. responsibilities 
               within the IAI.  ***
