Title       : Oxygen Dynamics During the JGOFS Southern Ocean Process Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9530746

Award Number: 9530746
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434240             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Bender   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Lynn Dickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              95-30746  BENDER    This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean
              Flux  Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better  understanding
              of the fluxes of carbon, both organic and  inorganic, in the Southern Ocean,
              (2) identifying the physical,  ecological and biogeochemical factors and
              processes which  regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and
              (3)  placing these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global  carbon
              cycle.    One of the primary goals of the JGOFS program in general, and of  the
              Southern Ocean initiative in particular, is to constrain the  carbon flux in
              order to evaluate whether this region is a net  sink or source of carbon.
              Interest in this program is directed  towards gaining an understanding of the
              environmental factors  that affect rates of primary production and the
              extrapolation of  these rates over broad spatial and temporal scales.  Research
              will focus on using oxygen to constrain carbon fluxes on  three scales; large,
              meso and local.    1) For the large scale, air samples will be collected and
              the  O2/N2 ratio will be measured. Oxygen concentrations in the  atmosphere
              vary on seasonal time scales due to primary production  in the spring and
              summer months and ventilation of the ocean in  the fall and winter. Thus
              knowledge of the amplitude of the O2/N2  signal will provide a measure of the
              magnitude and timing of net  production for the Southern Ocean.  Air samples
              will be collected  daily from ships that will participate in the JGOFS
              experiment to  have high resolution records of zonal and temporal variations of
               the atmospheric oxygen field over the Southern Ocean.    2) Similarly, net
              primary productivity will be determined from  the mesoscale oxygen field in two
              ways: first by measurement of  O2/Ar ratios and del 18O of O2 in seawater
              collected from the  mixed layer and second by continually measuring subsurface
              oxygen  concentrations along the cruise track. These two approaches,  together
              with the air sampling program, wi ll provide a temporally  and spatially
              integrated estimate of net production.    3) Carbon flow will be constrained by
              undertaking daily  measurements of gross and net oxygen production, and nitrate
               assimilation. Gross oxygen production is calculated by spiking  and incubating
              seawater samples with 18O-labelled water and  measuring the del 18O of the
              photosynthetically produced oxygen.  Net oxygen production is measured by
              comparing the relative  change in the oxygen concentration between initial and
              incubated  samples by automated high precision Winkler titrations. These 
              measurements will provide daily depth integrated gross and net  production
              rates in addition to respiration rates. Furthermore,  photosynthesis-irradiance
              experiments will measure gross and net  production during cruises to
              extrapolate local measurements up to  meso and large scale using bio-optical
              data from moorings and  satellites.
