Title       : IAI Workshop: Application of Remote Sensing in Microbial Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9530040

Award Number: 9530040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42930              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anwarul Huq   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rita R. Colwell  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530040  Colwell  The association of Vibrio cholerae with plankton has been
              demonstrated for  geographical regions such as Bangladesh and Latin America,
              but the link  between plankton blooms and cholera outbreaks is less clear. 
              This proposal  will bring together a team of investigators to compare cholera
              outbreak data  and satellite imagery of phytoplankton blooms.  The satellite
              imagery will  be coupled with ground measurements of subsequent zooplankton
              blooms since  phytoplankton blooms almost always precede zooplankton bloom, as
              observed  in Bangladesh.  Productivity of plankton, a part of the global
              oceanic food  chain, is dependent on temperature and other nutrients present in
              the  environment.  It has been demonstrated that particular bacterial species 
              which are autochthonous members of marine and estuarine aquatic  environments
              are uniquely associated with zooplankton that feed on  phytoplankton.  By
              measuring the chlorophyll content of water through  remote sensing techniques,
              it is possible to assess the phytoplankton  population density and thereby
              estimate the concentration of bacterial  species with which they are
              associated.  Investigators from North and South America will visit several
              countries for  discussions and carry out preliminary investigations.  All
              collaborating  investigators will meet in Maryland to make the final
              preparations for  developing a full Phase II proposal to be submitted to the
              Inter-American  Institute for Global Change Research (IAI).  The Phase II
              proposal will  include a 2-3 year study during which an inverse model will be
              developed  based on the descriptive/quantitative model to monitor microbial
              ecosystem  from total pigment concentration data.  The data will be used as a
              tool to  predict the emergence of a particular species, e.g. Vibrio cholerae,
              in the  aquatic environment.  %%%  The association of the bacterium Vibrio
              cholerae with plankton has been  demonstrated for geographical regions such as
              Bangladesh and Latin America,  but the link between  plankton blooms and
              cholera outbreaks is less clear.  This proposal will bring together a team of
              investigators to compare  cholera outbreak data and satellite imagery of
              phytoplankton blooms.  The  satellite imagery will be coupled with ground
              measurements of subsequent  zooplankton blooms since phytoplankton blooms
              almost always precede  zooplankton blooms, as observed in Bangladesh.  The PIs
              will meet with  investigators in South American countries to obtain
              epidemiological data  for areas along the coasts of South America for evidence
              of either  epidemics or elevated Vibrio cholerae counts.  All collaborating 
              investigators will meet in Maryland to make the final preparation to  develop
              an Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) Start-  Up Grant
              Phase II proposal.  The group of researchers makes up a strong collaboration
              among  microbiologists, ecologists and climatologists, and this collaboration
              will  bring a better understanding of biodiversity and the impact of climate 
              change on cholera epidemiology.  By focusing on cholera epidemics, this 
              collaboration of researchers is addressing a public health problem  affecting 
              many parts of the world, in particular South America.  The researchers of  this
              proposal are from Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, and the  United States.
               These countries are members of the IAI, an initiative to  stimulate global
              change research among the scientific institutions of the  Americas.  The
              National Science Foundation is the designated U.S.  Government agency to carry
              out the U.S. responsibilities within the IAI.  ***
