Title       : Computational Modeling of the Photophysics of Conjugated Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1998     
File        : a9530148

Award Number: 9530148
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Yaron yaron@chem.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award is made jointly by the Office of Special Projects in the   Chemistry
              Division and by the Division of Materials Research in support   of the
              computational studies of Dr. David Yaron. Semi-empirical quantum   chemistry
              models will be developed and applied to the photophysics of   conjugated
              polymers. Simultaneous fits will be developed based on   experimental data on
              oligomers and polymers and on different polymeric   systems to provide for the
              investigation of the operative screening   mechanisms. By developing a single
              consistent approach for   polyacetylenes, polydiacetylenes and
              poly(paraphenylenevinylene),   parameters will be developed that can be applied
              to other polymers.   Coulomb screening between electrons and holes in excited
              states will be   included through explicit calculations of the polarization
              induced in   surrounding polymer chains, and through explicit calculations of
              on-chain   screning mechanisms. Equation-of-motion formalisms developed for  
              nonlinear optics will be used to calculate excited states, providing a  
              size-consistent and computationally feasible approach to the excited   states
              of long polymer chains.  The major advantage of conjugated polymers over
              inorganic materials in   optical and electronic applications is the ability to
              control structure   at the molecular level by synthesis, and at the
              macromolecular level by   self-assembly. The development of semi-empirical
              models will allow for   the prediction of structure-property relationships in
              important classes   of materials and provide a basis for the design of new
              materials.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
