Title       : Dissertation Research: Changing Patterns of Community Structure and
               Organization: The End of the Classic Period at San Lorenzo, Cayo District,
               Belize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9530949

Award Number: 9530949
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Sharer rsharer@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Sharer, Mr. Jason Yaeger will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct an archaeological study of San
              Lorenzo, a prehistoric Mayan site located in Belize. The site itself is
              interesting because it is intermediate in size between the large ritual centers
              for which the Mayans are so well known and the small isolated mounds which are
              common across the Mayan range. San Lorenzo is, in Mayan terms, a small
              community and its inhabitants probably lived a life typical of most people at
              that time. Mr. Yaeger and his colleagues have conducted prior excavation at the
              site and with NSF support this work will be expanded to provide a
              representative sample of dwellings. Areas within and adjacent to structures
              will be cleared and additional test pits excavated. Abundant stone tools and
              ceramics as well as floral and faunal remains will be collected. On this basis
              it will be possible to reconstruct interrelationships among families as well as
              subsistence practices.  The Mayan civilization has long interested
              archaeologists not only because of the impressive stone monuments which were
              constructed but also because of the organizational and subsistence skills
              required to sustain large populations in tropical environments which are
              sparsely populated today. While excavations at ceremonial mounds have shed
              considerable light on ritual organization and elite behaviors much less is
              known about how smaller communities which constituted the backbone of Mayan
              society were organized. Mr. Yaeger's research will provide relevant
              information. Mr. Yaeger notes that other researchers have studied present-day
              Mayan villages and described a particular form of social organization. Through
              his excavations he will test whether this same model applied to the past.  This
              research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to
              many archaeologists. It will shed new light on how the Mayan civilization was
              organized and it will assist in the training of a promising young scientist.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
