Title       : Plasticity of Life History Traits in Arctic Charr: Use of Retrospective Data to
               Couple Migration Data with Environmental Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9530081

Award Number: 9530081
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180721             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Radtke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The relationships between morphology and environmental history will be
              investigated.    The plan of research is aimed at 1) refining and advancing
              promising, but nascent, techniques for extracting a record of the past life
              history and environmental conditions encountered by individual fish from
              otolith carbonate and archival tags, and 2) exploring a fresh approach to
              investigate the influence of environmental conditions upon morphology and life
              history plasticity by applying experimentally validated otolith techniques to
              individuals from a multitude of natural conditions.  The goals are to establish
              retrospective and predictive relationships between the chemical structure of
              otoliths and environmental factors: to understand interactions among
              environmental factors that affect chemical structure; and to combine the
              environmental information encoded in otoliths with field observations to
              evaluate the importance of biotic and abiotic parameters to the establishment
              of divergent life history patterns in Arctic charr.  Daily growth increments,
              the ratios  of elements in the otolith and archival tag information will be
              used to back-calculate environmental and somatic changes for individual fish. 
              Techniques will be applied to:     1) Assess life history data (i.e., growth
              rates, age structure,   hatch date distribution, timing of spawning, etc.) in
              terms   of life history strategies.     2) Establish the importance of critical
              life-history     transitions, conditions affecting their onset, and derive   
              migrational schemes (whether an individual is a migrant or a   resident, age at
              first migration, whether a former migrant    individual will resume a resident
              life history strategy, and   the events leading and following migration) by
              investigating   the structural and elemental composition of fish otoliths.    
              3) Detect differences in growth and life histories between    different
              geographical areas as related to hydrographic,    trophic or habitat
              conditions.     4) Precisely time the occurrence of  several pivotal life   
              history transitions and correlate them with environmental    variables.    The
              results of the proposed research will provide a paradigm to the study of fish
              life histories.  Such knowledge is vital to our understanding of the processes
              fundamental to adaptable life history patterns and would make it possible to
              link growth and migration to environmental occurrences.  This would provide
              insight to the ecological  process of interactions between a species and its
              environment.  In a general ecological sense such information is of great and
              fundamental importance since it will allow to reconstruct the complex
              environmental interactions that are integrated among individuals to provide for
              both the short term stability and the long term evolution of families of
              individuals, populations and species.
