Title       : IAI Workshop: Comparative Studies on Oceanic and Coastal Processes in Temperate
               Zones of the Eastern Pacific
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1996      
File        : a9530332

Award Number: 9530332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tim Baumgartner trbaumgartner@uscd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0511603   Societal Aspects                        
              0521700   Marine Resources                        
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              45        Ecology                                 
              82        Economics                               
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530332  Baumgartner  This workshop will develop a science implementation plan
              for research in Pacific Ocean margins along the western Americas, including
              their distinctive upwelling and eastern boundary current ecosystems.  The focus
              of the proposal is on the coastal and oceanic regions of the Pacific margins in
              order to focus on the biophysical interactions within a set of ecosystems that
              are significantly different from their Atlantic and estuarine counterparts. 
              The research approach will use comparative studies of ecosystems, using the
              present and past spatial and temporal variability to identify and quantify the
              most important biophysical interactions and human impacts on those
              interactions.  The goal is to increase the ability to predict the response of
              the ecosystems to natural and anthropogenic changes in environmental conditions
              using improved ecosystems models.  The unifying theme of this workshop and the
              research program for Phase II will be the use of comparative and integrative
              studies of the physical, chemical, and biological processes, as well as the
              human-induced effects which drive the principal elements of the marine
              ecosystems.  These ecosystems extend from the intertidal zone onshore to the
              pelagic region about 200 km offshore.  The underlying scientific question to be
              addressed by this program is how to predict the response of these ecosystems
              and key populations to the forces of global change resulting from direct and
              indirect human intervention and from the stresses on natural systems which have
              been accumulating over the past century.  The workshop participants will design
              a coherent and well-coordinated program to conduct comparative studies leading
              to substantially improved understanding of the control and regulation of
              population/ community structures and productivity of the ecosystems of
              interest.  The workshop will address priority areas identified in the
              Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) Science Agenda.  The
              questions which will be addressed  in the formation of a Phase II proposal
              consider the natural, intrinsic states and modes of variability in the
              large-scale biophysical systems which regulate local physical and biological
              characteristics of the ecosystems.  The biophysical coupling which regulates
              abundance and distribution of planktonic components and closure of complex life
              cycles in both pelagic and benthic ecosystems is highlighted for particular
              attention.  In addition, questions which also relate the concern for effects of
              direct and indirect intervention in the natural systems by human activities
              will be addressed.  Lastly, there will be the application of our understanding
              of the interaction of natural processes and human activities to develop
              predictive models addressing the pre-eminent question of predicting and
              ecosystem responses under various global change scenarios.  %%%  This workshop
              will develop a science implementation plan for research in Pacific Ocean
              margins along the western Americas, including their distinctive upwelling and
              eastern boundary current ecosystems.  The focus of the proposal is on the
              coastal and oceanic regions of the Pacific margins in order to focus the
              planning process on the biophysical interactions within a set of important
              ecosystems that are significantly different from their Atlantic and estuarine
              counterparts.  The research approach will use comparative studies of
              ecosystems, using the present and past spatial and temporal variability to
              identify and quantify the most important biophysical interactions and the human
              impacts on those interactions.  The goal is to increase the ability to predict
              the response of the ecosystems to natural and anthropogenic changes in
              environmental conditions, using improved ecosystems models.  The upwelling
              regions off western North and South America are among the most biologically
              productive in the world's oceans.  There is a correspondingly great potential
              for the commercial harvest of pelagic species like anchovies, sardines and
              mackerel, as well as  harvest of the wild and cultivated benthic invertebrates
              like crustaceans, mollusks, and urchins.  The economic importance of this ocean
              productivity to Peru and Chile is difficult to overestimate.  Of the
              approximately 82 million metric tons (mmt) of marine fish landed in 1991
              worldwide, Peru and Chile accounted for approximately 13 mmt (the U.S. west
              coast accounted for approximately 1 mmt).  The landings in Peru and Chile are
              an order of magnitude greater than any other South American country and a
              factor of 5-6 times as great as the landings in other Pacific Eastern Boundary
              Current areas, making them the fourth and fifth most productive nations in the
              world in terms of fisheries landings.  The economic impacts extend far beyond
              the direct income from exports and in-country sales.  For instance, although
              the amount of fish landed off the west coast of the US was lower than Peru or
              Chile by a factor of 5-10, the US Department of Commerce lists the direct,
              indirect or induced impact of fisheries on the economies of California, Oregon
              and Washington in 1992 as US$4 billion.  Canada, Chile, Mexico, Peru, and the
              United States will coordinate their research through the IAI Network of
              ecosystems of the eastern boundary regions of North and South America.  These
              countries are members of the IAI, a United States initiative to stimulate
              global change research among the scientific institutions of the Americas.  The
              National Science Foundation is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry
              out the U.S. responsibilities within the IAI.  ***
