Title       : Physics and Recycling Efficiency as Factors Controlling New (Nitrate) Production
               in the Southern Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9530981

Award Number: 9530981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397747             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond N. Sambrotto sambrott@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530981  Sambrotto    This project is part of the U.S. Joint Global Ocean Flux
              Study  (U.S.JGOFS) Southern Ocean Process Study aimed at (1) a better 
              understanding of the fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic,  in the
              Southern Ocean, (2) identifying the physical, ecological,  and biogeochemical
              factors and processes regulating the magnitude  and variability of these
              fluxes, and (3) placing these fluxes into  the context of the contemporary
              global carbon cycle.         As the fourth U.S.JGOFS study region, the Southern
              Ocean in  potentially the most significant yet examined by this 
              interdisciplinary program. The Southern Ocean's vast size together  with its
              abundance of nutrients has led to extensive speculation  about its role in past
              and present-day exchanges of carbon with the  atmosphere as well as how this
              role may change in response to  future climactic perturbation. Thus project
              will measure nitrate  uptake and the uptake and regeneration of nitrogen from
              ammonium,  area, and dissolved amino acid sources in surface water. The light 
              response of nitrate uptake will be measured and the size  distribution analyzed
              to determine how vertical mixing can affect  the local rates of new production.
              Although all of the major  physiographic regions of the Southern Ocean will be
              sampled during  this project, the focus will be on the frontal systems at the 
              northern portion of the study area as well as the permanently ice-  free region
              immediately to the south. This extensive region  encompasses the largest,
              uninterrupted biogeochemical province in  the world ocean. Thus, the work
              addresses the JGOFS goal of  identifying the factors that regulate the
              magnitude and variability  of biological production and its ultimate export
              from surface water  and will be critical to the success of future models that
              intend to  predict the response of the Southern Ocean to climate change.
