Title       : Silica Cycling and the Role of Diatoms in the Biological Pump of the Southern
               Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1999     
File        : a9530677

Award Number: 9530677
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Nelson nelsonda@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                 This work is one of forty-four projects that are collaborating in the
              Southern Ocean Experiment of the Joint Global Ocean Flux Study.   The Southern
              Ocean Experiment is a three-year effort south of the Antarctic Polar Frontal
              Zone to track the flow of carbon through its organic and inorganic pathways
              from the air-ocean interface through th  e entire water column into the bottom
              sediment.  JGOFS itself is a decadal study of the processes controlling the
              time-varying fluxes of carbon and associated biogenic elements in the ocean
              with the objective of observing changes in ocean biogeochemical cycles in
              relation to climatic change.  The experiment will make use of the RVIB
              Nathaniel B. P  almer and the R/V Thompson.   This component concerns the
              general topic of removal of organic carbon from the surface layers of the
              ocean, and deals specifically with diatoms, a form of siliceous phytoplankton,
              as a major component of the biological pump of the Southern Ocean.  Diatoms are
              known to be responsible for the  majority of primary production in the Polar
              Frontal Zone (PFZ) and along the retreating ice edge in the Ross Sea.  Strong
              correlations between the fluxes of diatomaceous silica and organic carbon
              indicate that diatoms are also the autotrophic source of much of the organic
              matter exported from the surface waters of the Southern Ocean.  The role of  
              diatoms in the biological pump may be especially important in the PFZ, since
              nearly all of the silica flux in the Southern Ocean occurs beneath the PFZ with
              the result that this region and the waters to the south comprise the largest
              area of modern siliceous sediment accumulation in the world.   Surprisingly,
              that immense opal accumulation is supp  orted by very low rates of primary
              production near the surface.  Within the water column and upper sediments the
              regional cycles of carbon and silica are decoupled to a degree that does not
              occur elsewhere, with the result that opal rich, but organic poor, sediments
              are forming throughout much of the abyssal Southern Ocean.   The observational
              program is designed to reveal the fate of the silica produced and help
              constrain the contribution of diatoms to carbon fixation and export in the
              region.  Two newly developed tracer methods will be used.  The first involves
              the use of the newly available radioisotope of silicon, 32Si  (half life 134
              y), to measure silica production rates. The second is a new method for
              measuring natural variations in silicon isotopes within diatoms and seawater
              that may be useful as a proxy for level of paleo-silica production.  The
              insights gained regarding the magnitude, fate of biogenic silica, and the
              factors controlling silica cycling and   diatom productivity will help evaluate
              the role of diatoms in the biogeochemical cycling of elements in the region and
              explain the mechanisms producing high  accumulation rates of diatom silica in
              the Southern Ocean.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
