Title       : IAI Workshop: Nunavut Environmental Assessment Transect (NEAT)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9530135

Award Number: 9530135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elliott Burden   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mem Univ of Newfoundland
	      
	      St. Johns Newfoundland,   00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530135  Burden   This project will assemble a team of senior researchers with
              expertise in the areas of climate, hydrological cycles, biogechemical cycles,
              geological processes, and human interventions.  This team will outline in a
              conference format, the state of our knowledge of Nunavut and similar high
              latitude regions, and will then propose, in round table discussions the designs
              for long term experiments aimed at identifying and measuring change in these
              systems, and the collection and compilation of other data and observations of
              change which will be the focus of the proposal to be submitted to IAI  Start-Up
              Grants Phase II.     Phase I of the IAI Start-Up Grants will aim to produce a
              volume of review papers on the environment of Nunavut.  Invited delegates will
              be obligated to produce summaries of the understanding of the land, sea, air,
              and biology of Nunavut, and these summaries would be used to establish baseline
              data and guidelines for future endeavors in Phase II of the IAI Start-Up
              Grants.  Logistically, platforms for this research may be centered on the
              National Park reserves on Baffin, Bylot and Ellesmere islands.  These three
              islands delineate a transect from below the Arctic Circle to near the North
              Pole.     This project will assemble a team of senior researchers with
              expertise in the areas of climate, hydrological cycles, biogechemical cycles,
              geological processes, and human interventions.  This team will outline the
              state of our knowledge of Nunavut and similar high latitude regions, and to
              then propose, in round table discussions the designs for long term experiments
              aimed at identifying and measuring change in these systems, and the collection
              and compilation of other data and observations of change which will be the
              focus of the proposal to be submitted to IAI Start-Up Grants Phase II.  The
              proposed workshop for Phase I of the IAI Start-Up Grants will establish
              baseline data and guidelines for Phase II.  The application developed for Phase
              II will identify the relevance of  this work to regional and global interests. 
              From a scientific perspective, understanding environmental change is an
              important contribution towards understanding the earth system.  By predicting
              changes to Nunavut, government land-use policy can be modified to accommodate
              future developments, and to contribute to increasing the state of knowledge of
              similar high latitude regions of the Americas.    It is likely that the Phase
              II proposal will reopen the Arctic Research Establishment, a field station in
              Pond Inlet, and its training component for local technicians and university
              students.  In addition, this proposal will link universities in Canada and the
              United States with the IAI Network.  These countries are members of the IAI, an
              initiative to stimulate global change research among the scientific
              institutions of the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is the
              designated U.S. Government agency to carry out the U.S. responsibilities within
              the IAI.  ***
