Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Control: Feedback Stabilization and Cardiac
               Arrhythmia Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1998  
File        : a9530973

Award Number: 9530973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21373              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Hermes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-9530973  PI: Hermes    Hermes proposes to continue his
              research program on the problem of existence and construction of asymptotically
              stabilizing feedback control (ASFC) for affine control systems, in particular
              via the use of high order, homogeneous, approximations.  The dilations and
              local coordinates relative to which the approximating systems are constructed
              can be naturally obtained from the Lie algebra structure of the vector fields
              defining the original system.  Also, an ASFC of appropriate homogeneous order
              for the approximating system is a local ASFC for the original system.  The
              method will be to extend the classical   linear, quadratic, regulator technique
              to a nonlinear, homogeneous regulator.  A first goal is to classify
              homogeneous, affine, systems which admit a smooth ASFC.  Linear, controllable,
              approximating systems   are divided into equivalence classes via the action of
              the linear feedback group, and canonical representatives of each equivalence
              class are well known.  Hermes proposes tho study the equivalence classes of
              small time, or large time, locally controllable homogeneous approximations
              having known smooth ASFC, under the action of a homogeneity preserving group of
              transformations, and to find canonical representatives of the equivalence
              classes.  The odd power integrators provide an example of such.  The above
              topics have implications to questions of regularity conditions for viscosity
              solutions of Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations, another topic to be studied.   
              Many mathematical systems, e.g., an inverted compound pendulum, a robotic arm,
              a high performance aircraft, a communications satellite, either are, or are
              designed to be, unstable in their uncontrolled mode   of operation.  Stability
              of the system is achieved via the introduction of external controls.  In past
              decades, construction of stabilizing controllers was achieved via the use of
              linear approximations, which had   to be "controllable" for the method to work.
               Many space age prob lems are basically nonlinear, have uncontrollable linear
              approximations, and their analysis requires high order approximations which
              retain relevant nonlinear behavior but are still amenable to analysis.  The
              high order, homogeneous approximations are such.  The goal of Hermes research
              is to use these for the construction of stabilizing controls.
