Title       : Theoretical Investigation of Optical & Electronic Properties of Semiconductor
               Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9530649

Award Number: 9530649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190537             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob B. Khurgin jakek@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: ECS-9530649    Principal Investigator:  Jacob Khurgin   
              ABSTRACT    Theoretical investigations will be performed to develop a coherent
              pictureof the optical, electronic and magnetic processes occurring in low
              dimensional semiconductor heterostructures.  The research can lead to families
              of novel optical, electronic and magnetic devices.  One major direction of the
              research is in the area of mid-infrared (3 to 30 microns) light generation and
              detection. Mid-infrared lasers have potentially important applications to
              atmospheric remote sensing, pollution monitoringand laser radars due to the
              presence of an atmospheric window in this range and the current lack of compact
              and powerful laser sources there. The following studies will be performed (1)
              Engineering of the transition rates, based on Coulombic scattering with
              application to intersubband light sources and detectors; (2) Surface-emitting
              intersubband lasers based on theinter-valence subband transitions utilizing
              "the effective mass reversal effect" in the valence bands. This study will also
              ascertain the feasibility of Si-based intersubband lasers and detectors. (3)
              Comparative studies of intersubband lasers without inversion. In (3), the
              threshold and slope efficiency of the inversion-less laser will be established
              and optimized for the first time, using the balance equations. Comparison with
              similar descriptions of more conventional intersubband lasers using real
              numberswill allow a realistic determination of whether inversion-less
              semiconductor laser is a viable alternative to the Quantum-Cascade or Optically
              Pumped semiconductor laser as well as to the recently introduced by the PI
              "Stimulated Intersubband  Electronic Raman Oscillator (SIERO)".    Another
              major direction is in engineering of artificial ferro and ferri-magnetic
              materials. A detailed theoretical investigation of the exchange and correlation
              interaction of the electrons (or holes) placed in the periodic three
              dimensional arrays of quantum dots and anti-dots  will be performed. The
              purpose of this investigation is to specify the exact set ofconditions that
              will lead to ferro- and ferri-magnetism  and to calculatethe most important
              properties of these materials such as the Curie temperateand the critical
              magnetic field. The potential benefit is possibility of integrating the
              magnetic elements on the same semiconductor chip with the electronic and
              optical elements.    The third direction of research is the theoretical study
              of localization processes in semiconductor superlattices and their applications
              to ultra-fast opto-electronic switches. The fourth area of the research is an
              investigation of all-optical switching and frequency conversion components and
              devices based on cascaded second-order nonlinearity.
