Title       : Collaborative Research: Scotia Arc GPS Project (SCARP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9530383

Award Number: 9530383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189108             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Bevis bevis@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Lawver and Dalziel  OPP 9526687  Bevis  OPP 9530383  Smalley  OPP 9527529   
              Abstract    Antarctica is the Earth's most isolated continent.  It is 
              surrounded by actively spreading ridges except in the South  American sector. 
              The motion of South America with respect to  Antarctica is latitudinal and
              left-lateral at approximately 22 mm  per year and is distributed along the
              boundaries of the  intervening Scotia plate.  A prominent but discontinuous 
              bathymetric high known as the Scotia Ridge surrounds the Scotia  plate on three
              sides.  This feature includes some continental  material detached from the
              South American and Antarctic  continents, but its eastern closure is a
              volcanically and  seismically active group of islands, the South Sandwich arc,
              that  is separated from the Scotia plate by a vigorously spreading back-  arc
              ridge.  The entire east-closing, locally emergent bathymetric  feature joining
              the two continents, is known as the Scotia arc.  The D-shaped Sandwich plate
              and arc appear to be moving rapidly  east with respect to both South America
              and Antarctica, thereby  for the first time introducing a subduction system
              into the  otherwise rift-bounded South Atlantic Ocean basin.  This motion  may
              constitute the best evidence for mantle return flow from the  closing Pacific
              Ocean basin to the expanding Atlantic Ocean  basin.  The Scotia arc is
              nonetheless one of the most poorly  constrained of the major tectonic systems
              on Earth, yet it is a  critical and enigmatic link in global plate-motion
              circuits.    This SCotia ARc GPS Project (SCARP) will use the Global 
              Positioning System (GPS) to measure the plate motions between  South America,
              Antarctica, and Africa, and around the Scotia arc  using a newly developed
              geodetic strategy known as a multimodal  occupation strategy (MOST).  This
              involves setting up permanent  GPS receivers at a small number of sites in
              South America and  Antarctica, and using additional receivers to position
              numerous  stations relative to this continuously operat ing network.  Two 
              seasonally occupied stations in the South Sandwich islands will  be tied to
              permanent GPS sites in South America, Antarctica, and  Africa, and to
              intervening stations in the Falkland, South  Georgia, and South Orkney islands
              that will be occupied on an  occasional basis by British collaborators.  During
              the initial  three years the South Sandwich arc motion will be easily 
              resolved, and using roving stations in the Antarctic Peninsula-  South Shetland
              Islands area, it should be possible to determine  if extension is occurring
              across Bransfield Strait.  This project  will also construct a relatively dense
              subnetwork in  Patagonia/Tierra del Fuego, and a moderately dense subnetwork in
               the Antarctic Peninsula.  While achieving sub-millimeter/year  velocity
              resolution in the initial three year project with these  subnetworks is not
              expected, this project will establish the  baseline necessary for a follow-on
              suite of measurements in  perhaps six to eight years.  The follow-on project
              will allow  characterization of the slow motions and deformations that occur 
              across and within the boundaries of the Scotia plate.    The objectives of
              SCARP are to determine:  1. the relative motions of the Antarctic, South
              American, Scotia  and South Sandwich plates;  2. strain partitioning within the
              South America-Scotia plate  boundary zone, Tierra del Fuego;  3. the rate of
              extension across the volcanically active  Bransfield trough and the present
              rate of uplift or subsidence of  the extinct South Shetland Islands volcanic
              arc;  4. and with our British colleagues, the rate of rollback of the  South
              Sandwich Trench in a South American-African framework;    These objectives in
              turn will allow:  1. An important contribution to a geodetic assessment of the 
              elastic displacement field associated with extension in  Bransfield Strait and
              the accumulation or loss of ice on the  Antarctic continent;  2. Determination
              of why there is transpression along the northern  boundary of the Scotia plate
              and tra nstension along its southern  boundary;  3. Testing for motion between
              East and West Antarctica postulated  as a source of error in global plate
              circuits; and  4. Evaluatation of what the South Sandwich trench rollback means
               in terms of mantle flow and the potential for transforming a  passive rifted
              ocean basin into a subducting or disappearing  ocean basin.
