Title       : Field-Aligned Lorentz Forces with Application to Thermal-Ion Upflows into the
               Magnetosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1997    
File        : a9530248

Award Number: 9530248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69871              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland T. Tsunoda roland.tsunoda@sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This is a three-year research program to investigate the nature of  a newly
              discovered ionospheric source for ion energization and  transport.  The topic
              of ion energization is one of paramount  importance in magnetospheric physics
              because ions carry the bulk of  the particle energy and thereby play a central
              role in the molding  of that environment.  The proposed program directly
              addresses one  of the most puzzling problems of ion energization - that is, how
               are heavy (O+) ions accelerated at low altitudes in the ionosphere  and
              transported upward in large numbers to the magnetosphere?  This  question is
              crucial because (1) the abundance of O+  ions found  throughout the
              magnetosphere requires some means by which large  fluxes of thermal ions are
              transported upward from the ionosphere,  and (2) thermal-ions upflows (TIU) and
              transversely accelerated  ions (TAI) have been observed at altitudes as low as
              400 km in the  ionosphere.  Other observations have demonstrated the existence
              of  at least one class of TIU events that is characterized by the  absence of
              ion frictional heating and the presence of elevated  electron temperature,
              features that cannot be easily explained by  known mechansisms.  These findings
              indicate that the process  responsible for the transport of large fluxes of
              terrestrial ions  to the magnetosphere has not yet been identified.  We have
              recently described a new, ion energization souce  Tsunoda  and Kagan, 1995 
              that appears to be the missing mechanism.  The new  source consists of
              Lrentz-type forces that arise because of the  presence of a perturbation
              magnetic field, for example, that  associated with a large-scale field-aligned
              current system.  This  perturbation magnetic field acts together with a
              latituinal  pressure gradient or current (directed orthogonal to one another 
              and transverse to B) to produce a Lorentz-type force in a direction  parallel
              or antiparallel to B.  As described by Tsunoda and Kagan   1995 , and in this
              proposal, this mechanism is capable of   accounting for the class of TIU events
              that occur without ion  heating.  More exciting however, is the likelihood that
              these  field-aligned Lorentz forces can account for a number of related  but
              still puzzling observations including (1) TIUs produced by ion  heating, (2)
              the transport of molecular ions into the  magnetosphere, (3) the triggering of
              the ion-cyclotron and ion-  acoustic instabilities, (4) the transverse
              acceleration of ions by  electrostatic ion-cyclotron waves, (5) the development
              of ion-  acoustic turbulence and anomalous resistivity, and (6) elevated 
              electron temperatures in upward field-aligned current regions.  Given the
              potential of field-aligned Lorentz forces for explaining  a variety of
              ion-acceleration-related phenomena, an investigation  of a larger database of
              incoherent scatter radar data will be  undertaken of determine if the
              observations support the predictions  of this novel theory.
