Title       : SBIR Phase II: Fisheries Geographic Information Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1997       
File        : a9530617

Award Number: 9530617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick K. Simpson pat@scifish.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Scientific Fishery Systems
	      PO Box 242065
	      Anchorage, AK  99524    907/345-7347

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 1321,1352,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***  9530617  Simpson         Over the past three decades, US commercial
              fisheries have experienced tremendous growth and now contribute $50 billion to
              the GNP.  However, although the US ranked fifth in worldwide fishery landings
              in 1990, imported fishery products valued at $9 billion exceeded exports by 3.4
              billion.  In order to sustain this economic growth and reduce the trade deficit
              in the face of the realization that the ocean is not an unlimited resource,
              sound fisheries management is essential.  It is constrained by individual
              fishing quotas (IFQ's) and limited entry, and must involve strategies for
              resource sustainability, bycatch reduction, and the development of
              comprehensive ecosystem models.  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase
              II project from Scientific Fishery Systems, Inc. will implement and field test
              a commercially viable software product entitled The Fisherman's Associate.  The
              Fisherman's Associate is a Geographic Information System (GIS) that will
              integrate all of the available data within a given fishing region including
              fishery, bathymetric, oceanographic, atmospheric, and navigational data. 
              Windows-based software will be used to create, analyze, manipulate, print, and
              store maps.  The resulting maps will be used by fishermen to determine which
              areas are the best to fish during a specific time of the year.  By employing
              The Fisherman's Associate, it will be possible for commercial fishermen or
              fisheries managers to reduce bycatch, increase target catch, decrease
              operational costs, and maximize their respective profits.  An inherent benefit
              of The Fisherman's Associate is the complete utilization of data collected by
              survey organizations such as the National Marine Fisheries Service, the
              National Center for Atmospheric Research, and the National Oceanographic Data
              Center.  Also during Phase II, an automatic model generation capability based
              on neural networks will be developed and integrated into The Fisherman s
              Associate.  The inclusion of automatic model generat ion  to produce pre-season
              forecasts will broaden the appeal of this product and will lure fisheries
              managers to utilize this system as well.  Scientific Fishery Systems will be
              working with two fishing groups during the development and field tests of The
              Fisherman's Associate.  The first group, the F/V Lady Simpson, has agreed to
              provide data and test the system for longline halibut fishing in the Gulf of
              Alaska and king crab and opilio crab fishing in the Bering Sea/Aleutian
              Islands.  The second fishing group is Tyson Seafood Group.  Tyson has agreed to
              provide data, assist in the development, and provide testing for their fleet of
              30 trawlers that fish for cod, pollock, and sole in the Bering Sea.       This
              product will contribute to the capability of improving yields and recovering
              depleted resources thus representing significant potential for facilitating the
              reduction of the US trade deficit in fishery products.  Commercial potential
              for this product is excellent.  The preliminary market analysis has been
              completed for this product indicating estimated sales by the year 2000 at $12.5
              M with a cumulative profit of $10.3 M.  ***
