Title       : Weighted Myriad Filters and Their Applications in Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9530923

Award Number: 9530923
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gonzalo R. Arce arce@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neal C. Gallagher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Linear Filtering theory has been largely motivated by the characteristics of 
              Gaussian random processes.  In the same manner, research in myriad filtering 
              theory is motivated by the statistical properties of alpha-stable processes
              which  describe an important class of processes, impulsive in nature, that obey
              a  Generalized Central Limit Theorem; thus these processes can arise in
              practice as  a result of physical principles.  The foundation of myriad
              filtering algorithms  lies in the definition of the sample myriad as the
              location estimate of a class  of alpha-stable distributions.  The main goals of
              this research are:  (1) To  study the theoretical properties of the sample
              myriad and to exploit its  geometrical structure for the development of
              efficient computational algorithms.   (2) To solve the optimal "weighted
              myriad" filtering problem - the problem  analogous to the design of the optimal
              FIR (Wiener) filter and the optimal  weighted median filter.  (3) To develop
              adaptive filtering algorithms for the  simple design of weighted myriad filters
              for applications where the statistical  characteristics of the underlying
              signals may be unknown or varying.  (4) To  extend the filter formulation to
              the case where the signals are complex or  multivariate, providing us with the
              tools needed to develop robust CDMA multiple  access detectors.    This work
              can have a significant impact on applications requiring robust  estimation and
              filtering.  This is particularly the case in mobile and personal  communication
              systems, to be deployed in the near future, where the underlying  statistics of
              the noise and interferences closely follow the models used in this  research
              rather that the traditional models used in practice today.  The results  of
              this research can also be applied to a wide range of problems including remote 
              sensing imaging of the environment and non-destructive evaluation of materials.
