Title       : Ontogeny and Dynamics of Cnidarian-Algal Symbioses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1998     
File        : a9530057

Award Number: 9530057
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Alice Coffroth coffroth@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530057  Coffroth            Symbioses  between  cnidarians and dinoflagellates 
              in  the  genus  Symbiodinium  are  widespread in the  marine  environment. 
              Their importance to reef-building corals and reef nutrient cycles  is  well 
              documented, but surprisingly little is known about  the  ontogency  of the
              symbiosis and the demographics of zooxanthellae  populations  within  their 
              hosts.   An  understanding  of  these  processes   is   essential   to 
              understanding   the   symbiosis.  Physiologic  adaptations to conditions such 
              as  temperature  and  light  may  in fact be mediated by the demographics of
              the  algal  symbionts.   The objective of this researech is to determine  the 
              ontogeny  of  the  symbiosis in a gorgonian coral  that  produces 
              azooxanthellate  planulae  larvae.  Dr.  Coffroth  will   examine  initial  
              zooxanthellate  infection  in   planulae   larvae   and  characterized  the
              population structure of the  zooxanthellae  in  established  symbioses  in 
              adult  colonies.   These  data   will  determine  whether  the observed
              host-algal association  are  the  result  of  selection (mediated by the host
              or alga),  stochastic  process or simply suitability of the host "habitat" to
              the alga.          Understanding  the  population  dynamics  of  zooxanthellae 
              communities   has  important  ramifications  for   studying   the  symbiosis  
              and  how  the  symbiosis  responds  to  environmental  changes.   It is now
              recognized that zooxanthellae are a  diverse  group.   If  this  diversity  is 
              widespread  among  single  host  colonies  or if the association is in a state
              of continual  flux,  then  changes  in functional and physiologic traits  may 
              reflect  changes in the algal community structure. In this case it will be 
              critical  to examine each component of the symbiosis and consider  the 
              population  dynamics and ecological responses  of  both  the  coral  and  the
              algae to understand and preserve reef ecosystems.  The  first  step,  however, 
              is to quantify  this  diversity  a nd  address how this diversity is
              established.
