Title       : SBIR Phase II: Microwave Plasma Generation of Oxidative Radicals for the
               Non-Thermal Destruction and Removal of Hazardous Air Pollutants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1996 
File        : a9530223

Award Number: 9530223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299305             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bill A. Wofford   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rf Environmental Systems,
	      1506 Lock Lake Drive
	      Seabrook, TX  77586    713/532-1252

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1440,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530223  Wofford   Emissions of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are an
              increasing environmental concern because they are the major contributors to
              three of the today's predominant environmental problems:  global warming, ozone
              depletion, and photochemical smog.  This Small Business Innovation Research
              Phase II project proposes the development of an innovative air pollution
              control device for the destruction and removal of hazardous chemical compounds
              emanating from industrial semiconductor fabrication processes as well as from
              other sources of air pollutants such as soil vapor extraction remediation
              systems.  Currently, air pollution control technologies are limited either by
              cost per pound of pollutant destroyed (thermal oxidation) or by space
              requirements (catalytic oxidation).  The proposed process will very efficiently
              oxidize hazardous air pollutants to such innocuous by-products as CO2 and H2O
              along with other easily scrubbed and neutralized compounds such as HCl.  These
              hazardous air pollutants will be oxidized by reaction with oxidative free
              radicals which are generated by the application of non-thermal microwave
              plasmas.  Non-thermal plasma techniques are a promising strategy for air
              pollution control and abatement.  Phase II will entail the development of a
              full-scale mobile system to demonstrate the viability of these plasmas for two
              distinct applications.  The first is the development of an air control device
              for the destruction of thermally stable compounds such as perfluorocompounds
              emanating from semiconductor etching tools.  The second application will
              involve the destruction and removal of hazardous air pollutants such as benzene
              and trichloroethene emanating from soil vapor extraction remediation systems. 
              These experiments will provide critical data such as plasma resonance times,
              reaction by-products, and destruction and removal efficiencies which can be
              used to design a variety of commercial control systems.   Non-thermal plasma
              application will potentially be a very cost  effective, reliable, flexible, low
              maintenance, and extremely efficient control technology for the removal of
              hard-to-incinerate gaseous air pollutants emanating from non-combustion sources
              such as semiconductor etching equipment and for the removal of hazardous air
              pollutants emanating from other sources such as soil vapor extraction
              remediations.
