Title       : IAI Workshop: Experimental and Time Series Approaches to Global Change Research
               in the Americas: Proposal for Coordination and Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9530127

Award Number: 9530127
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: R E. Hecky   (Principal Investigator current)
              G G. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Manitoba
	      
	      Winnipeg,   00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530127  Hecky  This proposal is for a workshop which is intended to overcome
              major   constraints on global change research on inland waters:  the need for  
              international cooperation to achieve effective research planning and  
              collaboration on field experiments, the need to conduct thorough and  
              geographically extensive database analyses, and the need to formulate and  
              execute hypothesis-driven comparative studies.  The workshop will be  
              structured in order to develop Phase II proposals to the Inter-American  
              Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) in the following themes: effects  
              of hydrologic regimes on biogeochemistry; greenhouse gas flux, mercury  
              cycling and food web performance, UV-dissolved organic carbon interactions  
              and UV effects on aquatic ecosystem structure and function; direct effects of  
              atmospheric chemical changes on aquatic ecosystem structure and function and  
              food web performance; and ecosystem effects of interannual climate  
              variability and effects of El Ni=F1o-Southern Oscillatio= n  events.  It is
              anticipated that the Phase II proposals that result from   this workshop will
              extend ongoing activities at the sites to expand the   research questions being
              addressed and to optimize training and education   opportunities for
              international graduate students and researchers, endorse   new global change
              experiments to be conducted at the Canadian sites or   elsewhere in the
              hemisphere, and identify and evaluate the utility of   long-term (2 or more
              ENSO events) data sets, including paleoclimatological   data sets which can be
              analyzed for insight into future ecosystem   interactions.  There is growing
              consensus that significant changes are occurring in the   earth's atmosphere
              and that these changes if unabated would lead to   significant changes in the
              earth's ecosystems.  The effects of these   atmospheric changes in ecosystems
              are more difficult to detect and can be   buried in the complex dynamics that
              are characteristic of even unstressed   ecosystems.  The c hallenge that this
              proposal accepts is to predict the   ecosystem and societal consequences of
              these atmospheric changes and to   detect ecosystem changes as early as
              possible by using the most powerful   research approaches available to
              ecosystem scientists.  These approaches   are whole system experimentation and
              time series analysis of ecosystems in   relatively remote areas, where they are
              only responding to the changing   atmosphere.  %%%  This proposal is for a
              workshop which is intended to overcome major   constraints on global change
              research on inland waters:  the need for   international cooperation to achieve
              effective research planning and   collaboration on field experiments, the need
              to conduct thorough and   geographically extensive database analyses, and the
              need to formulate and   execute hypothesis-driven comparative studies.  The
              workshop will be   structured in order to develop Phase II proposals in the
              following themes:   effects of hydrologic regimes on biogeochemistry;
              greenhouse gas flux,   mercury cycling and food web performance, UV-dissolved
              organic carbon   interactions and UV effects on aquatic ecosystem structure and
              function;   direct effects of atmospheric chemical changes on aquatic ecosystem
                structure and function and food web performance; and ecosystem effects of  
              interannual climate variability and effects of ENSO events.  It is  
              anticipated that the Phase II proposals that result from this workshop will  
              extend ongoing activities at the sites to expand the research questions   being
              addressed and to optimize training and education opportunities for  
              international graduate students and researchers, endorse new global change  
              experiments to be conducted at the Canadian sites or elsewhere in the  
              hemisphere, and identify and evaluate the utility of long-term (2 or more  
              ENSO events) data sets, including paleoclimatological data sets which can   be
              analyzed for insight into future ecosystem interactions.  The workshop venues
              provide ecologically stimulat ing and contrasting   environments from both a
              natural and scientific perspective.  The   Experimental Lake Area Research
              Station (ELA) near Kenora, Ontario, is   located along a drainage divide at a
              relatively high elevation.  The area   abounds with exceptionally deep,
              extremely oligotrophic, headwater lakes   and scattered peatlands with some of
              the lowest dissolved inorganic carbon   concentrations recorded. The area is a
              wilderness which has resisted   settlement by humans and has therefore escaped
              most of the environmental   insults common to lakes and wetland worldwide. 
              These characteristic have   made the lakes ideal experimental systems in
              service to aquatic science as   well as insuring that the natural lakes are
              responding only to global   atmospheric changes rather than local impacts.  In
              addition, current global circulation models and linked ecozone models  
              forecast a future as dynamic as the past with serious consequences for   these
              well studied sites and surrounding regions in Central Canada.  The   known
              meteorological and geological records of the area indicate a strong   positive
              correlation between air temperature and increasing aridity, and   the 25 year
              integrated ecosystem monitoring at the ELA clearly established   that the
              boreal ecosystems will respond strongly to even short time   climatic
              fluctuation.  It has been demonstrated that there is potential to   gain from
              the ELA lakes positive feedback interactions among concurrent   changes in
              atmospheric acidity, UV, and increasing aridity.  The following countries are
              participating in the coordination of this   proposal:  Canada and the United
              States.  These countries are Members   States of the IAI, a U.S. initiative to
              stimulate cooperative research on   global change issues among the scientific
              institutions of the Americas.   The U.S. National Science Foundation is the
              U.S. Government agency   designated to carry out U.S. responsibilities within
              the IAI.  ***        --========================_13392204==_--
