Title       : Containerization-Origins and Consequences of a Twentieth- Century Revolution in
               Transportation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9530602

Award Number: 9530602
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur Donovan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : US Merchant Mar Acad Fdn
	      Babson Center
	      Kings Point, NY  110241699    516/482-3933

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Since the mid-1950's the technology of surface freight transportation has been
              radically transformed by containerization.  The technological innovation  at
              the heart of this transformation is the use of truck-sized containers as unit
              packages for moving cargo from its point of origin, which is often a factory,
              to its ultimate destination, which is commonly a retail outlet serving
              individual customers. This innovation is notable not because it is an example
              of science-based high technology, but because it enables carriers to radically
              reduce the cost of handling and moving cargo, especially when multiple modes of
              transportation are involved. Once introduced, containerization made possible
              profound cost reductions and efficiency gains, and today containerization is an
              accomplished fact in the transportation industry.     Dr. Donovon is studying
              the origins and consequences of the container revolution and will describe
              these developments by using concepts and patterns of explanation currently
              employed by historians of technology and business.  The introduction of
              containerization was in fact an act of entrepreneurial innovation that entailed
              confronting federal regulation, recalcitrant longshoreman, maritime and
              teamster unions as well as development of new technologies to create an
              intermodal transportation system.  Dr. Donovan will not only create a history
              of this revolution but will also create an oral history archive by recording
              and preserving the recollections of the business and labor leaders who played
              key roles in the container revolution.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
