Title       : Viscoelastic Behavior of Inorganic Glass-Formers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9530372

Award Number: 9530372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Plazek plazek@vms.cis.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sindee L. Simon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                  9530372  Plazek  Inorganic network compounds form an
              important class of  glass-formers whose viscoelastic behavior has not been 
              well-studied compared to that of organic polymers and small  molecule liquids. 
               The viscoelastic behavior of selected  inorganic glass-formers, including
              selenium, sulfur, boron  trioxide, arsenic selenide, arsenic telluride, arsenic
              sulfide,  germanium dioxide, and various compositions of germanium-arsenic- 
              selenium will be examined both above and below their glass  transition
              temperatures (Tg). The establishment of a  characteristic variable for glass
              formation, based on the growing  evidence of a common molecular mobility at the
              glass transition  temperature will be attempted. This attempt will entail
              proper  determination of the glass temperatures of these materials during 
              cooling using volume dilatometry and differential scanning  calorimetry in
              order to use the glass transition  temperature(Tg)as a corresponding state
              parameter. The  viscoelastic measurements made above Tg are also anticipated to
               resolve the issue of whether molecular networks are present in  some inorganic
              glasses, and will allow determination of whether  molecular moieties in these
              glasses are fixed or in dynamic  equilibrium. The data obtained will also be
              used to test the  generality of the relationship which has been found between
              the  time and temperature dependencies of the viscoelastic behavior of  organic
              materials. Finally the viscoelastic data obtained below  Tg, coupled with
              dilatometry and calorimetric data, will be used  to determine whether
              decoupling of different irreversible  processes occurs in inorganic glasses. 
              %%%  This research will enhance the understanding of inorganic glass  structure
              and the correlation of structure with properties in an  attempt to learn how to
              control structures to obtain desired  properties.  Establishing the behavior of
              these inorganic  materials when compared to other glass formers in terms of 
              dynamic states above and below  glass transition temperatures is  an important
              goal, and given the fact that the solid-state  inorganic materials are similar
              to silica, the potential impact  on innovative technologies such as optical
              fibers is high.  ***
