Title       : Carbon Oxidation and Denitrification Rates in Sediments of the Chukchi Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1999   
File        : a9530774

Award Number: 9530774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Duguay                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199588             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Matrai pmatrai@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Christensen  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  The northward flow through the Bering Strait transports nitrate-rich Pacific
              waters into the Arctic basin.  This influx supports the richest productivity
              found in the Arctic.  It has been hypothesized that export of part of this
              productivity could supply significant amounts of organic matter to the central
              Arctic.  Part of the productivity is consumed within the Chukchi Sea via
              sedimentary carbon oxidation, and the rates in the U.S. region of the Chukchi
              are moderately high.  However, new measurements of sedimentary sulfate
              reduction rates indicate that past estimates were several-fold low. 
              Furthermore, conversion of inorganic nitrogen to N2 by denitrification in these
              sediments appears to be rapid.  Thus, the sediments in the American Chukchi may
              oxidize more of the productivity and remove more of the nitrogen than
              previously thought. Furthermore, a large pool of organic rich sediments
              underlies much of the Russian Chukchi Sea, suggesting that even larger areas of
              sedimentary consumption, perhaps with even greater rates of oxidation and
              denitrification, may occur in the Russian areas.  The organic rich  areas of
              the U.S. and Russian Chukchi Sea will be sampled throughout the ice-free
              regions in mid summer of 1996.  At each site, sediment-water fluxes of O2, N2,
              N2O, inorganic nutrients, TCO2, and alkalinity will be measured in replicate
              flux experiments.  Vertical profiles of sulfate reduction rates will be
              determined by current 35SO4 tracer techniques.  Porosity, organic matter
              content and pore water distributions of key solutes will also be determined. 
              These data would expand our knowledge of sedimentary carbon oxidation and
              denitrification rates and their role in the productivity cycle in the Chukchi
              Sea.  The improved estimates of these sedimentary processes will better
              estimate the potential for this region to export significant quantities of
              organic matter to the rest of the Arctic basin.
