Title       : Nature, History and the Natural Historical Sciences in the Twentieth Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1998  
File        : a9530941

Award Number: 9530941
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221205             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Beatty beatt001@staff.tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregg A. Mitman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Under the direction of Dr. John Beatty of the University of Minnesota, Dr.
              James Collins of Arizona State University, and Dr. Gregg Mitman of the
              University of Oklahoma, this `Small Grant for Training and Research`(SGTR) will
              provide a cohort of graduate students and a postdoctoral fellow with the
              methodological and analytical skills to investigate particular historical,
              philosophical and scientific issues related to the natural historical sciences
              in the 20th century.  The unifying issues of this SGTR center on the ways in
              which the `natural historical sciences` have been distinguished as a group from
              the rest of biology.  The three PI's believe that despite changes in the way
              this distinction has been drawn, there is considerable historical continuity to
              the tradition of distinguishing the natural historical sciences from more
              laboratory-based disciplines.  They have organized their teaching and research
              around two general respects in which the natural historical sciences have been
              seen as distinct:  1) with respect to conceptions of nature and what is
              natural, and 2) with respect to the importance of history.  In order to give
              the students a fuller understanding and appreciation of the natural historical
              sciences, they are not relying on documents alone, but will also provide field
              natural historical experience.  Through this program,  students will explore
              various dimensions and unique aspects of natural history in the 20th century
              within a cohort/community learning environment that draws upon the experience
              of an ecologist (Collins), an historian of ecology (Mitman) and a
              philosopher/historian of evolutionary biology (Beatty), each of whom is engaged
              with these issues in their own research.  The program is designed as a
              traveling seminar.  The cohort of five graduate students from Arizona State,
              Minnesota, and Oklahoma universities, and a postdoctoral fellow will travel to
              each respective institution for one semester where they will participate in a
              seminar led by the faculty member of that institution and engage in field
              research.  In the fourth semester, the students will return to their home
              institution.  The postdoc will help the PI's in the development of the
              seminars, serve as liaison between students and faculty and conduct his/her own
              research.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
