Title       : The Carbon Dioxide System in the Southern Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9530384

Award Number: 9530384
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400339             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank J. Millero fmillero@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530384  Millero         This research project is part of the US Joint Global 
              Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1)  a better
              understanding of the fluxes of carbon, both organic  and inorganic, in the
              Southern Ocean, (2) identifying the  physical, ecological and biogeochemical
              factors and  processes which regulate the magnitude and variability of  these
              fluxes, and (3) placing these fluxes into the context  of the contemporary
              global carbon cycle.       This work is one of forty-four projects that are 
              collaborating in the Southern Ocean Experiment, a threeyear  effort south of
              the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to track  the flow of carbon through its
              organic and inorganic  pathways from the air-ocean interface through the entire
               water column into the bottom sediment.   The experiment will  make use of the
              RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V  Thompson.       It is known that the flux
              of gaseous carbon dioxide  from the atmosphere to the ocean is controlled by
              the airsea  difference in the partial pressure of CO2.  In the ocean the 
              dissolved carbon dioxide is in chemical equilibrium with the  carbonate and
              bicarbonate ions.  The carbonate ion  concentration controls the rate of
              dissolution and  precipitation of calcium carbonate, and the rate at which 
              inorganic carbon is delivered to the sediment.   What is not  known very well
              is how these inorganic relationships are  affected by biological processes in a
              region where  production and transformation processes are quite large.      
              This component concerns the direct measurement of the  carbonate system on
              seven cruises between 1996 and 1998.  This will involve measuring total
              inorganic carbon dioxide  (TCO2), the partial pressure of gaseous carbon
              dioxide  (pCO2), and total alkalinity (TA) in the surface waters, as  well as
              the pCO2 in  atmosphere, continuously along the  cruise tracks.  Complementary
              depth profiles of the oceanic  parameters will be made at some of the stations.
                    These measurements will be made in  cooperation with  the carbon-related
              measurements planned by other groups that  receive support to participate in
              the experiment.  The  resulting carbon-based and nutrient measurements should 
              provide the necessary field data that will be required in  examining the flux
              of carbon dioxide across the air-sea  interface and the changes resulting from
              primary  productivity and the oxidation of plant material.  ***
