Title       : Dissertation Research: An Assessment of Mobility in Upper Paleolithic and
               Mesolithic European humans: Evidence from Postcranial Cross-Sectional Geometric
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1996  
File        : a9530828

Award Number: 9530828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis H. O'Rourke                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7352               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Benfer BenferR@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The transition between hunter-gatherer lifestyle and subsequent sedentary
              Neolithic was a major  stage in human history, a stage that remains poorly
              understood. The proposed study will test the  hypothesis that sedentism in
              Europe began at the onset of postglacial conditions, and provide  further
              insights into the preconditions of the European transition as well as a more
              complete  understanding of skeletal adaptation to activity patterns. The
              consequences of environmental  changes for human subsistence at the European
              Late Pleistocene/Holocene transition are poorly  understood. Specifically, how
              did mobility change? This project will test the hypothesis that a  significant
              decrease in mobility occurred at the European Upper Paleolithic/Mesolithic
              transition  by examining changes through time in human postcranial skeletal
              structure, using cross-sectional  tibial and femoral properties that are
              directly related to activity levels (locomotion). Data will be  obtained from
              radiographs of the femur and tibia of osteological specimens in museum 
              collections. Molds will be taken at three locations along the the femur and the
              tibia.  Cross-sections at each location will be reconstructed, using the
              radiographs and molds as guides  to endosteal and periosteal contours. Each
              reconstructed cross-section will be digitized and  cross-sectional geometric
              properties calculated. Previous studies have shown that variation in  lower
              limb bone cross-sectional shape corresponds to differences in mobility levels
              and patterns,  reflecting subsistence differences. Correlations between various
              environmental, biological, and  cultural factors and observed levels of
              mobility will be examined.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
