Title       : Distributed Manipulation Algorithms for Massively Parallel Microfabricated
               Actuator Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1997       
File        : a9530785

Award Number: 9530785
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247673             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce R. Donald   (Principal Investigator current)
              Noel C. MacDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9146,9216,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research investigates manipulation tasks with arrays of  micro 
              electromechanical structures  (MEMS).   The  PIs  are  developing  a  geometric
              model for the  mechanics  of  micro  actuators  and  a theory of massively
              parallel manipulation,  and  will develop efficient algorithms for their
              evaluation.  They    have   designed,   built,   and   tested   prototype 
              microfabricated  actuators,  and  will  demonstrate  control  strategies  to
              manipulate small objects. In particular,  the  research  will  develop  and
              implement  sensorless  actuator  array control strategies to efficiently orient
              flat parts in  the  plane. The main objective of the research concerns  the 
              development  of a science base for micro-scale manipulation.  Manipulation 
              strategies  with  reduced  sensing  have  been  highly  successful  in 
              industrial  manufacturing,  e.g.  in  vibratory bowl feeders, or in systems
              such as the Sony  APOS  system.   These  strategies will be extended  to  the 
              micro  scale.   A dense array of devices can be modeled as a vector  field. 
              The flow this field induces on a rigid body will  be  analyzed  to  develop, 
              evaluate, and  extend  a  theory  of  manipulation with micro-actuator arrays. 
              It will  be  shown  how  simple  actuator  control strategies  can  be  used 
              to  uniquely  orient  a  part  up  to  symmetry  without  sensor  feedback. The
              manipulation algorithms are based on a  theory  of programmable vector fields,
              which is applicable to a wide  range of micro-actuator arrays. The algorithms
              will be  impl  emented  on  physical micro-arrays to validate  the  theory. 
              Strategies  for  orienting, sorting, and  singulating  parts  using 
              micro-arrays  will  be  designed,  implemented,   and  tested.
