Title       : IAI Workshop: The Impact of Solar Ultraviolet Radiation on Aquatic and
               Terrestrial Resources in Patagonia, Argentina-Chile
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1998       
File        : a9530255

Award Number: 9530255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Osmund Holm-Hansen oholmhansen@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530255  Holm-Hansen   This Phase I proposal focuses on the potential biological
              impacts of increased solar ultraviolet radiation (UVR) on both terrestrial and
              aquatic ecosystems in the southern regions of Argentina and Chile.  During
              three workshops, this Phase I proposal has as its objective to work with
              research personnel in Argentina and Chile to develop a framework of cooperation
              between researchers from these countries and those from the United States in
              order to plan a research program that will be both scientifically productive
              and also meaningful to social interests in South America.    It is recognized
              that a meaningful biological study of the UV impacts related to ozone depletion
              should involve expertise from many disciplines and backgrounds.  In particular,
              it is important to involve expertise related to measurement of ozone and
              spectral UVR, experimental biologists with expertise in terrestrial and aquatic
              ecosystems, personnel who are knowledgeable regarding important regional
              resources that should be investigated in regard to UVR sensitivity, and
              modeling expertise to integrate the physical-biological data resulting from the
              field research.  This proposal draws upon the scientific and environmental
              expertise from Argentina, Chile, and the United States to develop a dynamic
              research program that gives regional concerns a high priority.     The research
              is organized in regions of Argentina and Chile because incident UVR will
              increase with decreasing latitude, but the maximum change in enhanced UV-B
              radiation will be at the higher latitudes.  The consequences of such opposite
              trends in incident radiation with changes in latitude will thus impose very
              different radiation regimes in different regions of Argentina and Chile.  The
              regions mentioned above are different in regard to the terrestrial and aquatic
              resources which are of importance to the local inhabitants and to the economy
              of the countries.  %%%   This Phase I proposal focuses on the potential
              biological impacts of increased  solar ultraviolet radiation (UVR) on both
              terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems in the southern regions of Argentina and
              Chile.  During three workshops, this Phase I proposal has as its objective to
              work with research personnel in Argentina and Chile to develop a framework of
              cooperation between researchers from these countries and those from the United
              States in order to plan a research program that will be both scientifically
              productive and also meaningful to social interests in South America.     This
              proposal focuses on the potential significance of increased UV-B radiation in
              those regions of South America where the impact will be of importance for
              social interests, which will include agricultural crops, alterations in aquatic
              primary production with resultant effects of harvestable aquatic resources, and
              other aspects of the terrestrial ecosystems which may be of importance to the
              economies of the region.  Although Antarctic regions are experiencing the
              greatest change of solar regimes, the above social concerns are not very
              relevant to the Antarctic continent.  The southern portion of South America,
              however, with its close proximity to the seasonal ozone hole and its many
              inhabitants and abundant terrestrial and aquatic resources, would appear to be
              the area of greatest potential harm by increasing depletion of stratospheric
              ozone.  It is for this reason that this proposal is mainly concerned with the
              area of Patagonia, but research will also be conducted in tropical areas so as
              to compare subantarctic and temperate species with tropical species.     As the
              research of this proposal will focus on components of the terrestrial and
              aquatic ecosystems which represent important economic resources, the findings
              will have direct relevance to regional and national interests and economies. 
              The incorporation of student education and training and international
              cooperation will benefit both individuals and the institutional framework of
              science in various Member States of the IAI participating in this  program. 
              This proposal assembles a team of scientists from the following countries: 
              Argentina, Chile, and the United States.  These countries are Member States of
              the IAI, an initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change
              issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas.  The National Science
              Foundation is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry our the Unites
              States responsibilities within the IAI.  ***
