Title       : IAI Workshop: Climate Variability in the Americas from High Elevation Ice Cores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1996      
File        : a9530179

Award Number: 9530179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49937              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond S. Bradley rbradley@geo.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530179  Bradley  The purpose of this workshop on Climate Variability in the
              Americas from High Elevation Ice Cores is to develop plans for obtaining a set
              of ice cores from sites distributed along the mountainous western axis of the
              Americas, from Alaska/Yukon to the southern tip of South America.  Although
              most ice core research has been in polar regions, ice cores from high
              elevations in the Americas have also provided unique and detailed insights into
              paleoclimates of the past, and this workshop will build on the analysis which
              has been carried out in the past.  The workshop will bring together interested
              parties from different research institutions in the region:  Argentina;
              Bolivia; Brazil; Canada; Chile; Ecuador; Peru; and the United States.  The
              primary goal of the workshop is to prepare a document outlining the
              opportunities that ice core studies in the high mountains of the Americas can
              provide in understanding ENSO-related interannual variability and cold region
              processes.  The is goal will be achieved by:  identifying the principal
              scientific questions which can be answered by ice core studies; determining
              which ice caps have the potential of yielding high resolution
              paleoenvironmental records; prioritizing the most important sites; planning
              preparatory glaciological and geophysical surveys to determine in detail the
              optimum coring sites; establishing which research institutions and individuals
              have the necessary technical and analytical skills and the motivation to carry
              out the required work; determining what funding would be required to carry out
              the proposed research and to establish a time-frame for accomplishing the work;
              and developing a plan for inter-institutional exchange of scientists and
              graduate students to ensure that the research program is truly collaborative,
              international, and multidiscilplinary.  These objectives will contribute to the
              study of a IAI research priority which is to what extent climate variability in
              the two hemispheres is synchronous.    The workshop  will identify institutions
              and individuals and their relevant expertise to assign areas of responsibility
              for subsequent research. A prioity list of sites where research should be
              initiated will also be prepared in order to build on existing knowledge or new
              areas for reconnaissance studies.  Workshop participants will discuss what
              mechanisms currently exist or will be required to ensure that the proposed
              research will be carried out in the framework of full international
              collaboration.  %%%  The purpose of this workshop on Climate Variability in the
              Americas from High Elevation Ice Cores is to develop plans for obtaining a set
              of ice cores from sites distributed along the mountainous western axis of the
              Americas, from Alaska/Yukon to the southern tip of South America.  Although
              most ice core research has been in polar regions, ice cores from high
              elevations in the Americas have also provided unique and detailed insights into
              paleoclimates of the past.  This workshop will build on the analysis which has
              been carried out in the past.  The primary goal of the workshop is to prepare a
              document outlining the opportunities that ice core studies in the high
              mountains of the Americas can provide in understanding ENSO-related interannual
              variability and cold region processes.  The workshop will bring together
              interested parties from different research institutions in the region: 
              Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil; Canada; Chile; Ecuador; Peru; and the United
              States.  Climatic variations of the last 2000 years are of particular relevance
              to contemporary human endeavors.  Although climatic fluctuations over this time
              period were small in comparison with those expected from a doubling of
              greenhouse gases, the last 2000 years have witnessed the most extreme condition
              of the Holocene period.  Furthermore, there is abundant evidence that even such
              relatively small climatic anomalies have had significant impacts on human
              societies such as prolonged droughts and other climate-related disruptions.  It
              is necessary to  understand these fluctuations and their causes and
              interactions between one region and another because it is the background of
              natural variability that the anthropogenic greenhouse effect is being impaired.
               Climate-related proxy records can provide the longer time frame necessary to
              document the significance of underlying trends, to analyze the nature of any
              periodicities in climate, and to address the critical issues of abrupt climate
              change.  A long-term, detailed record of global climate is thus an essential
              pre-requisite of placing contemporary climatic conditions in perspective, and
              this proposal will construct high resolution proxy records from the Americas to
              construct a globally comprehensive view of such climatic variations in the
              past.    This proposal assembles a team of scientists from the following
              countries: Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil; Canada; Chile; Ecuador; Peru; and the
              United States.  These countries are Member States of the IAI, an initiative to
              stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific
              institutions of the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is the
              designated U.S. Government agency to carry our the Unites States
              responsibilities within the IAI.  ***
