Title       : IAI Workshop: Effects of UV-B Radiation on Various Ecosystems at Different
               Latitudes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1998      
File        : a9530334

Award Number: 9530334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Serge Demers Serge demers@uqar,uquebec.ca  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne Roy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen De Mora  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Quebec
	      Box 8888, Station A
	      Montreal,   00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0521500   Ozone & The Stratosphere                
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530334  Demers  This proposal requests support for two meetings on the effects
              of UV-B   radiation on aquatic ecosystems, both in high and low latitudes, and
              in   both fresh- and salt-water environments.  The first workshop, to be held
              in   late 1996 in Ensenada, Mexico, will have as its products the following:  a
                state of the art review, to be compiled and produced as a book, a  
              discussion of the principal research themes for the group, and the division  
              of labor between working groups for the production of a Phase II proposal   to
              the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI).  The   second
              workshop, to be held in early 1997 in Buenos Aires, Argentina, will   consist
              of a smaller group that meets to integrate the results of the   working groups
              and draft the actual Phase II proposal.  The preliminary   comprehensive
              objective for a Phase II project is a latitudinal comparison   of the effects
              of the variations in incident UV radiation at the   individual, population,
              community, and ecosystem levels.  This goal will be   achieved through the
              following sub-objectives:  the characterization of   subsurface UV spectral
              irradiance; the quantification of the impact of   environmental UV on
              biogeochemical processes with respect to spectral   composition, intensity and
              duration of exposure; the quantification of the   impact of UV-B radiation on
              the biology and bio-diversity of marine   planktonic ecosystems up to decadal
              exposure times, with emphasis on   phytoplankton and pelagic primary
              production, and measurements of possible   UV-induced photoinhibition; and
              finally the training of local personnel to   carry out a coordinated program of
              measurements and analysis.  The proposed   program would identify key areas of
              study at different levels in the   ecosystems; coordinate efforts, sampling,
              and methods to be used for   inter-site comparisons; and take advantage of
              existing ecosystem study   sites (e.g. the Palmer LTER site).  Facilities
              belonging to the following   institution s might be used during Phase II: 
              Argentine Antarctic Institute;   Austral Center for Scientific Research,
              Argentina; Autonomous University of   Baja California, Mexico; Bigelow
              Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, Canada;   Center for Scientific Research and
              Higher Education of Ensenada, Mexico;  National Autonomous University of Mexico
              in Yucat=E1n; National Institute fo=   r  =46isheries Development, Chile;
              National Institute for Fisheries Research an=   d  Development, Argentina;
              National Scientific Research Institute of the   University of Qu=E9bec, Canada;
              Oceanographic Institute, University of Sao   Paulo, Brazil; Scripps Institute
              of Oceanography, in the United States;   Smithsonian Institute (facilities in
              Belize, C.A., and Maryland); and the   University of San Francisco, USA.  These
              institutions are all principally   located in countries that are members of the
              IAI, a United States   initiative to stimulate global change research among the
              scientific   institutions of the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is
              the   designated U.S. Government agency to carry out the U.S. responsibilities 
               within the IAI.  %%%  This proposal requests support for two international
              scientific meetings on   the effects of ultra-violet radiation on aquatic
              ecosystems.  The first   workshop, to be held in late 1996 in Ensenada, Mexico,
              will have as its   products the following:  a state of the art review, to be
              compiled and   produced as a book, a discussion of the principal research
              themes for the   group, and the division of labor between working groups for
              the production of   a Phase II proposal to the Inter-American Institute for
              Global Change   Research (IAI).  The second workshop, to be held in early 1997
              in Buenos   Aires, Argentina, will consist of a smaller group that meets to
              integrate the   results of the working groups and draft the actual Phase II
              proposal. The   preliminary comprehensive objective for a Phase II project is a
              comparison of   the effects of UV radiation on ecosystems at variou s levels.
              The proposed   program would identify key areas of study, coordinate methods to
              be used for   inter-site comparisons, and take advantage of existingecosyst em
              study sites   (e.g. the Long Term Ecological Research sites).  Facilities
              belonging to the   following institutions might be used during Phase II:
              Argentine Antarctic   Institute; Austral Center for Scientific Research,
              Argentina; Autonomous   University of Baja California, Mexico; Bigelow
              Laboratory for Ocean Sciences,   Canada; Center for Scientific Research and
              Higher Education of Ensenada,   Mexico; National Autonomous University of
              Mexico in Yucat=E1n; National   Institute for Fisheries Development, Chile;
              National Institute for Fisheries   Research and Development, Argentina;
              National Scientific Research Institute   of the University of Qu=E9bec, Canada=
              ;  Oceanographic Institute, University of Sao Paulo, Brazil; Scripps Institute 
               of Oceanography, in the United States; Smithsonian Institute (facilities in  
              Belize, C.A., and Maryland); and the University of San Francisco, USA.   These
              institutions are all principally located in countries that are   members of the
              IAI, a United States initiative to stimulate global change   research among the
              scientific institutions of the Americas.  The National   Science Foundation is
              the designated U.S. Government agency to carry out   the U.S. responsibilities
              within the IAI.  ***
