Title       : Proxies of Past Changes in Southern Ocean Productivity: Modeling and
               Experimental Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9530379

Award Number: 9530379
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $532000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530379  Anderson         This research project is part of the US Joint Global 
              Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at  (1) a better
              understanding of the fluxes of carbon, both  organic and inorganic, in the
              Southern Ocean, (2)  identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical 
              factors and processes which regulate the magnitude and  variability of these
              fluxes, and (3) placing these fluxes  into the context of the contemporary
              global carbon cycle.       This work is one of forty-four projects that are 
              collaborating in the Southern Ocean Experiment, a three-  year effort south of
              the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to  track the flow of carbon through its
              organic and inorganic  pathways from the air-ocean interface through the entire
               water column into the bottom sediment.   The experiment  will make use of the
              RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V  Thompson.       This component is a study
              of how naturally radioactive  material in the ocean sediment may be used to
              reconstruct  the flux of biogenic material through the water column to  the
              sediment, and by inference, the productivity of the  surface layers.  There is
              evidence that the current surface  conditions of high nutrient levels, but low
              chlorophyll  levels do not extend back into colder climatic epochs, and  that
              an examination of radionuclides may allow the  reconstruction of rates of
              paleoproductivity.       Two aspects of the biogeochemical cycling and physical
               transport of radionuclide tracers in the modern ocean will  be investigated. 
              In the first part, the concentration of a  series of natural radionuclide
              tracers (thorium-230,  protactinium-231, and Beryllium-10) in the Southern
              Ocean  will be measured for their scavenging behavior both in the  water column
              and in particulate material collected by  sediment traps. The goal is to test
              the proposed use of  radionuclide ratios as proxy variables for the export
              flux.  In the second part, the concentration values will be  introduced into an
              ocean general circulat ion model to  evaluate the transport of radionuclides by
              the ocean  circulation on scales that are larger than the spatial  gradients in
              particle flux.  These combined efforts will  better define our ability to use
              radionuclide ratios to  evaluate past changes in ocean productivity, and
              improve  our understanding of the response of ocean productivity to  climate
              variability.  ***
