Title       : Solution and Gas-Phase Photochemistry Involving Multiple and Delocalized Excited
               States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1997  
File        : a9530650

Award Number: 9530650
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry A. Morrison   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Harry Morrison of Purdue University will conduct a project with  
              funding from the Organic Dynamics Program of the Chemistry Division  
              emphasizing the study of the limitations and consequences of movement of  
              electronic energy through `photonic wires.`  These are assemblies of  
              chromophores pendant on or incorporated into a passive framework, and in  
              particular in the present case the passive framework is the steroid ring  
              system.  The transfer of electronic excitation absorbed by `antenna`  
              chromophores to distal, formally unconjugated, groups may produce   chemistry
              or quenching, depending on the groups, and Professor Morrison   will be
              determining the ground rules for each.  The study will be   complemented by
              parallel theoretical and experimental studies intended to   determine the role
              of through space mixing of orbitals in determining   such ground rules.  These
              studies will be accomplished in part by   cooperative studies with senior
              collaborators at other institutions.  An   added effort will be made to
              understand the role of the second excited   singlet state in indene
              photochemistry.  The use of light in information transmission, storage, and
              retrieval is   changing modern society.  This project will generate basic
              results   pertinent to the ability to use light in modulation of information  
              transmission on the scale of an organic molecule. It will also support  
              experimental results with theoretical calculations which allow a   generalized
              picture to be developed.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
