Title       : Computer-aided Statistical Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9530492

Award Number: 9530492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudolf J. Beran   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1303,9216,EGCH,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Beran          Modern statistical methods for large data sets rely on rotation
              of the   data in high dimensions (as in Fourier analysis, wavelet transforms,
              or   projection pursuit), on smoothing (as in nonparametric regression), on  
              shrinkage (as in Stein estimation or ridge regression), on variable selection  
              (as in linear regression), and on combinations of these ideas (such as  
              thresholding of wavelet or Fourier coefficients). Concurrently, statisticians  
              have introduced computer-aided techniques, such as cross-validation or the  
              bootstrap, for assessing the uncertainty in patterns recovered though data  
              analyses. This research project develops: (a) necessary and sufficient  
              conditions under which bootstrap distributions converge correctly plus  
              diagnostic methods for detecting bootstrap failure in data analyses; (b)  
              modulation estimators that recover a signal from noise by adaptively tapering  
               the rotated data plus confidence regions for the signal that are centered at  
              the modulation estimators; (c) nonparametric bootstrap confidence sets for all 
               pairwise rotational differences among the mean directions (or mean axes) of  
              several independent samples of directional (or axial) data.           The
              computer revolution in scientific and social measurement has created   large,
              complex data sets. In response, data analysts have devised computer-   assisted
              methods for recovering patterns from data. However, incompleteness of   the
              data as well as measurement errors induce possible errors in the   conclusions
              reached. The recent controversy about Census undercounts in the   cities is a
              prominent example. How much uncertainty is there in patterns   recovered
              through sophisticated data-analyses?  The statistical technique   called the
              bootstrap, which relies on fast computers, has grown since 1979   into the most
              widely applicable method for assessing uncertainties inherent in  
              data-analyses. Unfortunately, bootstrap methods, as currently used, can  
              sometimes give a misleading asse ssment of uncertainty. Part (a) of this  
              research project provides computer-intensive ways to detect and to correct  
              such bootstrap failure. This portion of the work contributes to the Federal  
              Strategic Area of high-performance computing. Part (b) of the project develops 
               uncertainty assessments for signals recovered from noisy measurements.  
              Electronic images recorded by a satellite camera are an instance of such  
              measurements. This portion of the work provides statistical methodology for  
              analyzing satellite data in the Federal Strategic Area of global change. Part  
              (c) of the project develops uncertainty assessments for analyses of  
              directional and axial data sets. Geophysical measurements in earthquake  
              studies, oil exploration, and studies of volcanic activity are examples of  
              such directional and axial data.
