Title       : Glaciological Interpretation of Changes in Radar Reflection Characteristics from
               Glaciers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1996      
File        : a9530827

Award Number: 9530827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37540              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Raymond charlie@geophys.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      The speed of glaciers and ice sheets can be affected by hydraulic
              conditions at their beds.  Examples are the dramatic fast-motion of ice streams
              and glacier surges or the more modest seasonal variations in speed that are
              common in temperate glaciers.  The connection between glacier speed and
              hydraulic conditions at the bed has been established through borehole and
              glacial discharge observations.  However, these observations yield only very
              limited spatial coverage (in the case of boreholes) or resolution (in the case
              of stream discharges).  Radio echo-sounding (RES) has been used extensively to
              map the thickness and structure of many glaciers and ice sheets.  The
              Investigator  recently used RES to monitor the spatial and temporal reflection
              changes within a temperate glacier (Black Rapids Glacier, Alaska) and across a
              relict ice stream margin in Antarctica.  Results from Black Rapids Glacier show
              distinct temporal changes in RES return characteristics during the early part
              of the melt season when the speed of the glacier increased significantly.
              Results from Antarctica show a large spatial change in RES return
              characteristics;  the reflection strength of the bed changed by about 300% in a
              traverse across the relict margin.  Interpretation of the evolving physical
              conditions at the bed is complicated because some of the observed changes in
              RES returns from the bed may be caused by changes at the surface and/or within
              the interior of the ice.  Here the investigator proposes to determine the
              actual changes in reflection characteristics of the bed by using multivariate
              analysis to remove the effects of transmission through the surface and
              propagation within the ice.  Models of reflection from layered dielectric media
              will them be used to investigate relationships between the changes in
              reflection coefficient and changes in basal conditions such as the thickness
              and electrical conductivity of water at the bed.  Their main objective is to
              use the RES records to gain understanding about physic al conditions at the bed
              of glaciers and ice sheets.
