Title       : Mesoscale Processes and Primary Productivity at the Polar Front
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9530507

Award Number: 9530507
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. Abbott mark@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530507  ABBOTT  This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean 
              Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a  better understanding
              of the fluxes of carbon, both organic  and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean,
              (2) identifying the  physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and 
              processes which regulate the magnitude and variability of  these fluxes, and
              (3) placing these fluxes into the context  of the contemporary global carbon
              cycle.    The Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) provides a pathway  between
              the major basins of the Pacific, Atlantic, and  Indian Oceans.  Therefore, it
              plays a critical role in the  global redistribution of salt, heat, and other
              ocean  properties between these basins.  Although improved  observations and
              more powerful numerical models have  identified many critical processes, it is
              still not possible  to balance all of the terms.  The scarcity of direct 
              observations has greatly hampered our understanding of the  physical
              environment, and the situation with regard to ocean  biogeochemistry is even
              worse.  The challenge to  understanding Southern Ocean dynamics (both physics
              and  biogeochemistry) is exacerbated by the strong dynamical link  between
              mesoscale processes and large-scale processes. The  dynamical scales approach
              the scales typical of energetic  coastal systems.  Yet the size of the Southern
              Ocean and its  impacts on global biogeochemistry and climate make this an 
              important region.    This research starts with the hypothesis that the
              ecosystem  of the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone (APFZ) behaves much like  a
              coastal upwelling system which is characterized by  episodic diatom blooms. 
              These blooms result in high  f-ratios, high preservation rates of biogenic
              silica and  relatively little vertical flux of particulate biogenic  material. 
              These processes are consistent with observations  of bottom sediments.  The
              lack of meridional barriers leads  to a "recirculation" of diatoms associated
              with frontal  meanders.  Phytoplankton wou ld alternately upwell and then 
              downwell in these meanders, creating a helical circulation  path.  Such bloom
              events may be unimportant in the total  productivity of the system but play a
              disproportionate role  in carbon fluxes.    In this project a high-resolution
              sampling array of moorings  with bio-optical sensors and current meters will be
               deployed.  The moorings will rely on low-cost components so  that the sampling
              scales will match with the dynamical  scales of the critical processes at the
              Polar Front.  Lagrangian drifters (some equipped with bio-optical sensors) 
              will be deployed during high-resolution surveys in order to  characterize the
              temporal and spatial scales of variability  when coupled with the Eulerian
              observations from the  moorings.  These data will be analyzed in conjunction
              with  high-resolution SeaSoar surveys and high temporal resolution  sediment
              traps proposed by other investigators to study the  effects of mesoscale
              processes on productivity and  horizontal and vertical fluxes of biological
              properties.
