Title       : New and Regenerated Production in the Southern Ocean: Ross Sea Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9530716

Award Number: 9530716
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229180             (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Cochlan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              95-30716  Cochlan    This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean
              Flux  Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better  understanding
              of the fluxes of carbon, both organic and  inorganic, in the Southern Ocean,
              (2) identifying the physical,  ecological and biogeochemical factors and
              processes which  regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and
              (3)  placing these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global  carbon
              cycle.    The broad continental shelf of the Ross Sea is characterized by 
              relatively high biomass with large phytoplankton blooms in the  austral
              spring-summer.  This region has been designated as an  area for intensive
              process studies as part of the U.S. JGOFS  comprehensive investigative program
              of carbon and biogenic fluxes  in the Southern Ocean.  As part of that effort,
              this study is  designed to assess the rates of new and regenerated production
              in  the Ross Sea continental shelf regime during the productive  growing season
              in Antarctica (spring, summer, autumn).    The overall objectives of this study
               are to obtain accurate and  quantitative estimates of the nitrogenous
              nutrition of the  planktonic assemblages in this dynamic system, and to
              understand  the factors which control the magnitude and variability of  primary
              production and the vertical flux of biogenic material  from the euphotic zone
              (i.e. export production).  A suite of core  measurements will be made to
              estimate new and regenerated  production over relevant spatial and temporal
              scales.  New  production in the Ross Sea is hypothesized as a function of the 
              evolution of the ecosystems' development and thus regulated by:  the
              hydrodynamic properties of the water column (i.e. vertical  stability from ice
              melt), the interaction of macronutrients  (ammonium and urea), and the
              availability  of the micronutrient  iron.  Core measurements include
              determining the uptake rates of  four nitrogen substrates (nitrate, nitrite,
              ammonium, and urea)  using the 15N-tracer technique; a t stations distributed
              along  transects from the ice-edge (marginal ice zone), across the  shelf,
              slope, and into the open ocean; with measurements at seven  depths ranging from
              100% to 1% of surface irradiance; during  morning, mid-day and night.  The
              degree of isotopic dilution  will be quantified during nitrogen uptake
              experiments to more  accurately determine rates of uptake, and to estimate
              rates of  microheterotrophic nitrogen regeneration.    In addition to the core
              measurements additional experiments will  answer specific questions about the
              system, and will refine our  estimates of new and regenerated production.
