Title       : IAI Workshop: The Assessment of Present, Past and Future Climate Variability in
               the Americas from Treeline Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1998      
File        : a9530427

Award Number: 9530427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian H. Luckman Luckman@sscl.umo.ca  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Western Ontario
	      SLB328
	      London, Ontario, AL  N6B5B8    519/661-2111

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530427  Luckman  Treelines are critical, climate-sensitive, ecotones in
              mountain areas that have been the focus of many studies of environmental
              change.  Understanding the present and former dynamics of these environments is
              crucial to the interpretation of these records.  The adoption of PEP-I transect
              concept for the Americas by IGBP-PAGES offers unparalleled opportunities for
              collaborative studies by scientists working at or near treelines along the
              length of the American Cordillera.  This proposal requests IAI Start-Up Grant
              Phase I funding to hold a workshop in Jasper, Alberta, Canada in late
              September- early October 1996, to focus on treeline environments along the
              American Cordillera.  The meeting will bring together scientists from IAI
              member countries who are experts in a wide range of fields:  paleoecology,
              dendrochronology, and climatology.  This mix will allow the group to formulate
              a science plan for the understanding of the dynamics of present treeline
              environments, and the reconstruction of environmental and climate changes at
              treeline sites.  The participants will review the present information base on
              treeline environments along the American Cordillera and discuss the formulation
              of collaborative, comparative studies, that will evaluate and benchmark the
              climate signals found at modern treeline sites and determine the response of
              this sensitive environment to recent climate variation; develop a network of
              comparable high resolution proxy climate series that show internal climate
              variation at treeline over the last ca 1000 years for key localities; and
              utilize these data to examine the local and regional patterns of internal and
              longer term climate variability to develop data on key temporal and spatial
              patterns of forcing functions.  This meeting will lead to the development of a
              series of collaborative, international, interdisciplinary research proposals
              for Phase II of the IAI Start-Up Grants that implement this scientific agenda. 
              %%%  Treelines are critical, climate-sensiti ve mountain areas that have been
              the focus of many studies of environmental change.  Understanding the present
              and former dynamics of these environments is crucial to the interpretation of
              these records.  The adoption of the Pole-Equator-Pole (PEP-I) transect concept
              for the Americas by the International Geosphere Biosphere Programme's "Past
              Global Changes Program" (IGBP-PAGES) offers unparalleled opportunities for
              collaborative studies by scientists working at or near treelines along the
              length of the American Cordillera.  This proposal requests IAI Start-Up Grant
              Phase I funding to hold a meeting in Jasper, Alberta, Canada in late September-
              early October 1996 and to be focused on treeline environments along the
              American Cordillera.  The meeting will bring together scientists from IAI
              member countries who are experts in a wide range of fields:  paleoecology,
              dendrochronology, and climatology.  This mix will allow the group to formulate
              a science plan for the understanding of the dynamics of present treeline
              environments, and the reconstruction of environmental and climate changes at
              treeline sites.  This meeting is planned to lead to the development of a series
              of collaborative, international, interdisciplinary Phase II IAI Start-Up Grants
              research that implement this scientific agenda.  These proposals will promote
              and enhance the IAI scientific goals by fostering collaborative studies by
              scientists and institutions in several IAI member states that share common
              interests in mountain environments and climate change.  They will also bring
              together and provoke interaction among a diverse group of scientific
              specialists in the earth, life and physical sciences who focus on the same
              environment in quite different ways.  An additional outcome of the meeting will
              be a proceedings volume ("Treeline Environments of the Americas") that will
              summarize the information and discussion presented at the meeting. 
              Participants of this proposal are from the following IAI countries:  Argentina;
              Bolivia; Canada ; Chile; the United States; and Venezuela.  These countries are
              Member States of the IAI, an initiative to stimulate cooperative research on
              global change issues in the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is the
              designated U.S. Government to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI.  
               ***
