Title       : Cosmogenic Nuclide Chronology of Weathering Zones and Ice Sheet Limits in
               Northern Labrador: A Pilot Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9530759

Award Number: 9530759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Odile de la Beaujardiere                
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28829              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter U. Clark clarkp@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This proposal requests funds for a pilot study applying cosmogenic nuclide
              exposure ages to glacial deposits in the Torngat Mountains, northern Labrador,
              that were deposited by the eastern margin of the Laurentide Ice Sheet.  This
              sequence of moraines and drift represents at least two successively limited
              glaciations of the Torngat Mountains and is a "type area" for study of
              weathering zones in North America.  Despite over a century of study, the
              chronology of this classic sequence of differentially weathered glacial
              deposits is highly uncertain.  Furthermore, the glacial history of this region
              is a key component in reconstructing the past history of the Laurentide Ice
              Sheet, which exerted a major influence on global climate during the last
              glacial period.    Samples for measurement of cosmogenic 10Be and other
              cosmogenic nuclides will be  collected to evaluate the suitability of this
              region for exposure dating studies.  The preliminary 10Be data will be used to
              create an absolute exposure age chronology for the region, and to evaluate the
              correlation of previously mapped and correlated deposits.    Potential results
              of the proposed work and its possible extensions include:     An absolute
              chronology for a largely undated glacial sequence in  an area that is crucial
              for reconstructing the margins of the  Laurentide Ice Sheet at the last glacial
              maximum (LGM).     Age constraints for glacial deposits and ice sheet limits
              related  to pre-LGM Laurentide Ice Sheet advances in Labrador.     Constraints
              on erosion rates and weathering history of rock  surfaces in sub-Arctic/Arctic
              regions.
