Title       : SBIR Phase II: Confusion to Precision: Tools for Assessing Expert Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1999    
File        : a9530293

Award Number: 9530293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299939             (Estimated)
Investigator: Max Henrion henrion@lumina.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Sonnenblick  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Lumina Decision Systems
	      59 North Santa Cruz Avenue
	      Los Gatos, CA  95030    408/354-1841

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 1321,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9530293  Sonnenblick   Quantitative models, virtually all of which are subject
              to uncertainties and most of which must rely on expert opinion for estimating
              key uncertain input quantities, are increasingly widely used to support the
              making of key decisions in public and private sectors.  This Small Business
              Innovation Research Phase II project from Lumina Decision Systems, Inc.
              describes research seeking to develop and evaluate an innovative decision
              support system software tool to assist experts in expressing their uncertain
              knowledge in the form of probability distributions.  There is a growing
              recognition on the part of builders and users of quantitative models of the
              need for a such a tool, but heretofore usage has been constrained by the lack
              of availability of a tool that is both easy to use and designed to overcome the
              difficulties people have expressing uncertainty in meaningful and coherent
              ways.  In Phase I, the practicality of two innovative methods was developed and
              experimentally established:  (1) animated density functions and (2) verbal
              probability phrases, such as probable or very seldom.  In Phase II, a 
              prototype tool for probability assessment will be refined, providing these two
              and six other assessment methods with associated calibration and debiasing
              techniques...These methods will be evaluated experimentally to measure ease of
              learning and use, effort required, confidence in results, and reliability and
              calibration of the resulting distributions.  These results will be used to
              guide users in choosing the most cost-effective methods to suit their needs and
              skills.  Methods to assess multivariate distributions and multimedia courseware
              on probability assessment will also be integrated into the package.   The
              expression of expert judgment in the form of subjective probability
              distributions is becoming accepted for risk analysis in areas where uncertainty
              is critical, including finance, oil and gas exploration, risks to the
              environment, medical diagnosis, and bidding decisions .  This project will
              contribute effective means of eliciting beliefs regarding the likelihood of
              outcomes, and thus it will serve to enhance existing capability of quantifying
              expected costs and benefits in a variety of contexts.
