Title       : IAI Workshop: Comparative Studies of Small Pelagic Fish and Climate Change
               (SPACC) in the Americas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1996      
File        : a9530213

Award Number: 9530213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian J. Rothschild brothschild@umassd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass, Dartmouth
	      285 Old Westport Road
	      North Dartmouth, MA  02747    508/999-8953

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0521700   Marine Resources                        
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530213  Rothschild  This is a proposal to hold a workshop to develop a
              consortium for implementing the Small Pelagic Fish and Climate Change (SPACC)
              scientific activities.  The workshop will identify the functions of the
              consortium by: developing a consensus on the Global Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics
              (GLOBEC) SPACC core program, by preparing a strategic plan for GLOBEC/ SPACC
              and identifying specific action items that are required to achieve the
              Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) mission relevant to
              GLOBEC/SPACC, by developing a strategy for achieving new levels of support for
              GLOBEC/SPACC research, and by determining how the proposed consortium would
              contribute to these goals.  The objective of the Inter-American SPACC is to
              identify linkages between the physical forces that control population growth of
              small pelagic fish populations and to achieve this through comparative studies.
               The long range goal is to forecast how changes in pattern and intensity of
              these forces, related to elevated greenhouse gases and changes in the air-sea
              engine, alter the productivity of small pelagic fish populations.  Major
              changes in small pelagic fish abundance may be accompanied by marked changes in
              ecosystems structure. Examination of zooplankton data indicate that the great
              collapse of the Peruvian anchovy in 1972 may have been more strongly related to
              a long term decline in zooplankton stocks than to El Ni o and fishing. 
              Similarly, the decline in North Sea herring stock appear to be linked with
              declines of two standard deviations in phytoplankton and zooplankton.  In sum,
              present evidence indicated that long term trends in productivity of small
              pelagic fish are climate driven and may be mediated through zooplankton.  What
              is not known is how these processes are linked nor how to predict the effect of
              long term changes in ocean climate.  An IAI SPACC could do much to coordinate
              the often separated research on these topics in the Americas through a Phase II
              proposal which will address mech anisms responsible for large-scale
              fluctuations in small pelagic fish over time scales of 10-100 years.  Although
              focused on the fish (sardines, anchovies) over fairly long time scales, the
              mechanisms responsible for these fluctuations act throughout the ecosystems
              within which the fish live and are thought to act fairly rapidly.  %%%  This is
              a proposal to hold a workshop to develop a consortium for implementing the
              Small Pelagic Fish and Climate Change (SPACC) scientific activities.  The
              workshop will identify the functions of the consortium by: developing a
              consensus on the Global Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics (GLOBEC) SPACC core program,
              by preparing a strategic plan for GLOBEC/ SPACC, by identifying specific action
              items that are required to achieve the IAI mission relevant to GLOBEC/SPACC, by
              developing a strategy for achieving new levels of support for GLOBEC/SPACC
              research, and by determining how the proposed consortium would contribute to
              these goals.  The objective of the Inter-American SPACC is to identify linkages
              between the physical forces that control population growth of small pelagic
              fish populations and to achieve this through comparative studies.  The long
              range goal is to forecast how changes in pattern and intensity of these forces,
              related to elevated greenhouse gases and changes in the air-sea engine, alter
              the productivity of small pelagic fish populations.  GLOBEC/SPACC has an
              Afro-European component that focuses on small pelagic populations of Europe and
              Africa and this proposed Inter-American component.  An implementation planning
              meeting for Euro-African SPACC was held in late 1995.  This workshop is for a
              similar meeting for the Inter-American SPACC.  Inter-American and Afro-European
              SPACC, as members of international GLOBEC, share common themes:  identifying
              linkages between physical forces and biological processes; an emphasis on
              modeling to interpret multi-disciplinary observations; and a focus on
              zooplankton as a key link between physics and fish productivity.  The fo
              rmation of an Inter-American GLOBEC/SPACC consortium would be a significant
              contribution in coordinating activities in the Americas. The goal of the
              workshop in Phase I is to finish the design of the measurement and modeling
              systems which were begun during two previous SPACC meetings and coordinate the
              activities of SPACC researchers in the Americas.  The approach is to develop a
              hierarchy of measurement strategies and models that could be implemented by all
              countries.    The unique contribution of Inter-American and Afro-European SPACC
              is that they will use comparisons of ecosystems dominated by small pelagic fish
              to infer cause and effect linkages between fish, zooplankton and ocean physics,
              and thus addresses the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
              (IAI) Science Agenda theme of "Comparative Studies of Oceanic, Coastal and
              Estuarine Processes."  The following countries are participating in this
              proposal:  Argentina; Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Peru, and the United States. 
              These countries are Members States of the IAI, a U.S. initiative to stimulate
              cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific institutions
              of the Americas.  The U.S. National Science Foundation is the U.S. Government
              agency designated to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI.  ***
