Title       : Iron in Antarctic Polar Front Zones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9530762

Award Number: 9530762
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1142276            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth H. Coale   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth S. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,1315,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9530762  Coale         This research project is part of the US Joint Global 
              Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at  (1) a better
              understanding of the fluxes of carbon, both  organic and inorganic, in the
              Southern Ocean, (2)  identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical 
              factors and processes which regulate the magnitude and  variability of these
              fluxes, and (3) placing these fluxes  into the context of the contemporary
              global carbon cycle.       This work is one of forty-four projects that are 
              collaborating in the Southern Ocean Experiment, a three-  year effort south of
              the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to  track the flow of carbon through its
              organic and inorganic  pathways from the air-ocean interface through the entire
               water column into the bottom sediment.   The experiment  will make use of the
              RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V  Thompson.       This component concerns
              the effect of iron on the  productivity of the upper layers of the ocean. 
              Dissolved iron concentrations in surface waters of the open  ocean are often
              extremely low, and have been shown to limit  primary production in high nitrate
              and low chlorophyll  regions of the global ocean.  As a result of an earlier 
              JGOFS study in the equatorial Pacific Ocean, models  describing the spatial and
              temporal variability in  production and export now include the role of iron as
              a  limiting micronutrient.  The observed patterns of  production in the
              equatorial Pacific were consistent with  the supply and distribution of iron in
              this region.  However, there are very little data on iron concentrations  and
              distribution of iron in the Southern Ocean that could  be used for such
              interpretations.  For example, we do not  know if iron concentrations are
              enhanced or depleted in  Southern Ocean upwelled waters.  Also, very little 
              information is known concerning the concentrations,  distributions, or sources
              of iron in the Southern Ocean and  as a result, it is currently difficult to
              correlate  patterns of productio n in these waters with the  distribution of
              iron.       Systematic measurements of trace metal distributions  in the Ross
              Sea and in the Antarctic Polar Front Zone with  an emphasis on iron will be
              made as part of this study, and  will provide a data base that will allow the
              evaluation of  Southern Ocean biological processes in terms of a possible  iron
              limitation. The results of this work will be a  significant contribution to our
              understanding of iron  biogeochemistry in the Southern Ocean, and to our 
              understanding of factors which control rates of new  production in these
              regions.  They will have a direct  bearing on our understanding of the global
              carbon cycle.  ***
