Title       : Thorium Isotopes as Indicators of Export Flux and Particle Dynamics in the
               Southern Ocean: Joint Global Ocean Flux Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9530720

Award Number: 9530720
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333843             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Bacon mbacon@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              95-30720  Bacon         This research project is part of the US Joint Global
              Ocean  Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better 
              understanding of the fluxes of carbon, both organic and  inorganic, in the
              Southern Ocean, (2) identifying the physical,  ecological and biogeochemical
              factors and processes which  regulate the magnitude and variability of these
              fluxes, and (3)  placing these fluxes into the context of the contemporary
              global  carbon cycle.       This work is one of forty-four projects that are 
              collaborating in the Southern Ocean Experiment, a three-year  effort south of
              the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to track the  flow of carbon through its
              organic and inorganic pathways from  the air-ocean interface through the entire
              water column into the  bottom sediment.   The experiment will make use of the
              RVIB  Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V Thompson on six process cruises  between 
              Oct.-Nov., 1996, and March 1998.       This component focuses on the spatial
              and temporal  variations in the distributions and particulate fluxes of thorium
               isotopes (thorium-234 and thorium-228).  These isotopes serve as  ocean
              tracers that yield fundamental information about the rates  of biogeochemical
              processes that govern the production and fate  of biogenic particles in the
              oceanic water column.  Measurements  of thorium-234 will be made at sea by beta
              and gamma-counting;  measurements of thorium-228 will be made ashore by alpha- 
              spectrometry.  The data will be interpreted within the context of  biological
              rate measurements and other data to be collected  during the study and will be
              used to provide estimates of export  fluxes of organic matter, carbonate, and
              silica from the euphotic  zone; to quantify transformation processes such as
              aggregation  and disaggregation in the water column; and to test 
              biogeochemical models.       Thorium is a particularly useful tracer in this
              context  because its mode of production is well known; it is taken up  quickly
              by biogenic particles, and its  concentration can be  measured quite precisely.
               The removal of thorium by falling  particles can therefore be determined, and
              the inverse problem of  inferring the integrated mass of falling particles (the
               particulate carbon flux) may be solved.  ***    .
