Title       : Inorganic Monolayers Formed at Organic Templates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1997  
File        : a9530453

Award Number: 9530453
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Talham talham@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9530453  Talham    This proposal outlines a continuation of a prior NSF 
              research for the development and characterization of new  mixed
              organic/inorganic monolayer and multilayer thin film  materials formed using
              Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) methods. The  approach is to incorporate inorganic
              extended lattice  structures into organic monolayer assemblies thereby 
              introducing into the films structural features and  cooperative phenomena which
              are inherent to many inorganic  lattices, while at the same time maintaining
              the monolayer  control afforded by the organic assembly.  Layered solid-  state
              structures will be used because they offer the highest  probability of success
              as the inorganic lattice energy  clearly favors forming layers. Specifically,
              the proposed  research consists of three efforts: 1) To expand on the  protocol
              developed for preparing new LB materials containing  extended-lattice inorganic
              networks. 2) To chemically and  structurally characterize new materials and
              account for  structural differences. 3) To investigate the magnetic  properties
              of paramagnetic materials.  %%%  Several classes of mixed organic/inorganic
              assemblies have  received attention recently as researchers have realized  that
              through the combination of organic and inorganic  networks a vast array of new
              solid-state structures is  possible often with tunable bulk and interfacial
              properties.  Examples include pillared clays, organic/inorganic layered 
              solids, zeolites with organic guests, self-assembled organic  films at
              inorganic surfaces, and inorganic mesostructures  formed with the aid of
              organic surfactants. In addition to  the structural and chemical diversity that
              these classes of  materials promise, the combination of organic and inorganic 
              components into a "dual-network" assembly opens the  possibility of engineering
              into one material a composite of  physical properties that are normally only
              associated with  one type of material or the other. An example of a 
              potentially interesting "dualnetwork" material  would be one  that combines a
              magnetic inorganic lattice with a conducting  organic network. Despite the
              tremendous potential, detailed  studies of these types of materials are still
              quite young.  The proposed research addresses three important questions.  What
              drives the solid-state structures and how can they be  controlled? If composite
              properties are desirable, how can  this be achieved? How can coupling of the
              networks be tuned  to behave separately or in synergy?
