Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Confidence Regions in Multivariate Calibration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9530932

Award Number: 9530932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74868              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Mathew Mathew@UMBC2.UMBC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9181,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9530932  Mathew     The problem of multivariate calibration can be briefly
              described as   follows. Two types of measurements can be made on each item or
              individual   in a study: one of them, denoted by a vector x, is expensive, or
              time   consuming or sometimes even impossible to obtain, and a second
              measurement,   denoted by a vector y, is more easily obtained. A calibration
              curve  is constructed by fitting a statistical model that establishes the  
              relationship between y and x, based on data that is available on both of  
              these variables. The calibration curve is then used in a further study for  
              statistical inference concerning an unknown value of x after observing y.  
              This research involves the construction of confidence regions for the  unknown
              value of x. Different types of confidence regions are needed   depending on the
              application. If the calibration curve is used for   constructing a confidence
              region for a single unknown value of x, we have   a single use confidence
              region. On the other hand, if the calibration   curve is used to construct
              confidence regions for a sequence of unknown   values of x, corresponding to a
              sequence of measurements y, we have   multiple use confidence regions.
              Simultaneous confidence regions may   also be required when we have a given set
              of unknown values of x,   corresponding to a given set of independent y
              measurements. The   construction of such confidence regions will be
              investigated   under various assumptions on the  model that relates y and x. 
              %%%  Calibration is a widely used procedure in the chemical and engineering  
              sciences. Typical problems where calibration arises deal with the  measurement
              of the concentration of a chemical in a sample, or the amount of  drug in a
              serum sample, where the direct measurement of these quantities of  interest is
              usually difficult or expensive. An indirect response is usually  easy to obtain
              and once a relationship is established between the response and  the quantity
              of interest, this relationship can be us ed to estimate the  quantity of
              interest, when its value is unknown. This research is aimed at  obtaining an
              interval for the unknown quantity of interest. In particular, the  interval can
              be used to conclude, for example, if the unknown concentration   of the
              chemical exceeds a certain limit.   ***
