Title       : Regulation of Primary Productivity in the Southern Ocean: Phytoplankton
               Photosynthesis Characteristics from Individual Cell Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1998      
File        : a9530718

Award Number: 9530718
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Olson rolson@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heidi M. Sosik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              95-30718  OLSON  This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
               Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better  understanding of
              the fluxes of carbon, both organic and  inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
              identifying the physical,  ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
              which  regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3)  placing
              these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global  carbon cycle.   
              Central to the mission of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux Study in  the Southern
              Ocean is an understanding of the composition of the  planktonic food web, and
              the efficiency with which it transports  carbon to the deep ocean.  One of the
              specific questions being  posed is the mechanism of regulation of phytoplankton
              growth and  productivity in this area; light limitation, micronutrient 
              availability and grazing pressure have all been proposed to  explain the
              persistence of high macronutrient concentrations and  the relatively low
              productivity often observed.  To distinguish  among these mechanisms, this
              research examines photosynthetic  characteristics of phytoplankton in natural
              populations under a  range of environmental conditions.  specifically, it will 
              estimate, from chlorophyll fluorescence induction measurements of  individual
              cells, photochemical efficiency  and absorption cross  sections of photosystem
              2(PS2) as well as relative pigment  content per cell for different groups of
              phytoplankton, which can  be distinguished either microscopically or flow
              cytometrically.  These measurements, carried out on samples from depth profiles
               and experimentally-manipulated assemblages of phytoplankton,  should allow us
              to distinguish among limiting factors for  phytoplankton growth.  For example,
              limitation by micronutrients  should result in low photochemical efficiency
              (reflecting loss of  functioning PS2 reaction centers), while low-light
              limitation  (due to deep mixing) would be indicated by high fluorescence 
              (i.e., pigment content)  in near-surface cells.  Grazing control  would be
              implied if photosynthetic characteristics indicate no  limitation of intrinsic
              growth rates    The individual cell nature of the proposed measurements will 
              allow us to evaluate the condition of different groups of  phytoplankton (or
              different cells) in a  given water sample, and  to examine unambiguously the
              effects of environmental gradients  or experimental treatments on given
              species.  In addition, in the  course of the measurements, the composition of
              the phytoplankton  community will be characterized by microscopic and flow 
              cytometric analysis.  Observations of the physiological state of  cells in
              natural assemblages and experiments, combined with  information on community
              structure, will allow us to evaluate the  relative importance of light, iron,
              and grazing as limiting  factors for productivity in the Southern Ocean, and to
              better  interpret bulk measurements of phytoplankton properties, such as  can
              be obtained in a high resolution survey with FRR (fast  repetition rate)
              fluorometry.
