Title       : RUI: Radio Studies of the Interstellar Medium and Pulsars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2000        
File        : a9530710

Award Number: 9530710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143716             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel M. Weisberg JWEISBER@CARLETON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1207,1216,5912,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Weisberg  AST-9530710      Radioastronomical studies of the interstellar medium
              and pulsars  will be carried out. Observations will be conducted at the 
              Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico, the Parkes radio telescope in  Australia,
              the Green Bank Telescope in West Virginia, and the  Very Large Array in New
              Mexico. In particular, the upgraded  Arecibo Observatory telescope and the
              Green Bank Telescope will  be highly sensitive instruments that will enable one
              to make much  more sensitive observations than previously possible.    The
              interstellar medium studies are divided into three main  categories: In the
              first, neutral hydrogen line absorption  spectra of distant pulsars will be
              obtained and measured and  kinematic distances will be determined from these
              spectra. The  electron densities along the pulsar-Earth lines of sight will 
              then be derived from distances and dispersion measures, and  models of the
              Galactic distribution of electrons will be compared  with these results. In the
              second category, the spatial structure  and physical properties of interstellar
              hydrogen will be studied  with neutral hydrogen line absorption measurements of
              high-  latitude and nearby pulsars and recombination line observations  in the
              directions of pulsars. The third category consists of  studies of the Galactic
              magnetic field through Faraday rotation  measurements of polarized pulsar
              signals. Temporal and small-  scale spatial variations will be studied in one
              experiment, while  the broad structure of the magnetic field will be
              investigated in  another.    There are also three main categories of intrinsic
              pulsar  investigations: First, full Stokes parameter pulsar polarization 
              profiles will be measured and calibrated, and morphological  classifications
              will be assigned on the basis of these and all  other published observations.
              Second, polarized profiles will be  examined for temporal variations that could
              indicate free  precession or intrinsic beam changes as well as the Galactic 
              magnetic field variations di scussed above. Third, the emission  beam geometry
              will be studied via empirical/geometrical analyses  and fits of the rotating
              vector model to measured position  angles.    Undergraduate students at
              Carleton College will be involved in  the research program.
