Title       : Seabed Slope Processes in Deep Water Continental Margin, Northwest Gulf of
               Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9530396

Award Number: 9530396
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $478700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Armand J. Silva silva@oce.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George E. Veyera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530396  Silva  Natural resources recovery, including offshore oil and gas  is
              the most important economic activity in the United States  Exclusive Economic
              Zone.  Many technical constraints must be  faced as the industry moves toward
              sites on the continental  slope and rise where seabed processes are complex. 
              The  objective of this research project is to understand the  fundamental
              linkages between engineering properties of slope  sediments, environmental
              forcing functions, and downslope  processes; and to develop the capability of
              predicting the  range of seabed processes.    The program is theoretical as
              well as an integrated  combination of field, laboratory, and modeling efforts. 
              A  corridor 2000m wide by 100 nm long, of the seabed in the  northwest Gulf of
              Mexico has been selected extending from  water depths of 1000 to 3000m.  This
              corridor encompasses a  wide range of seabed processes including mass wasting
              and  creep, faulting, diapirism, sediment flows, and related  processes such as
              fluid expulsion and depressions (basins)  associated with halokinesis.  The
              field work during the  first year entails two research cruise expeditions:  the
               first to obtain detailed acoustic subbottom information and  side-scan sonar
              seafloor images within the corridor and the  second to obtain large-diameter
              undisturbed core samples to  depths of 25 to 30m subbottom and to conduct in
              situ  geotechnical tests.  The comprehensive laboratory testing  program
              focuses on determining the pertinent geotechnical  properties and parameters
              necessary for the  analysis/modeling portion of the research.  Essentially all 
              the instrumentation is available for the experimental  studies.  The laboratory
              program will include determination  of constitutive models to characterize the
              engineering  behavior of the various sediments from very slow  deformations
              (creep), static stress strain properties, and  flow properties.  The material
              models and parameters will  then be incorporated in available computer models
              to  charac terize and study the full range of seabed processes  that are
              encountered within the corridor site.  The expected  result will be the ability
              to predict the range of seabed  processes at work on the continental slope of
              the Gulf of  Mexico.  ***
