Title       : Firn Properties and Processes at Shallow Coring Sites in Greenland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9530737

Award Number: 9530737
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67272              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary R. Albert malbert@crrel.usace.army.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward M. Arons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      The proposed project examines physical processes that affect the manner
              in which heat, vapor, and chemical species in air are incorporated into snow
              and polar firn.  The processes include diffusion and advection, the transport
              of heat, vapor, and chemical species by air flow within snow and firn.  An
              understanding of these processes is important because they control grain
              growth, snow metamorphism, and the rate at which chemical species in the
              atmosphere become incorporated into the snow and firn, and thus will affect
              interpretation of polar ice core data.  The objectives of the project are to
              define the magnitude and extent, both in space and time, of these transfer
              processes, and to develop a process-level understanding and modeling capability
              of the phenomena within the snow and firn.  The approach is to conduct field
              studies at sites where shallow cores and meteorological data are being obtained
              on the Greenland Ice Sheet to determine the spatial and temporal extent fro key
              parameters, and boundary conditions needed to model the conduction and
              advection of heat, mass and chemical species within the firn.  An existing
              multidimensional numerical model is being expanded to simulate the processes
              and serve as the basis for ongoing and future work in transport and 
              distribution of chemical species.  Currently interpretation of the polar ice
              core data assumes that diffusion controls the rate at which chemical species
              are incorporated into the firn.  The proposed  project will determine the
              site-specific extent of ventilation in the firn, and will provide a model for
              multidimensional diffusion and ventilation on grain growth, sublimation rates,
              and chemical species transport.
