Title       : The Properties and Behaviors of Grain Boundaries in Fine Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9530314

Award Number: 9530314
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $501325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander H. King  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1771,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9530314  King    This  project  combines theory and experiment in a study  of 
              the  effects of free surfaces and triple junctions upon grain boundary 
              structure,  properties and behavior.  Traditional  approaches  to  grain 
              boundary properties rely on models that are  intrinsically  infinite,  and
              relatively little attention has been paid  to  the  effects   associated  with 
              the  non-infinite  extent   of   real  interfaces.  Calculations are made of
              the elastic fields of grain  boundaries  made  up of dislocation arrays in 
              finite  materials,  taking  into account surface relaxation effects.  The
              effects  of  free  surfaces  on the dislocations are considered  with  a  view 
              towards understanding how dislocations are eliminated from  grain  boundaries, 
              resulting  in  changes  of  misorientation.    These  effects  are also studied
              in polycrystalline films using  in-situ  transmission  electron microscopy
              experiments which are  compared  to  the  calculations.   The project  includes
               a  study  of  the  properties    and    behavior   of   triple   junctions   
              within  polycrystalline  materials.  For certain  classes  of  materials, 
              notably  thin  films, triple junctions may fall  into  restricted  symmetry 
              classes in which the anisotropy of the  grain  boundary  energy  exerts a
              controlling influence on the morphology  of  the  triple line.  An attempt is
              made to demonstrate that these triple  junctions embody strain fields and
              excess elastic energies  which  depend  upon  the  misorientations of  the 
              grain  boundaries  in  calculable  ways.  This represents a new approach to
              triple  line  studies.  %%%  The   overall  thrust  of  this  project  is  to 
              study  how  the  terminations  of  grain boundaries affect  their  properties 
              and  behavior.   This is important in polycrystalline thin films  used  in  
              electronic   applications   and   in   the   properties   of  nanocrystalline
              materials.  ***
