Title       : IAI Workshop: Austral Chilean Coast and Inland Sea (ACCIS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1996      
File        : a9530193

Award Number: 9530193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry P. Atkinson atkinson@ccpo.odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carole L. Seyfrit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eileen E. Hofmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arnoldo Valle-Levinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0511303   Toxicology                              
              0511603   Societal Aspects                        
              45        Ecology                                 
              82        Economics                               
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9530193  Atkinson  For Phase I, the PIs of this proposal will facilitate the
              development of an interdisciplinary, multi-institutional program focused on
              ecological and socio-economic human health issues in temperate waters of the
              Austral Chilean Coast and Inland Sea (ACCIS).  The PIs propose to form a
              research center of physical and biological oceanographers, fisheries
              scientists, economists, sociologists, and public health researchers from
              Chilean and North American institutions.  These individuals will have the
              expertise necessary to compare and contrast Chilean and analogous North
              American coastal systems.  The research center will develop predictive
              capabilities through hydrodynamics and ecosystem models, and the ACCIS Research
              Center will explore human dimensions of global change by focusing on objectives
              with socio-economic and human health implications.  The development of this
              program in the ACCIS is essential to gain knowledge of an area of great
              ecological and economic importance that is under increasing pressure from human
              activities.  The program will facilitate understanding of the ecology of the
              area, will protect human health and the quality of life, and will ensure
              sustainable development by appropriate management, use and protection of
              coastal resources.  The following are the areas of study of the proposed
              research program for a phase II proposal:  describe the regional climatology,
              including atmospheric forcing, oceanic variability, process controlling
              climate, temporal and spatial scales of variability, and links between
              semi-enclosed coastal bodies of water and the coastal ocean; describe ecosystem
              variability, both in space and time; describe the ecosystem problems related to
              harmful algae blooms and marine biotoxins; describe and understand the
              influence of human impacts on coastal and inland sea ecosystems; describe and
              understand the influence of ecosystems and changes in ecosystems on human
              adaptations and activities; study the epidemiology of human diseases caused by
              h armful marine phytoplankton; describe and study the interaction between
              environmental variations and human health; train professionals; and educate the
              general public.  %%%  For Phase I the PIs of this proposal will facilitate the
              development of an interdisciplinary, multi-institutional program focused on
              ecological and socio-economic human health issues in temperate waters of the
              Austral Chilean Coast and Inland Sea (ACCIS).  The PIs propose to form a
              research center of physical and biological oceanographers, fisheries
              scientists, economists, sociologists, and public health researchers from
              Chilean and North American institutions.  These individuals will have the
              expertise necessary to compare and contrast Chilean and analogous North
              American coastal systems.  The research center will develop predictive
              capabilities through hydrodynamics and ecosystem models, and the ACCIS Research
              Center will explore human dimensions of global change by focusing on objectives
              with socio-economic and human health implications.  The results of variation
              and degradation of natural resources on the economy, social structure, and
              human health of the Austral Chilean Coast and Inland Sea are evident but have
              not been well studied.  These topics can be investigated by applying the
              knowledge of comparative systems in North America to the ACCIS.  The ACCIS is
              important for its high biological productivity that supports diverse fisheries.
               The inclusion of studies on socio-economic and epidemiological topics is
              relatively new, but essential.  The ACCIS is a remote area organized in small
              communities, many of which correspond to the poorest social segments in Chile. 
              To meet the challenges of understanding the interactions between ecosystem
              variability and socio-economic-human health impacts in ACCIS, and to met the
              organizational and scientific goal of the IAI, a diverse group of professionals
              from Chile and the United States are collaborating in this proposal to prepare
              a Phase II proposal.  These countries are Member S tates of the IAI, an
              initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the
              scientific institutions of the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is
              the designated U.S. Government agency to carry our the Unites States
              responsibilities within the IAI.  ***
