Title       : Hormone-Behavior Adaptations in Arctic Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9530826

Award Number: 9530826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $504236             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Wingfield jwingfie@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Arctic breeding birds arrive on their nesting grounds at a time when weather
              conditions may still be extreme (low temperature, snow).  However, the brief
              arctic summer requires that they begin nesting as early as possible to take
              advantage of the ephemeral abundance of food to feed young.  Failure to adhere
              to this rigid schedule results in drastically reduced reproductive success.
              Hormone-behavior adaptations that maximize survival and reproductive success
              under the extreme conditions of the Arctic are the focus of this proposal.  It
              has been shown that the interrelationships between testosterone and territorial
              aggression are diverse, especially as birds arrive on the arctic breeding
              grounds.  In some species territoriality is extremely brief, following which
              birds apparently become refractory to the effects of testosterone.  Others are
              territorial throughout the breeding season, but the dependence of these
              behaviors upon testosterone activation remains unclear.  Aggressive behavior of
              between four and seven arctic breeding passerines displaying different types of
              territoriality will be compared.  Temporal patterns of testosterone in relation
              to patterns of aggressive behavior and the effects of manipulating testosterone
              level will also be determined.  Additionally, these species will be compared
              with their closest relatives breeding at mid-latitudes (i.e. matched pairwise
              comparisons to avoid confounding issues relating to phylogenetic
              relationships).  In this way it is possible to determine the ecological bases
              of different types of territorial behavior and interrelationships with
              testosterone, as well as indicate potential specializations of arctic breeding
              birds.  The same spectra of species in the Arctic and at mid-latitudes will be
              used to compare adrenocortical responses to stress.   Extensive data now
              indicate that arctic birds modulate the secretion of corticosterone in response
              to a standardized capture  stress protocol as a function of latitude and stage
              in the breeding cycle.   This is thought to be an adaptation to allow onset of
              territorial behavior and breeding in the face of potentially stressful
              conditions.  Both arctic and mid-latitude species will be compared.  Behavioral
              and physiological responses to corticosterone treatment will be determined
              within these species comparisons to indicate how endocrine mechanisms may vary
              in relation to latitude and other ecological factors.  Finally, laboratory
              experiments will assess the number and distribution of receptors for
              testosterone (and possible metabolites) and corticosterone in the central
              nervous system.  This unique approach of field experiments to compare types of
              territorial behavior in arctic and mid-latitude passerines, effects of hormones
              and stress, and ultimately the related distribution of hormone receptors in the
              brain will not only pinpoint specific adaptations for birds breeding in the
              Arctic, but will have significance for the regulation of reproductive processes
              of vertebrates in general.
