Title       : Dissertation Research: An Archaeological Investigation of the Social and
               Economic Organization of a State-Initiated Town and Temple Complex in Second
               Millenium Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1996     
File        : a9530885

Award Number: 9530885
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11840              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. O'Connor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. David O'Connor Mr. Josef Wegner will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He and his colleagues will analyze data collected
              during his 1994 field season at the site of Abydos in Southern Egypt. During
              the Middle Kingdom period, ca. 2040-1650 B.C. the site of Abydos, a large
              regional center, underwent major change as it was incorporated in the kingdom
              of Egypt. Local cult and religious institutions underwent significant
              alteration and Mr. Wegner wishes to understand the nature of these changes. His
              fieldwork to date has focused on a residential area which is associated with
              temples built during this transition period and the material which he has
              collected will permit him to examine how these religious structures were
              managed and integrated into the broader community. Through the analysis of
              ceramics, seal impressions and other materials such as stone tools and floral
              and faunal remains, Mr. Wegner will address three issues: 1. community
              organization - the range of personnel and activities centered on town and
              temple and the relationship between the two; 2. the methods by which the
              settlement and temples sustained themselves and how this changed over time; 3.
              the nature of royal and state interest in Abydos and the degree of central
              control the central government exercised.  Although the immediate focus of this
              research is on religion, the underlying goals lie in the realm of political
              science. Mr. Wegner wishes to understand how, in early states, large and
              diverse subject populations are controlled and integrated into the larger
              economic and political whole. Anthropologists have argued that control and
              manipulation of pre-existing social and ideational structures such as religions
              institutions can play a central role and it appears likely that this occurred
              at Abydos. Through his analysis Mr. Wegner can examine one particular case
              examine the mechanisms which governed this interaction and see how they changed
              over time.  This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light on the
              mechanisms which led to the growth of early states and it will assist in the
              training of a promising young scientist.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
