Title       : NSF/EPA Technology for a Sustainable Environment: Superheated Water and Steam
               Degreasing of Working Stocks, Parts, and Equipment in Machining, Manufacturing
               and Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9985423

Award Number: 9985423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter J. Weber wjwjr@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1238,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This NSF/EPA Technologies for a Sustainable Environment project will identify
              and develop an environmentally benign, innovative, efficient, low-cost
              technique for degreasing working stocks, parts and other metal surfaces using
              superheated water and steam.  By utilizing the unique properties of pure
              superheated water for this purpose it is anticipated that the current use of
              conventional hazardous organic and alkaline solvents will be markedly
              reduced.

The research will demonstrate that superheated water and/or steam
              (SHWS) will provide the same level of degreasing as conventional solvents. 
              Optimum superheated water temperatures for effective degreasing will be
              correlated to quantifiable parameters of grease components, such as dropping
              point, thickener type and grease condition.  Alternating sequences of
              superheated water and steam treatments will be tailored to specific types of
              grease to provide optimal degreasing effectiveness.  The alternating sequence
              schemes will be coupled with reactor configurations and mixing scenarios that
              will enhance the SHWS degreasing process.  It is expected that the energy costs
              for heating water and steam will be more than balanced by the reduction of
              treatment and disposal costs below those associated with traditional organic
              and alkaline solvent systems.  For difficult degreasing situations that require
              solvent modifiers such as surfactants and chelating agents, superheating the
              water will allow minimization of these additives, reducing direct costs and
              wastewater problems.

This NSF sponsored project, complemented by similar
              support from EPA for this research, is expected to result in significant
              reduction of solvent use in industrial parts cleaning operations.
