Title       : Translational Control of mRNA processing in Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9985706

Award Number: 9985706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329510             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve L. Moseley moseley@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Moseley
The project will investigate a novel mechanism of mRNA processing in
              Escherichia coli. A polycistronic message encoding assembly and structural
              elements of E. coli adhesive fimbriae is cleaved at a specific site upstream of
              the gene encoding the major structural element. The cleavage generates a very
              stable message encoding the major fimbrial subunit. mRNA cleavage
is coupled
              to translation of an open reading frame, daap, which spans the cleavage site.
              The project will test the hypothesis that the nascent DaaP peptide interacts
              with components associated with the ribosome, and that the interaction leads to
              cleavage of the daa mRNA through the action of a component associated with the
              ribosorne. The two major objectives of the project are: 1) a genetic analysis
              of daa MRNA processing, and 2) a biochemical analysis of the processing event.
              The genetic analysis involves two approaches. In the first approach, E. coli
              mutants which fail to process daa MRNA will be isolated and characterized,
              providing information about specific E. coli gene products involved in the
              cleavage reaction. The second approach will seek to exploit the observation
              that processing does not occur in Pseudomonav aeruginosa. E. coli chromosomal
              libraries will be screened in P. aeruginosa for acquisition of daa MRNA
              processing activity. The biochemical characterization of the processing
              reaction focuses on the ribosorne. A cell free processing reaction will be
              developed and optimized utilizing E. coli S30 extracts and purified components.
              Fractions and purified components from P. aeruginosa and E. coli will be
              combined in a cell free processing assay to identify E. coli components
              involved in mRNA cleavage. Ribosomal and soluble components from wild type E.
              coli will be combined with extracts from non-processing mutant strains to
              localize and identify complementing activities. The research will also
              determine if the nascent DaaP peptide induces stalling of the ribosome in
              association with the cleavage event.
The action of a nascent peptide in mRNA
              processing suggests an important new role for the ribosome in the regulation of
              gene expression. The objectives outlined above seek to explore the molecular
              interactions involved in this activity through genetic and biochemical
              experimental approaches. These investigations should provide a new
              understanding of a novel mechanism of gene regulation at the
              post-transcriptional level.

