Title       : Polymer-Ceramic Pervaporation Membranes for Organic-Organic Liquid Separation
               (TSE99-D)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9985532

Award Number: 9985532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103275             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yoram Cohen yoram@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9985532
Y. Cohen, University of California, Los Angeles 

There
              is a growing need in chemical manufacturing and pollution prevention for new
              processes capable of selectively separating and concentrating target species
              from organic liquid mixtures to increase product purity and for in-process
              recycling.  In recent years, membrane systems have been touted as an efficient
              means to achieve difficult liquid-phase separations, especially from dilute
              solutions, at a reduced energy consumption level relative to conventional
              technologies (e. g., distillation, extraction).  Despite the attractiveness of
              membrane technology, selective membrane technology, selective membranes for
              organic-organic liquid separations with adequate structural integrity and
              longevity are lacking.  In order to meet the above challenge, the proposed
              project will focus on the development and demonstration of novel class of
              robust hybrid polymer, ceramic (PolyCer) membranes for organic-organic
              separations.  The proposed PolyCer membranes will be fabricated by a
              surface-graft polymerization process resulting in a molecular layer of polymer
              chains which are terminally and covalently anchored to the pore surface of the
              porous ceramic support.  Given the covalent anchoring of the active polymer
              chains, the PolyCer membrane will retain its structural integrity and
              performance even when the polymer phase is exposed to organics that are good
              solvents for the polymer.  Through the selection of the polymer most
              appropriate for the desired separation task, the polymer surface layer can be
              synthesized to impact specific separation properties to the membrane.  It is
              expected that this project will lead to the demonstration of a new technology
              for the tailor design of a new class of selective and robust ceramic-supported
              polymer membranes.  The new approach will allow the rapid deployment of
              task-specific membranes for in-processes separation for recovery and recycle a
              selective replacement of energy intensive separation processes (e.g.,
              distillation) in a variety of industrial applications.
Mary,

