Title       : Collective Phenomena in Random Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a9985978

Award Number: 9985978
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gergely T. Zimanyi zimanyi@physics.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard T. Scalettar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9985978
Zimanyi

This grant continues the NSF support of the collaborative
              work of two mid-career PI's from UC Davis.  Their work, on collective behavior
              of strongly interacting many-body systems in the presence of disorder, combines
              analytical and numerical approaches to a variety of problems of current
              interest.  There are 3 related projects:  (1) Properties of vortices in high Tc
              Oxide superconductors, especially those materials where the layering effects
              are most strongly present.  (2) A search will be carried out for a Bose metal
              phase in disordered superconductors.   This project will also involve a study
              of the interplay between Coulomb interaction and disorder in 2-d
              metal-insulator transition and explore the role of percolation effects in
              non-self-averaging systems.  Finally project (3) consists of an extensive study
              of the hysteretic phenomena in recording media.  Early results indicate
              persistence of self-organized criticality in realistic versions of
              Sherrington-Kirkpatrick models.  It may be that in these models, such effects
              as aging, domain nucleation, domain wall propagation and avalanche formation
              play an essential role.
%%%
This grant continues the NSF support of the
              collaborative work of two mid-career PI's from UC Davis.  These PI's work on a
              variety of problems of current interest, ranging from high Tc superconductors
              to properties of magnetic recording media.  In the former, they are continuing
              with a detailed exploration of subtle effects of magnetic field on the
              superconducting properties.  They are, in particular interested in the
              enhancement of these effects in systems which are more layer-like.  In the
              magnetic recording media, they plan to further explore their early results from
              model calculations which show the presence of  "self-organized
              criticality".
***

