Title       : CAREER: Molecular Dissection of Protein Interactions at the Translocation Site
               in the Endoplasmic Reticulum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a9985479

Award Number: 9985479
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong Fang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt U Med Ctr
	      Office of Biomedical Sciences
	      Nashville, TN  372322103    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Proteins that are destined for export (secretion) from the cell and proteins
              that are destined to become integral components of either the plasma membrane
              or certain intracellular membranes (Golgi apparatus, lysosomes) undergo special
              routing and proteolytic processing within the cell.  These routing and
              processing steps are critical to the proper function and ultimate location of
              the proteins.  These proteins are originally synthesized in the cytoplasm
              bearing "signal peptides" at their amino termini.  The "signal peptide" serves
              as the targeting sequence for directing the nascent protein to an intracellular
              membrane-bounded compartment termed the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).   This
              "signal peptide" directs the translocation of the protein through the ER
              membrane, from the cytoplasm into the lumen of the ER.  Once in the lumen, this
              "signal peptide" is proteolytically removed from the rest of the protein. 
              Subsequent maturation and movement of the protein to its final location
              proceeds from there.  Thus, protein translocation across the ER membrane and
              signal peptide cleavage are important early steps in the biogenesis of many
              essential proteins. Numerous maturation steps occur in the ER within seconds
              after translocation, suggesting that the enzymes and protein complexes
              mediating these steps are probably present at or near the translocation site,
              which includes the protein-conducting channel formed by the trimeric Sec61
              complex, the signal peptidase complex (SPC), and Kar2p (yeast BiP), a molecular
              chaperone that appears to function in both translocation and maturation.  It is
              likely that interactions or coordination between these enzymes and protein
              complexes is occurs, since protein maturation events may need to be coordinated
              with each other and with the translocation process to ensure that maturation
              events occur in the proper sequential steps.  Recently, Dr. Fang observed an
              interaction between the SPC and Kar2p using genetic and biochemical approaches.
              The presence of this interaction leads to the questions, do other proteins
              involved in translocation and maturation interact, and what is the functional
              significance of this and possibly other interactions? To address these
              questions, the following scientific aims will be pursued, using in vivo
              analysis of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae:  Aim 1, to conduct structure -
              function analysis of the SPC and Kar2p interaction by identifying the
              interacting subunits or domains and to determine the importance of this
              interaction for signal peptide processing and translocation; Aim 2, to
              determine whether the SPC and Sec61 complex interact in yeast and to discern
              whether an interaction between these proteins is important for signal peptide
              processing and translocation; and Aim 3, to isolate and identify new proteins
              that interact with the SPC using a broad-based proteomic approach.  

This
              Faculty Early Career Development Award (CAREER) also includes a component that
              integrates research with education.  This part of the project will involve the
              teaching and training  of graduate students in the areas of intracellular
              trafficking and proteomics at two institutions in Nashville, Tennessee:  Dr.
              Fang's home institution,  Vanderbilt University, and Meharry Medical College, a
              historically black institution.  The educational objectives of this project
              are: 1, to modernize an existing Advanced Microbial Genetics course at
              Vanderbilt that is also attended by students from Meharry by integrating new
              material to reflect the impact and rapid progress of the microbial genome
              project and related new cutting-edge technologies; 2, to outreach
              under-represented groups by lecturing to graduate students in the Meharry
              Membrane Biochemistry course as an adjunct assistant professor at that
              institution and by hosting students from Meharry as laboratory trainees during
              the summers; and 3, to mentor graduate students as well as train undergraduate
              and high school students by providing them with hands-on research experiences
              in the laboratory.   

