Title       : CFD Simulation of Chemical Reactors: Development and Experimental Validation of
               Micromixing Models for Product Selectivity (TSE99-F)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a9985678

Award Number: 9985678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340566             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney O. Fox rofox@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The reduction of pollution and toxic byproducts caused by poor product
              selectivity is a critical step towards the development of
              environmentally-friendly, sustainable chemical processes.  Macroscopic models
              based on computational fluid dynamics (CFD) have potential for improving
              process design in the chemical process industry.  However, the ultimate utility
              of using CFD for reducing pollution and toxic byproduct caused by poor product
              selectivity depends on the development and validation of micromixing models
              needed to describe the complex interactions between turbulent mixing and
              chemical reactions at the sub-grid scale.  To date, no detailed experimental
              data for both the turbulent flow field and the concentration fields inside of a
              liquid-phase chemical reactor are available for model validation.  In this
              research project, the PI's plan to address this significant shortcoming by
              obtaining such data for a well-defined reactor geometry (i.e., a channel-flow
              reactor) under carefully controlled operating conditions using particle-image
              velocimetry (PIV) and planar laser-induced fluorescence (PLIF).  In addition,
              in order to extract flow statistics that cannot easily be measured with
              PIV/PLIF, direct numerical simulations (DNS) and large-eddy simulations (LES)
              will be performed for the same reactor geometry.  These data will be employed
              to validate CFD models for turbulent transport and the chemical source term. 
              If successful, the project will provide detailed data for CFD model validation
              of liquid-phase chemical reactors.

The experimental facility will be
              designed and built in collaboration with researchers at The Dow Chemical
              Company.  As part of the Vision 2020 initiative, Dow has identified CFD
              validation as an important long-term goal towards advanced chemical reactor
              design.  One PI has collaborated with Dow since 1992 on CFD modeling of
              chemical reactors and this project directly addresses shortcomings of existing
              CFD models that were identified in earlier industrial collaborations.  The
              project will thus have an impact on industrially relevant issues related to
              pollution prevention and avoidance at the source.

