Title       : CAREER: An Architecture for Building Dynamic, Adaptive Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9985129

Award Number: 9985129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony D. Joseph adj@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This is an NSF CAREER/PECASE grant proposal for research into a new
              Architecture for wide-area, Dynamic Adaptive Systems (ADAS). The decreasing
              cost of computing and networking technology and network-enabled devices is
              enabling the large-scale deployment of a wide-area infrastructure that operas
              many new and innovative services (e.g., a service that allows a user to control
              the lights in a room).
     Unfortunately, wide-area network deployment has
              not yielded the expected improvements in access to new and existing devices,
              services, and networks. Each of these areas faces significant problems: end
              devices that are more powerful than earlier generations, but are still very
              limited and fragile relative to their fixed counterparts; many services are
              developed with the static assumption of high-bandwidth and low-latency networks
              and thus perform poorly in the low bandwidth, high-latency wide-area
              environment; networks that have different capabilities (e.g., bandwidth,
              latency, cost, coverage) making reconciliation of these differences difficult
              for many services.
     This CAREER grant proposal addresses two key problems
              of wide-area services: (1) Dynamically adapting to the current conditions and
              environment at each level of the service and network, and (2) Locating the
              appropriate service for a task.
     Adaptive systems are a necessary response
              to the significant performance problems associated with accessing services in
              the wide-area. A dynamically  adaptive system continually changes based upon
              changing conditions at multiple levels: link, network, and service, yielding a
              significant improvement in the perfor-
mance and usability of services.
    
              Most networks make a fixed tradeoff between reasonable performance under
              worst-case conditions and performance under best-case conditions. However, for
              a fixed design point, best-case performance usually suffers. Previous research
              efforts have primarily focused on only one aspect of adaptation. What makes
              this
grant proposal unique is a plan for developing a new architecture that
              supports novel, dynamically adaptive services and enables anywhere, anytime,
              any mode access to services.
     The first step is to produce software tools,
              applied theoretical and simulation results, and an experimental testbed, all of
              which will aid researchers working with new models for wide-area service
              construction, deployment, and access. The second step is to use more mature
              versions of these tools in a large-scale experiment focused on two areas:
              improving the undergraduate and graduate academic experience in two courses and
              providing new undergraduate research opportunities in the intersection between
              mobile computing, wireless networking, and wireless telephony.
     This work
              builds upon the our research in the following areas:
     (1) Information
              Exposure and Multi-level Dynamic Adaptation. A key enabler for adaptation is
              the exposure of metadata between link, network, and service levels (e.g., a
              service can inform the link layer of its latency and reliability  quirements).
              This technique will depend upon the development of theoretical models for the
              predicted state of a wireless link, upon based upon extensive experimental
and
              simulation research.
     (2) Providing high-performance, wide-area access to
              services. The researcher strongly believes that "Access is the killer
              application." Decoupling user interfaces from communication and dynamic
              adaptation are the keys to delivering high-performance.
     (3) Large-Scale
              Deployment of Wide-Area Information Access. An important component of the
              research is conducting large-scale testbed experiments in both research and
              academic settings. Graduate and undergraduate students will be included in the
              project's research by leveraging the significant hardware and software testbed
              being deployed by related projects at UC Berkeley.
     These research
              directions will work together in a synergistic fashion, where theoretical,
              analytical, and simulation results guide the development of useful software
              infrastructure components | components that will be deployed in a large-scale
              research and academic testbed, providing a unique opportunity for
              significant
research and academic use of the results by both undergraduate and
              graduate students.
     Since the ADAS framework is really an abstraction and
              synthesis of many earlier ideas, the research results from this effort should
              be of interest to users of a broad class of wide-area information access
              services and applications, not merely those who choose to use ADAS software.
              These results will be applied within the ADAS architecture to a variety of
              service and information access challenges.


