Title       : CAREER: Hybrid Control of Complex Networked Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9985072

Award Number: 9985072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claire J. Tomlin tomlin@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is devoted to research and teaching in the area of hybrid systems
              theory.  The goal is to develop a control theory for complex networks of
              systems, each with its own objectives, decision-making, and information
              processing capabilities.  The systems have dynamics which are primarily
              continuous-state and continuous-time, yet the aggregate network is in general
              too complex to model with continuous tools alone.  Control theory to date has
              achieved tremendous success in the analysis and synthesis of single control
              systems, as well as the development of control laws for groups of systems which
              are connected together by point-to-point links so that information is received
              and processed synchronously at each subsystem.  Using continuous-state tools,
              simple hierarchical control schemes have also been designed and used with great
              success.  The control of an aircraft is an excellent example: the complex
              system of hydraulic valves which controls the surfaces of today's commercial
              jets is transparent to the pilot, due to a control layer in between that bounds
              the operation of the hydraulics and displays this simplified abstraction of the
              complex system to the pilot.

We are now interested in designing control laws
              for systems which are vastly more complex than continuous, synchronous control
              theory allows.  Examples include air traffic control systems,  highway systems,
              communication systems, the interconnected power grid, financial networks such
              as the stock market, and networks of distributed MEMS sensors.  In each of
              these examples, the sensors and resources are distributed across the systems,
              yet there is a strong need for the systems to coordinate to perform some task
              or achieve some goal.  The systems are also asynchronous, since correlated but
              different information is available to the controllers at different times.  We
              propose to design hierarchical, hybrid control systems: ours will be a
              hierarchy in which discrete state models are used at the highest level to model
              the large mode spaces in the system, and in which the lowest level incorporates
              distributed sensing and control, asynchronous receipt and processing of
              information, and multiple objective functions.  Our research will focus
              on:

1. Design of the real-time hybrid interface: A key focus of this
              research is on the development of a robust and computationally efficient hybrid
              system interface between the discrete-state system abstraction and the
              continuous-state subsystems.  This interface will provide a priori proofs that
              the system will function as desired, and automatic synthesis of both discrete
              and continuous control laws.

2. Control of asynchronous systems:
              Hand-in-hand with autonomous interacting agents comes the issue of asynchrony. 
              In classical control theory, sensor data is sampled and actuator commands are
              issued at a fixed rate.  We propose to design an asynchronous control theory,
              in which sensors transmit time-stamped data packets whenever new information is
              available and controllers pick up packets relevant to their current
              function.

3. Algorithms for automated air traffic systems: In future air
              transportation systems, it is proposed to automate and move much of the current
              air traffic control functionality on board the aircraft.  This provides a
              superb environment in which to develop the theory proposed here, and we will
              draw on this rich application domain for examples and laboratory
              experiments.

The education component of this project is a new curriculum in
              control theory at Stanford.  The courses will combine systems theory from both
              control theoretic and computer science perspectives.  In addition, a new
              Laboratory will be developed, with the goal of studying, modeling, and
              controlling complex systems.


