Title       : DNA Helicases in DNA Replication and Repair
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a9985527

Award Number: 9985527
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313292             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith L. Campbell jcampbel@its.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              J. Campbell

The goal of this research is to understand the mechanism by which
              an origin of DNA replication is converted into a replication fork and how the
              proteins at the fork are organized to coordinate the synthesis of the leading
              and lagging strands.  The underlying assumption, which, while plausible,
              remains to be proved, is that there is a superassembly of proteins at the
              replication fork and that it functions like a machine whose moving parts are
              proteins.  What is less certain is whether there is a single, multiprotein
              assembly at origins that changes conformation in a concerted manner to effect
              each stage of fork progression or if there are a number of smaller machines
              each assigned a different specific task and only transiently associated with
              the fork.  To attack such a complex problem requires dividing it into partial
              reactions.  In the coming granting period, the DNA2 helicase and its role in
              initiation and elongation will be studied in depth. These fundamental
              biological experiments  in yeast will be combined with experiments in the
              powerful Xenopus laevis egg extracts, that recapitulate both initiation and
              elongation in vitro under strict cell cycle control. The Xenopus in vitro
              replication system faithfully mimics in vivo events and has been very useful in
              working out the order of assembly of initiation proteins onto the sperm
              chromatin.  An important feature of this system is that the egg extracts
              stockpile replication proteins and are capable of very rapid and extensive
              replication in vitro.  Thus, they also provide the only existing in vitro
              replication system for studying eukaryotic chromosomal replication forks. 
              Previously, the first DNA helicase essential for DNA replication in yeast was
              identified in this laboratory.  In order to take advantage of both yeast
              molecular biology and genetics and Xenopus in vitro replication system, the
              Xenopus homolog of the yeast helicase, called Dna2, was cloned.  Each stage of
              DNA replication in Xenopus extracts will now be analyzed in the presence and
              absence of Xdna2p.  The assembly and disassembly of the replication apparatus
              during the cell cycle in the presence and absence of Xdna2p will be followed. 
              Yeast mutants defective in DNA2 are sensitive to X-rays and MMS.  Since the
              Xenopus extracts have been shown to be useful for studies of repair of X-ray
              induced damage, the Xenopus extracts will be used to study the molecular
              contribution of Xdna2. 

Studies of the cell cycle and regulated formation
              and activation of the replication fork have important implications for the
              understanding of regulation of cell proliferation.  DNA replication cycles are
              also a target of regulation during development and differentiation.  This
              research is expected to provide important insights into these processes.

