Title       : Alkyl Polyglucosides: Formulating for the Environment (TSE 99-D)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2002     
File        : a9985580

Award Number: 9985580
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric W. Kaler kaler@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9985580
Eric W. Kaler, U of Delaware

Objectives/Hypothesis: 
              Concern for the natural environment drives a need for surfactant-based
              formulations that are biodegradable or that can be synthesized from renewable
              resources.  Mixtures containing alkylpolyglucoside surfactants succeed on both
              counts.  A fundamental study is proposed of mixtures containing alkyl
              polyglucosides surfactant to enable their use as potential replacements for
              other types of surfactants  (in particular ethoxylated alcohols) in a large
              number of industrially important formulations and applications.  Objective 1 is
              to study water-alkyl polyglucoside mixtures in terms of phase behavior and the
              corresponding microstructure, including exploration of the effects of additives
              such as salt, alcohol, or other surfactants on the phase behavior and
              microstructure.  Objective 2 is to examine mixtures containing nonpolar
              solvents and the subsequent formation of microemulsions.  Adding materials such
              as salt, alcohol, or other surfactants to water/oil/alkyl polyglucoside
              microemulsions may effect the phase behavior and microstructure beneficially
              and allow tailoring of formulations to specific applications.  It is proposed
              to examine the feasibility of employing other environmentally compatible
              materials, as solvents and additives to alkylpolygucosides microemulsions. 
              Examples of these types of materials include limonene (derived from orange
              processing), rape seed oil, other naturally-derived oils, and also the use of
              alkanediols as substitutes for alkanols.  Objective 3 is to extend the utility
              of alkyl polyglucoside-based mixtures by modifying their rheological properties
              and microstructure through addition of naturally occurring polymers (e. g.,
              gelatin and gums).  Several classes of industrially important gums with
              different functionality and thickening mechanisms will be
              examined.

Approach:  The experimental approach involves determination of
              surfactant phase behavior using visual a microscopic observation of mixtures as
              a function of chemical type, concentration, and temperature.  Microstructure
              will be determined and quantified using fluorescence spectroscopy and light and
              small angle x-ray and neutron scattering methods.

Expected Results:  The
              work will provide a scientific basis for the use of alkyl polyglucoside
              surfactants as replacements for other nonionic formulations in a variety of
              applications including surface cleaners, personal care products, and industrial
              lubricants.  The work will also likely uncover features of these new materials
              that will be superior to conventional formulations, particularly in the areas
              of temperature sensitivity, rheological properties, and cost.  Completion of
              work reduces environmental risk because it leads directly to the development of
              formulations, which have a reduced impact on the environment via improved
              biodegradability, and the use of renewable resources.

Supplement Keywords: 
              Waste minimization, environmental chemistry, and surfactants 

