Title       : Identification of Signal Compound Involved in Root Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2000  
File        : a9985921

Award Number: 9985921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: N. Kent Peters                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94054              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha C. Hawes mhawes@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ho-Hyung Woo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Robbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Most of what is known about mitosis in plants is based on extrapolation from how
              cell division functions in other systems, such as yeast.  Identification of new
              genes that control this multicellular process is  hampered by the lack of a
              system in which cell division can be controlled  precisely and synchronized
              among individuals.  Recent studies in our laboratory have made it  possible to
              synchronize cell division in root cap meristems by the experimental
              manipulation of root cap development.   This system has been  exploited to
              characterize a previously unknown enzyme from pea roots whose  expression
              appears to be needed for the control of cell cycle in plants.  The objective of
              this proposal is to identify the metabolic product(s) of  this
              UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT). The identity of the gene, PsUGT1, with
              sequences common to mammalian UGT-encoding genes, has been confirmed by in
              vitro enzyme activity.  Expression of this microsomal-membrane bound UGT is
              tightly correlated with cell division, spatially and temporally. Moreover, a
              transient induction of PsUGT1 expression occurs in concert, within a time
              window measured in minutes, with the experimental activation of a transient
              increase in mitosis.  Most important, meristem-localized inducible inhibition
              of PsUGT1 expression by antisense mRNA mutagenesis under the control of its own
              promoter is lethal in pea hairy roots as well as transgenic alfalfa plants. 
              Fortuitously, however, constitutive expression of PsUGT1 antisense under the
              control of the CaMV35S promoter yields an intermediate, nonlethal phenotype in
              transgenic alfalfa plants. This provided a tool to demonstrate that the primary
              effect of PsUGT1 expression appears to be a reduced rate of cell division. 
              Thus, a 2-3 fold reduction in plant growth is correlated with a 2-3 fold
              reduction in the rate of DNA synthesis. These observations are consistent with
              the following model: PsUGT1 expression regulates the activity of a factor
              controlling plant growth and development (Factor GD).  Factor GD is
              constitutively present in meristematic cells, but its activity is modulated by
              reversible conjugation to glucuronide, catalyzed by PsUGT1. If this model is
              correct, completing the objectives will provide important insight into the ways
              mitosis is regulated in plants.  In addition, transgenic plant systems may
              provide a new experimental approach to understanding mechanisms by which
              glycoconjugation regulates life processes by controlling biological levels of
              potent endogenous ligands as well as environmental poisons. The goal of this
              project is to determine the chemical nature of the metabolic product(s) of
              PsUGT1.  Two approaches will be used:  1. Conjugation of known candidate
              molecules such as phytohormones with 14C-labelled-glycone by PsUGT1 will be
              tested directly by enzyme assay followed by separation of products on thin
              layer chromatography; and  2.  The products of PsUGT1 activity obtained from
              recombinant strains of Neurospora crassa and plant tissue will be purified and
              analyzed by HPLC, mass spectroscopy and NMR. The identification and
              characterization of Factor GD will facilitate future studies to examine its
              role in cellular differentiation.

