Title       : Nanoscale Structure of Semiconductor Surfaces, Alloys, and Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2001   
File        : a9985898

Award Number: 9985898
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341774             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. M. Feenstra feenstra@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses nanoscale geometric and electronic structure of
              semiconductor surfaces and interfaces. Particular focus is placed on the
              formation and properties of semiconductor alloys, including both ternary, e.g.
              In x Ga 1-x N, and quaternary, e.g. In x Ga 1-x As y P 1-y , materials.
              Incorporation of alloy constituents during growth will be studied, together
              with the phenomena of atomic ordering, short-range clustering, and long-range
              alloy compositional fluctuations (lateral composition modulation). The effect
              of external perturbations such as ion implantation and annealing on the
              compositional variations will also be examined. Heterostructures, containing
              layers of material with varying lattice constant, will be used to impose strain
              on the material. The effect of this strain on the resultant alloy composition
              and surface morphology will be observed. The intent of the research is to
              elucidate the underlying microscopic mechanisms responsible for the observed
              structural or compositional variations, with the aim of designing improved
              growth and/or processing techniques by which these mechanisms can be
              controlled. 
The major technique to be used for these studies is scanning
              tunneling microscopy (STM), which provides nanoscale information on the atomic
              arrangement on a surface.  Spectroscopic studies with the tunneling microscope
              will be used to probe electronic states at the surface. Studies will be
              performed both in a plan-view mode, probing in situ the growth surface of
              films, as well as in cross-sectional mode in which a heterostructure is cleaved
              in situ. 
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area
              of materials science having high potential technological relevance. The
              research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
              level to new understanding and capabilities in electronic/photonic devices. A
              variety of fundamental issues are to be addressed in these investigations. An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area.  
***

