Title       : MRI Quantitation of Regional Pulmonary Perfusion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2001       
File        : a9985954

Award Number: 9985954
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203812             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia B. Paschal cynthia.paschal@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9985954
Paschal
Many imaging modalities can be used for study of the lung
              including chest radiographs, radionuclide perfusion scanning, computed
              tomography (CT), and pulmonary angiography. While these methods are very useful
              in evaluating pulmonary vasculature, they have serious limitations. All involve
              exposure to ionizing radiation. Pulmonary angiography is invasive. All but CT
              provide only projection images. Quantitative information is not available with
              radiographs, CT, and pulmonary angiography and only limited quantitative
              information is available with radionuclide methods. In contrast, magnetic
              resonance imaging (MRI) does not involve ionizing radiation, is at most
              minimally invasive, can provide true three-dimensional (3D) image volumes, and
              can give some quantitative flow information. Preliminary results demonstrate
              that the signal in at least one 3D magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) method
              can be used to accurately estimate differential pulmonary perfusion, that is
              the percent of cardiac output that goes to each lung. Additional preliminary
              results demonstrate that 3D MRA can also accurately estimate perfusion in the
              upper, central, and lower portions of the lung.

Newer contrast agent
              enhanced, breathold 3D MRA techniques produce very detailed depictions of lung
              vasculature in an extremely short period of time. The objective of this project
              is to evaluate 3D MRA methods with and without contrast agent as means to
              quantify regional and global perfusion in different flow states, using
              radioactive microspheres as the gold standard for flow measurement. The
              hypothesis of this work is that magnetic resonance imaging can be used to
              quantitatively assess regional and global pulmonary perfusion with minimal to
              no invasiveness.

Twenty pigs will be imaged with 3D MRA techniques both
              before and after a perfusion altering intervention. A velocity and flow
              measuring MRI technique (2D phase contrast imaging) will also be used before
              and after the intervention to measure flow in ml/min to each lung. Two
              different radiolabels of micro spheres will be used to determine regional
              perfusion in the different flow states. The indicator dilution method will be
              used to measure cardiac output before and after the intervention. MRA results
              will be compared against the gold standards of micro spheres and indicator
              dilution.

The proposed work could have tremendous impact on investigations
              of lung physiology by providing scientists with a fast, non-destructive,
              non-invasive technique for measuring perfusion in different regions of lung.
              This would open the door to serial studies with no harm to the animal or human
              subjects. In comparison to radioactive microspheres, the proposed MR based
              approach to measuring regional perfusion under multiple physiologic conditions
              would also be less expensive.


