Title       : CAREER: Structure Formation and Support by Magnetized, Supersonic Turbulence in
               the Interstellar Medium and Star-Forming Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a9985392

Award Number: 9985392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354497             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mordecai-Mark Mac Low mordecai@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-9985392
MAC LOW

The appointment of Dr. Mordecai-Mark Mac Low to a
              position as Assistant Curator of Astrophysics at the American Museum of Natural
              History presents an extraordinary opportunity to combine public education using
              the assets of a state-of-the-art planetarium with fundamental research on the
              birth of stars and the structure of the interstellar gas.  Stars are formed
              from huge clouds of interstellar gas that collapse under the force of their own
              gravity.  The gas observed in our own and other galaxies would all collapse
              into stars in a small fraction of the lifetimes of the galaxies if it were not
              somehow supported.  Supersonic random motions (turbulence) are observed in the
              interstellar gas, and in the denser star-forming clouds observed in that gas. 
              These supersonic motions appear to support the clouds against immediate
              collapse, yet shock waves from these supersonic motions sweep gas up into
              extremely dense sheets and filaments.  In the interstellar gas, these dense
              regions may be the progenitors of the star-forming clouds, while within the
              clouds, these regions appear to evolve into the even denser cores in which the
              very youngest stars are observed.  Understanding how the balance between
              support and collapse caused by the supersonic motion works will open the way to
              understanding the evolution of star-forming galaxies and the origins of stars
              including our own Sun

Dr. Mac Low is computing three-dimensional models of
              supersonic turbulence in magnetized gas in order to study how star-forming
              clouds are swept up in the interstellar gas and how protostellar cores are in
              turn swept up in the clouds.  He includes realistic descriptions of the
              supernova explosions and protostellar outflows that drive the supersonic
              motions in the gas, as well as the heating and cooling of the gas.  He also
              models how ionizing radiation is transferred through the modeled density
              structure to understand how the gas in our own and other galaxy is ionized at
              enormous distances from hot stars, as well as how molecular clouds emit and are
              radiatively cooled.  The Rose Center for Earth and Space Sciences at the Museum
              includes two permanent exhibition halls---the Hall of the Universe and the Hall
              of Planet Earth---and a new Hayden Planetarium.  The new Planetarium has both a
              Zeiss star projector incorporating the latest developments in analog projection
              technology, and a Digital Dome that allows the projection of nine megapixels of
              computer-generated graphics in real time.  Dr. Mac Low incorporates the results
              of his research, as well as his general knowledge of modern astrophysics, into
              the Space Shows produced for the Planetarium, into other exhibits in the
              Planetarium and the Hall of the Universe, and into their associated web sites. 
              He also works with pre-college teachers to incorporate the spirit and results
              of modern research into their teaching.

This project is supported by funds
              from the Division of Astronomical Sciences.
***

