Title       : CAREER: Microsystem Model Identification and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2001       
File        : a9985046

Award Number: 9985046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199822             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. M'Closkey rtm@obsidian.seas.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This multidisciplinary research program integrates experimental, computational,
              and analytical methods for micro system modeling identification, and control. 
              Micro sensors and actuators are finding a niche in inertial navigation, vehicle
              stabilization, and flow control applications where power consumption, weight,
              and cost are primary considerations.  The manufacturing technology of these
              devices, however, does not enable precise control over some important
              electro-mechanical properties.  Furthermore, the devices can exhibit
              sensitivity to environmental factors, such as temperature and pressure, so
              additional compensation must be employed to improve linearity, dynamic range,
              and stability.  Real-time model identification algorithms are at the heart of
              this capability.  The algorithms enable higher levels of performance, autonomy,
              and reliability and can lower system costs through increased yields and
              increased self-testing.  Increased yields for micro systems arise from the
              ability to self-identify and compensate for micro-fabrication errors that would
              otherwise limit performance or cause test failure. 

These algorithms, based
              on adaptive lattice filters, have been used for on-line calibration of several
              micro gyroscope prototypes.  The results are extremely encouraging and new
              classes of model structures that incorporate nonlinearities present in micro
              sensors have been developed.  Complementary to this modeling effort are the
              development of novel nonlinear control architectures and synthesis methods that
              address the unique performance objectives of micro systems.  A number of
              devices, including micro-flow control actuators and other sensor prototypes,
              are being tested with these new tools.  

Education is enhanced through the
              undergraduate Sensor and Actuator Laboratory.  This laboratory introduces
              students to industrial sensor and actuator instrumentation and provides them
              with research experience by exploring many of the problems associated with
              micro system design, calibration, and control.


