Title       : Hyphal Biomechanics in Pathogenic Oomycetes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a9985546

Award Number: 9985546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287103             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas P. Money moneynp@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1132,1148,9169,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with the biomechanical strategies that have evolved
              among filamentous fungi enabling them to penetrate and harvest energy from the
              solid tissues of plants and animals.  While exoenzymes are presumed to play an
              important role in reducing the mechanical resistance presented by these
              tissues, the exertion of force at the hyphal apex represents a critical, yet
              largely ignored factor in invasion.  The chosen experimental design reflects a
              comparative physiological approach and will examine a pair of closely related
              species of oomycetes (recently assigned to the Kingdom Stramenopila) from the
              genus Pythium:  Pythium insidiosum causes an invasive disease in humans and
              other mammals, and Pythium graminicola is a pathogen of grasses.  The project
              draws upon a suite of biomechanical techniques developed by the P.I. that will
              allow analysis of the mechanical behavior of microscopic hyphae.  New methods
              employing ultra-sensitive silicon bridge strain gauges (or force transducers)
              with UN (millionths of one Newton) resolution will allow direct measurement of
              the micronewton forces produced by individual hyphae, and will also measure the
              force required to push glass microprobes into samples of animal and plant
              tissues.  Hyphal force is measured by positioning the strain gauge a few
              micrometers in advance of a hyphal apex using a micromanipulator.  As the cell
              grows and pushes against the end of the silicon beam, the electrical output
              from the instrument changes in proportion to the applied force.  Comparisons
              between hyphal forces and the physical resistance of these tissues will
              establish the potential for mechanical invasion without the action of
              tissue-degrading enzymes.  The relative significance of mechanical penetration
              versus exogenous enzymes in the invasive process (which remains a fundamental
              unresolved question in mycology) will then be tested by comparing hyphal forces
              and the strength of host tissues treated with a variety of fungal enzymes. 
              Further measurements of hyphal turgor pressure, the tensile strength of the
              hyphal wall, cytoskeletal activity, and cell size will be made to identify key
              variables that control force at the hyphal apex.  These experiments will
              explore the cellular mechanisms that determine the interaction between hyphae
              and the physical microenvironment presented by host tissues.  While some of
              these processes may be host specific, others are likely to be universal
              features of invasive growth.  Together, the planned experiments will reveal the
              significance of biomechanical adaptations in defining the host range (or
              ecological niche) of oomycetes that infect animals and plants.
