Title       : RUI: An Investigation of the Functional Role of a Brain Area in Day-Old Chicks
               Thought to Control Learning and Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2000  
File        : a9985592

Award Number: 9985592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146037             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa A. Barber Barber@Dickinson.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              It has been suggested through the use of lesion studies that a specific area of
              the chick forebrain (the IMHV) is involved in learning and memory. In the
              lesion technique a brain area is precisely removed (leaving other brain regions
              intact) and the resulting behavior examined. If an area of the brain is
              critical for a behavior, then removal of that structure will interfere with
              that behavior. Previous studies have shown that lesions of the chick forebrain
              (an area known as the IMHV) produce forgetting in passive avoidance learning, a
              task in which a chick pecks a bead coated with a bitter liquid. IMHV lesions
              also impair memory in sickness-conditioned learning (here the chick learns to
              avoid pecking beads associated with illness). These studies would suggest that
              the IMHV is important for all types of memory. 
	However, recent studies have
              demonstrated that IMHV lesions do not impair learning of a one-trial,
              water-bead task (here the chick pecks a bead coated with a positive reward).
              That is, lesions given before learning do not impair the ability of the chick
              to learn the task. Both the passive avoidance and the sickness-conditioned
              learning tasks are aversive and require pecking at beads. The water-bead task
              requires pecking at beads, but is not aversive (it is appetitive). It is
              possible that IMHV lesions only impair learning of aversive, pecking tasks.
              
	To test this hypothesis, the project will examine the effects of lesions in
              non-pecking tasks that are either aversive or appetitive. Chicks can learn, in
              one trial, to associate a specific "place" with either sickness
              (sickness-conditioned place aversion) or heat reward (place preference
              learning). The experiments will examine the effects of IMHV lesions in both
              sickness-conditioned place aversion and place preference learning. Taken
              together with previous research, these experiments will determine the effects
              of IMHV lesions on pecking, non-pecking, aversive and appetitive types of
              learning. 
	The experiments will be carried out with several undergraduates
              each year from Dickinson College. This project provides the students with two
              major skills. The first is practical research, in which the students learn how
              to perform many of the techniques used in neuroscience research. The other,
              more important skill, is a change in the student's attitude from consumers to
              producers of knowledge. The results of the experiments will answer the
              questions that remain about the functional role of a specific brain area in
              learning and memory.



