Title       : Organic Materials for Optoelectronic Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2000   
File        : a9985632

Award Number: 9985632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo C. Bazan bazan@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9985632
Bazan

Organic semiconducting materials are making a widespread
              impact in a range of emerging technologies.  Recent efforts in materials
              synthesis, in conjunction with device engineering, has culminated in the
              fabrication of organic-based light emitting diodes, thin film transistors,
              solid state lasers, solar cells and photodetectors.  There is even speculation
              about the creation of all-organic circuitry for computing purposes.  Underlying
              all these functions is the spatial relationship between organic chromophores in
              the solid and the manner by which this parameter controls the electronic
              coupling between different subunits.  Additionally, the level of order in the
              solid determines the ability of small molecule materials to form stable
              amorphous films and their potential inclusion into device structures.

The
              goals of this proposal over the next year are twofold.  The first is to develop
              the necessary methodology to prepare well-defined molecules with geometrical
              attributes that yield amorphous materials.  Materials of this type can be
              purified to a greater extent than polymer counterparts and offer advantages in
              devices where a small concentration of contaminants disproportionately affects
              charge migration.  The second aim is to fabricate devices with the above
              compounds and to use the resulting performance profiles to probe the effect of
              molecular shape on the charge transport ability of the bulk.
	The specific
              objectives during the grant period are:

(1) The synthesis of
              structurally-precise conjugated organic molecules with tetrahedral geometries. 
              Of interest will be to examine how topology translates into bulk morphology. 
              Spectroscopic studies will be executed to understand better the types and
              variability of environments present in organic glasses with a high chromophore
              content.  This will be achieved by incorporating solvatochromic dyes into
              organic amorphous films and by measuring the resulting optical properties.  The
              ultimate goal here is to develop guidelines that allow for tuning the
              cooperativity of chromophores in a disordered ensemble and to develop a better
              understanding of the local order that may exist in amorphous organic
              solids.

(2) To fabricate light emitting diodes using the above materials. 
              Analysis of device performance will provide useful insight into how molecular
              shape affects important bulk properties such as conductivity and
              electroluminescence quantum yield.

