Title       : CAREER: Crystal Growth and Scattering Studies of Transition Metal Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a9985067

Award Number: 9985067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Greven greven@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a CAREER award to a young faculty member at Stanford University who will
              setup a research program to grow and study the properties of complex
              "correlated-electron" transition metal oxides. The project will develop the
              ability to grow high quality single crystals of transition metal oxides.  The
              crystals will be characterized using X-ray scattering and neutron scattering at
              two national facilities (Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory and the
              National Institute of Standards and Technology respectively).  The project will
              increase our understanding of high temperature superconductors, quantum
              magnetism, and strongly correlated metals, all behaviors exhibited by these
              materials.  These topics are at the forefront of condensed matter physics
              research.
Integrated with this research is an educational plan that will reach
              out to under-represented groups in the natural sciences, both at the
              undergraduate and high school level.  High school students from a troubled
              community will be provided the opportunity to perform some exciting summer
              research.  A course in scattering will be developed for students at the
              upper-undergraduate and first year graduate level.
%%%
This is a CAREER award
              to a young faculty member at Stanford University who will set up a research
              program to study exotic crystals made from planes or chains of transition
              metals and oxygen. They behave in unique ways that may reveal fundamentally new
              insights into nature.  For example, they can be changed from poor conductors of
              electricity to good conductors by placing them in a magnetic field or by
              applying pressure.  Planes of copper and oxygen are also critical ingredients
              in high-temperature superconductors - materials that can carry electricity
              without resistance when cooled to the temperature of liquid nitrogen.  The
              project involves growing these materials as crystals, and then bombarding them
              with beams of X-rays and neutrons at several national laboratories.  The study
              of these exotic crystals is at the frontier of condensed matter
              physics.
Integrated with this research is an innovative high school outreach
              program involving students from East Palo Alto, one of the nation's troubled
              communities.  This program will provide exciting summer research opportunities
              involving a nearby national laboratory, the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation
              Laboratory (SSRL). In addition, a special effort will be made to involve
              undergraduate students from groups that are under-represented in the natural
              sciences in this research project.
***


