Title       : CAREER: An Integrated Research/Educational Plan to Develop and Deploy a
               Pointable, Hyperspectral Remote Sensing Instrument on a Tethered Balloon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a9985039

Award Number: 9985039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee A. Vierling LVierlin@msmailgw.sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0521400   Plant Productivity                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9125,9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              CAREER:  An Integrated Research and Education Plan to Develop and Deploy a
              Pointable, Hyperspectral Remote Sensing Instrument on a Tethered
              Balloon


Images of the earth taken by satellite and aircraft-based remote
              sensing instruments offer an immensely valuable, yet limited perspective. 
              While remote sensing technologies have revolutionized the study of the earth
              system by enabling large surface areas to be imaged quickly and frequently,
              various limitations can restrict the spatial resolution (i.e. pixel size) of
              remote sensing data to the point where observable surface detail is
              insufficient to study critical environmental processes.  As a result, complex
              mathematical procedures are often necessary to derive "sub-pixel" fractions of
              various ground cover types such as trees, grasses, bare soil, and water.  To
              complement and validate these mathematical procedures, novel remote sensing
              techniques are needed to bridge the gap between small-scale, ground-based
              observations and larger scale aircraft- and satellite-based measurements. A
              instrument  will be developed that can be attached to the tether line of a
              large, unmanned blimp and raised and lowered to view the earth across a range
              of intermediate perspectives.
 An integrated research/education program at the
              South Dakota School of Mines and Technology (SDSM&T) will develop and deploy a
              lightweight, state-of-the-art remote sensing instrument package for use on such
              a tethered balloon platform.  Graduate students and faculty in the Institute of
              Atmospheric Sciences will team with undergraduate engineering students
              participating in the SDSM&T Center of Excellence for Advanced Manufacturing and
              Production (CAMP) and Senior Design Courses to design, construct, and test the
              instrument.  In addition, the instrument will be used to develop a remote
              sensing educational module for integration into the SDSM&T Scientific Knowledge
              for Indian Learning and Leadership (SKILL) summer program for pre-college
              Native American students.  Instrument development will occur incrementally
              during each academic year of the five-year development period.  Upon the
              completion of each stage of instrument development, graduate students and the
              Principal Investigator will use the instrument to conduct several remote
              sensing experiments made possible by the balloon platform.  For example, the
              balloon platform will be used to investigate how cover estimates of sub-pixel
              landscape components using various mathematical "spectral mixture analysis"
              techniques can be validated and improved.  By the end of the project, the
              hyperspectral instrument platform will be capable of stable flight, real-time
              instrument-to-ground data transmission, and will be remotely pointable from the
              ground.  
The overarching goals of this work are 1) to foster collaboration
              between student scientists and engineers, 2) to utilize the results of this
              collaboration in order to conduct novel research and make advances in
              terrestrial remote sensing, and 3) to make this technology and research
              familiar to minority students and encourage them to pursue careers in science
              and technology. 


