Title       : Iron Limitation of Silica Production in the Southern Ocean: A Companion Proposal
               to the SOFeX Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9985887

Award Number: 9985887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Brzezinski brzezins@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The results of iron enrichment experiments in the high nitrate, low chlorophyll
              (HNLC) waters of the Equatorial Pacific, the Subarctic Pacific and most
              recently in the Southern Ocean demonstrate that phytoplankton growth and
              biomass in those areas is limited by low concentrations of available iron. A
              key result common to almost all shipboard Fe enrichment experiments from all
              Fe-limited regions is that diatoms are stimulated to a greater degree than are
              other phytoplankton taxa. The same preferential stimulation of diatoms over
              other taxa, was observed during IlronEx 11 where an in situ iron fertilization
              in the equatorial produced a bloom dominated by diatoms. Despite such a
              consistent strong response of diatoms to iron addition, the effects of Fe
              limitation on diatom silica production in situ remains un-examined.
Dr.
              Brzezinski will examine the effect of in situ iron fertilization on silica
              production and the kinetics of Si(OH)4 use in the Polar Front region of the
              Southern Ocean in conjunction with the SOFeX projects led by Moss Landing
              Marine Laboratory. The Southern Ocean is the largest HNLC region on Earth. Of
              all the HNLC areas, diatoms are likely to be important in the Southern Ocean as
              over half of modem global accumulation of siliceous sediment occurs there
              forming the Great Sedimentary Opal Belt that girdles most of the Southern
              Ocean.
Data from the recent AESOPS program indicate that Fe and Si both
              regulate diatom biomass and silica production in the Polar Front. In addition,
              this laboratory has produced the first data from two separate HNLC regions that
              demonstrate a strong response of diatom silica production to added Fe and Zn.
              Given the strong response of diatom growth to iron enrichment observed in
              several HNLC regions in the past, our new direct observations that additions of
              Fe enhance silica production in the Polar Front and the dominance of diatoms in
              the phytoplankton of the Southern Ocean, they anticipate that stimulation of
              diatom silica production will be one of the most pronounced biogeochemical
              responses to Fe fertilization during SOFeX. That result will have strong
              implications for the mechanisms controlling silica production rates and the
              contribution of diatoms to carbon flux in the very region that dominates the
              silica cycle of the modem ocean.

