Title       : Predicting Physical Disturbance in a Changing Environment: The Effect of Spatial
               and Temporal Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2000  
File        : a9985946

Award Number: 9985946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $549791             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Denny mwdenny@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Current ideas regarding the roles of competition, predation, recruitment,
              succession, and disturbance in community ecology are based in part on
              experiments in the intertidal zone of wave-swept rocky shores, and these
              studies serve as benchmarks for the ability of ecological theory to make
              predictions about the real world. Much of the experimental utility of the shore
              is due to the rapid turnover of individuals in the community. On exposed shores
              where turnover is due primarily to environmental effects, the ultimate ability
              to predict the distribution and abundance of organisms rests on our proximal
              ability to predict the physical environment at all relevant spatial and
              temporal scales, and on our ability to account for the biological consequences
              of environmental stress.

Field experiments have shown that it is feasible to
              predict from offshore wave height the maximum wave forces imposed at a given
              location on the shore. However, these forces (an important environmental
              stress) vary substantially through both space and time in a pattern known as
              1/f-noise: the larger the spatial or temporal scale at which the shore is
              examined, the larger the variation measured. As a result, it is difficult to
              specify unambiguously the wave exposure of a site. Because many aspects of
              intertidal community dynamics are closely tied to wave exposure, the 1/f-noise
              characteristic of the shore becomes potentially problematic when an attempt is
              made to generalize ("scale up") the results of small-scale experiments.
              Preliminary measurements of species diversity suggest, however, that it is
              possible for plants and animals to interact with the physical environment in a
              fashion that produces well-defined spatial structure even in the presence of
              physical 1/f-noise. This project builds on these results by examining how
              several basic ecological processes (e.g., recruitment, growth, and predation
              intensity) vary across spatial and temporal scales, and how these scales
              contribute to the overall pattern in community dynamics.

Field experiments
              will be conducted along a horizontal transect in the intertidal zone for which
              previous work has characterized the spatial variation in maximum wave-induced
              force and maximum temperature. Simultaneous measurements will be  made at 2-m
              intervals along a 200-m transect of: the rate of recruitment of mussels and
              barnacles, the rate of growth of mussels and barnacles, the intensity of
              gastropod predation on barnacles, disturbance in the mussel bed, and the course
              of succession on previously unoccupied substratum. Quarterly measurements will
              be made of species abundances at each location, and from these species
              diversity is calculated at each of the 100 points on the transect. Because
              these measurements are made at equally spaced points, it is possible to use
              spectral analysis to examine the scale-specific cross-correlation between the
              variation in each ecological process or biological attribute and the
              co-occurring variation of the physical environment (wave force and
              temperature). In conjunction with the experiment on predation intensity,
              measurements will be made of the adhesive tenacity and foraging speed of the
              primary gastropod predators of barnacles (Nucella and Acanthina). These field
              experiments will provide a direct measure of whether there are defined scales
              for ecological processes, and (if so) how biology interacts with environmental
              1/f-noise to yield the relevant scale(s) of community dynamics.

In addition
              to exploring the spatial and temporal variation in wave forces, previous work
              has shown that maximum wave-induced forces on the shore correspond to water
              velocities that are approximately twice those predicted by standard theories of
              wave breaking. The cause of these extreme velocities (up to 25 m/s) is thought
              to be tied to the interaction of breaking waves with the complex topography of
              the rocky shore. For example, when breaking waves are refracted so that two
              wave fronts collide, a jet of water is produced the velocity of which is
              substantially greater than that of either wave. Experiments will be conducted
              in a laboratory wave tank to characterize the flows resulting when waves break
              on a variety of model shores, thereby to delineate the circumstances under
              which enhanced velocities can be expected. In conjunction with these
              experiments measurements will be made of the force exerted on objects held
              fixed to the substratum. These measurements (in addition to similar
              measurements conducted in the field) will be used to test the possibility that
              the apparently extreme water velocities calculated from force measurements are
              in fact an artifact of the manner in which the leading edge of a wave impacts
              plants and animals on the shore. This work will allow one to quantify for the
              first time the inherent spatial and temporal scales of processes that govern
              community dynamics on wave-swept shores, and thereby to forge mechanistic links
              among the wave "weather," the shoreline topography, and the processes of
              recruitment, growth, predation, and succession. The elucidation of these
              mechanisms represents an important first step toward an ability to make
              large-scale mechanistic predictions from small-scale interactions, predictions
              that may be important inputs into the appropriate design of coastal marine
              protected areas.

