Title       : RUI: Starvation-Stress Response Loci of Salmonella
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a9985981

Award Number: 9985981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434224             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Spector mspector@usouthal.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    251/460-6101

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              One of the most common and persistent environmental stresses encountered by
              bacteria is starvation for an essential nutrient, such as carbon.  The ability
              to respond to and survive these environmental challenges has a profound effect
              on bacterial persistence in nature and some animal hosts.  Salmonella
              typhimurium, as well other bacteria, has evolved global response mechanisms,
              the starvation-stress response or SSR, that not only protect it from the
              effects of starvation but also provides cross-resistance to other environmental
              stresses (e.g., thermal, oxidative, or osmotic challenge).  Several
              carbon-starvation-inducible genes have been identified whose products are
              essential for the survival of S. typhimurium during long-term carbon-starvation
              and to varying degrees for resistance to other environmental stresses. The
              focus of this project is to: (a) further characterize two such SSR loci, stiA
              and stiC; and (b) identify additional SSR loci.  To address these goals: (1)
              the stiA locus will be PCR amplified, cloned, and DNA sequenced.  The
              regulation, expression and function of the gene(s) of the operon that are
              essential for starvation- and stress-resistance mechanisms will be
              characterized; (2) the regulation of the stiC gene and an additional
              hypothetical SSR gene (pbpG) will be analyzed independently and as part of a
              potential operon; and (3) new potential SSR genes will be identified and
              characterized. The completion of this project will be critical to the
              understanding of the basic physiology of the starved/stressed bacterial cell
              (the "natural" state in which bacteria are found) and the characterization of
              the starvation-stress response of not only Salmonella but also other bacteria.
