Title       : CAREER: Materials and Processes for Microlithography, Patterning and Surface
               Modification (Nanoscale)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a9985196

Award Number: 9985196
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford L. Henderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9985196
Clifford L. Henderson
Georgia Institute of Technology
              

Microlithography, the process used to print circuit elements
              in
Microelectronic devices, is the key technology driver for
              the
semiconductor industry.  Current microlithographic technologies
              are
reaching the limits of their resolution (-180 ran) and new materials 
and
              processes must be developed to enable continued progress in the
industry. 
              Failure to develop more advanced, higher resolution
patterning processes would
              result in a devastating of semiconductor
devices.
			
A two pronged approach
              to solving this problem will be followed by providing a progression of
              materials processes that can be pattern features down below 100 nm in size. The
              first part of the project
deals with research directed at improving current
              photoresist (the photosensitive polymeric materials) materials to provide
              higher resolutions.  One of the fundamental problems with developing better
              photoresists and processes based on current materials is the difficulty
              associated with measuring the physical properties of the photoresist that
              govern its lithographic performance, i.e. concentration of acid generated due
              to exposure and diffusivity of this acid in the polymer matrix.  Without this
              knowledge, it is difficult to rationally design improved materials and
              processes.  This work will develop a new, revolutionary technique based on
              measuring the capacitance of polymer coated interdigitated electrode (IDE)
              capacitors which can be used for quantifying the extremely small acid
              concentrations and diffusion of this acid within the photoresist film.  This
              technique will be calibrated against other acid measurement techniques
              including microtitration methods.  The effect of photoresist composition and
              processing on the accuracy and sensitivity of this technique will be evaluated.
               The methods and technology developed in this work will be transferred to
              industry through operations with industry, including a collaboration with
              SEMATECH (an R&D consortium for the industry). This technique will make it
              possible for the first time using non-invasive, nondestructive techniques to
              extract the physical parameters required to develop predictive models for the
              performance of photoresists.  These models can then be used to guide the
              rational design of improved photoresist materials and processes that will be
              capable of resoining features as small as 130 nm.

The extension of current
              lithographic photoresist materials and processes is not sufficient to achieve
              resolutions below approximately 130 nm.  To achieve these resolutions it will
              be necessary to change from current optical exposure systems (193 nm and 248 nm
              light) to so-called "Next Generation Lithography" tools (157 nm or 13 nm
              light).  This conversion represents a substantial challenge since the current
              photoresist materials used at higher wavelengths will not function due to their
              strong absorbance at these vacuum-UV wavelengths.  Thus, new photoresist
              materials and processes must be developed, The goal of the second part of the
              proposed research is to develop a novel surface imaging photoresist material
              based on the polymerization of aromatic monomers at solid surfaces using
              surfacebound photosensitive radical initiators.  These materials will enable
              pattern generation down to molecular length scales.  This project will
              demonstrate the use of such methods to pattern sub-100 nm features and develop
              a fundamental understanding of the mechanisms and system parameters that
              control the performance of these materials.  The deposition of covalently
              linked polymer thin films on surfaces allows for the control of the complete
              physiochemical nature of surfaces over molecular length scales.  Thus, in
              addition to semiconductor applications, these materials have a number of uses
              in bioengineening, integrated optics, and other areas that will be
              explored.

Four main educational innovations will be pursued: (1) development
              of new classes, (2) modification of existing courses to include non-traditional
              interdisciplinary Problems, (3) implementation of internet based teaching and
              teaching evaluation tools, (4) creation of a diverse, interdisciplinary
              research experience for students.  Some of the specific goals of these
              activities are to: (1) present students with opportunites to learn about
              frontier fields for chemical engineers including microelectronics, (2) engage
              the active participation of the
semiconductor industry in teaching activities,
              (3) demonstrate the application of fundamental engineering principles in the
              analysis of non-traditional problems, and (4) strengthen interest and
              involvement of under-represented groups in microelectronics.


