Title       : CAREER: Mnemonic Functions of Basal Ganglia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a9985417

Award Number: 9985417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400671             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Knowlton knowlton@psych.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1096,9179,9181,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lay Abstract: Mnemonic Functions of the Basal Ganglia

A great deal of
              research points to the idea that there are different forms of memory which
              depend on different brain systems. Explicit memory, which is memory for facts
              and events that you are consciously aware of appears to depend on brain
              circuitry including medial temporal lobes structures.  Implicit memory, on the
              other hand, refers to information learned without awareness, which does not
              seem to depend on this brain system. In the proposed project, we plan to study
              habit learning, which is a form of Implicit learning. Habit learning refers to
              the gradual learning of associations across trials. Some research has suggested
              that the basal ganglia play a role in this type of learning. However, habit
              learning is not well understood in terms of the precise neural circuitry
              underlying it or its behavioral characteristics. By using animal models and
              studies with patients with basal ganglia disorders I plan to address both of
              these questions. In one habit learning task, we train rats to find food in
              parts of a maze that are signaled by a visual cue. We plan to make lesions in
              the caudate nucleus (part of the basal ganglia) at different times after
              training to see whether memories are stored in this structure or if it is only
              involved early in training with memories eventually stored elsewhere.
We will
              also investigate the role of the nucleus accumbens in habit learning, a
              structure with significant interconnections with the basal ganglia that has
              been implicated in reinforcement. The work on humans will focus on patients
              with Parkinson's disease, which results in basal ganglia dysfunction. We will
              use a human habit learning task that I have developed in which different cues
              are probabilistically associated with different outcomes. Because the
              associations are probabilistic, subjects learn them implicitly and feel as if
              they are guessing. Patients with Parkinson's disease are impaired at this task,
              and I will test whether surgical treatments used to treat this disease have any
              effect on performance. I will also develop additional tasks to tap into this
              system, and examine the behavioral characteristics of these tasks, such as
              their dependence on attention. I will compare patients with Parkinson's disease
              and Alzheimer's disease on habit learning and explicit memory tasks. Because
              Alzheimer's disease mostly spares the basal ganglia, I will examine if habit
              learning can proceed normally in those patients. I will also look at basal
              ganglia activity using functional MRI during performance of implicit learning
              tasks to help define the characteristics of basal ganglia dependent learning.
              The proposed project also has a large educational component, in that I am
              continuing to develop a cognitive neuroscience major in our Psychology
              department to give students integrated training in the study of the nervous
              system and in cognitive science.
    Understanding the functions of basal
              ganglia has practical significance because this system is affected in a number
              of human disease states including Huntington's disease and Parkinson's disease.
              Although these diseases are generally thought of as involving motor function,
              they also involve cognitive deficits and mood changes. Implicit learning
              problems may have an impact on these deficits, and the depression associated
              with these diseases may in part stem from difficulties in using implicitly
              learned social information. Learning how the basal ganglia circuitry
              participates in learning will help us to better treat patients with these
              diseases.

