Title       : RNA Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9985627

Award Number: 9985627
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Lou King mking@med.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch of Med
	      Research Administration, RMSB
	      Miami, FL  33136    305/243-6232

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              King
9985627

RNA localization is a powerful strategy that can be used to
              localize
proteins to subcellular domains and to control protein synthesis
              regionally. In
germ cells, RNA targeting has profound implications for
              development, setting up local
concentrations of regulatory proteins that
              establish regional fates in the developing embryo.  The cellular mechanisms
              that select and transport RNAs are likely to be conserved, even across widely
              disparate species. In fact, it has been shown that yeast localizes RNA encoding
              cell-fate determinants to the distal tip of daughter buds, suggesting this
              mechanism is ancient . Recent evidence suggests that selection for transport
              may be initiated in the nucleus. However, with few exceptions, the identities
              of the interacting proteins involved in RNA selection, translational regulation
              and cortical
anchoring are unknown. Understanding how RNAs are localized
              represents a central problem in both cell and developmental biology.

In
              order to study the mechanism of RNA localization, Dr. King has isolated and
              characterized seven mRNAs localized to the vegetal cortex of Xenopus oocytes.
              Two localization pathways were identified that operate during oogenesis to
              target RNAs to the vegetal cortex. Based on the identities of these seven RNAs,
              Dr. King has suggested that the early pathway evolved to specifically localize
              germ cell determinants whereas the late pathway serves to localize RNAs
              involved in embryonic development. This proposal will focus on analyzing an
              RNA, that is a member of the early pathway and a component of the germinal
              granules (13, 19, 23, 55) as well as VegT RNA, a representative of the late
              pathway. VegT encodes a transcription factor that plays an essential role in
              patterning the three primary germ layers in the embryo.

Controlling when and
              where genes are expressed is essential for the development of multicellular
              organisms.  One strategy is to transcribe the DNA to RNA which is then
              localized.  Later translation of this RNA into protein begins appropriate cell
              differentiation.  Dr. Kings work will focus on how this mechanism maybe
              utilized to establish three tissue layers in the vertebrate embryo.

