Title       : CAREER: An Integrated Environmental Engineering Education and Research Plan to
               Enhance Molecular-Level Understanding of Sequestration Behavior of Volatile
               Organic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9985159

Award Number: 9985159
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257239             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene J. LeBoeuf eugene.j.leboeuf@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9985159  LeBoeuf  Remediation of subsurface sites contaminated with volatile
              organic compounds (VOCs) costs the nation billions of dollars.  The application
              of risk based approaches to the evaluation of contaminated sites requires an
              accurate understanding of the mechanisms controlling the transport and release
              of contaminants in the environment.  This research addresses this issue by
              providing a basis for an improved molecular-level understanding of the
              mechanisms responsible for the sequestration of VOCs in the subsurface.  The
              objectives are to: (1) determine the effects of natural organic matter
              composition on VOC sorption and desorption behavior; (2) determine the effects
              of soil and sediment nanoporosity on VOC sorption and desorption behavior; (3)
              predict VOC sorption and desorption behavior based on functional and structural
              characteristics of soils and sediments; (4) investigate mass transfer
              principles in the classroom using interactive teaching techniques and (5)
              determine how soil and sediment functional and structural characteristics
              affect field-scale evaluation of VOC fate and transport.  An investigation of
              the functional and structural characteristics of natural organic matter (NOM)
              is used to understand the sequestration processes that control the fate and
              transport of organic contaminants in the subsurface.  Temperature-modulated
              differential scanning calorimetry will be used to investigate glass transition,
              heat capacity and enthalpic relaxation behavior of NOMs.  This information will
              provide insights to its structure and inherent macromolecular mobility.  Use of
               positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS) to probe the size, volume
              and hydrophobicity of NOM nanopores will provide an improved means to correlate
              nanopore structure with VOC sequestration behavior in soils and sediments. 
              Comparisons of PALS measurements with N2, Ar and CO2 gas-based sorption data
              will provide increased knowledge of the ability of common gas-based
              measurements to characterize the nanoporosity of NOMs, model soils, and whole
              soils and sediments.  The effects of the presence of a rubbery or glassy state
              of NOM and nanoporosity on VOC transport will be brought to life through
              development of a user-friendly, graphical-user-interface based finite element
              and finte difference mass transfer model.  The use of this model in conjunction
              with developed case studies will provide an active learning environment
              emphasizing the use of fundamental concepts to more accurately predict
              contaminant behavior in real-world situations.  Case studies, field trips and
              visits by practicing engineers will provide students a connection with
              real-world problems.  Partnerships with Tennessee State University will provide
              opportunities to expose their undergraduate students to graduate-level
              research, while collaborations with Oak Ridge National Laboratory will
              significantly enhance the availability of research oportunities for both
              undergraduate and graduate students. ***
