Title       : PECASE: OceanStore: An Oceanic Data Utility for Ubiquitous, Highly-Available,
               Reliable, and Persistant Storage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9985250

Award Number: 9985250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399948             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Kubiatowicz kubitron@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This is an NSF CAREER/PECASE grant proposal for research into Extremely
              Wide-Area StorageSystems (EWASS). Ideally, such storage systems are
              highly-available from anywhere in the network, exploit automatic replication
              for disaster recovery, employ strong security by default, and provide
              performance that is similar to that of local storage under numerous
              circumstances. Further, such systems are self-repairing, providing automatic
              serviceability and maintainability.
     The research  envisions a utility
              model in which users pay a monthly fee to one particular "utility provider"
              while consuming resources from many providers. The utility providers buy and
              sell capacity amongst themselves in direct analogy to the deregulated electric
              industry. A demand for capacity or bandwidth in one region of the country would
              encourage entrepreneurs to bring additional services online. One of the key
              requirements for such utilities is nomadic data, i.e., data that is free to
              migrate and be replicated anywhere within the system. Nomadic data lends itself
              to fluid analogies (data is free to "flow" wherever it is needed) and permits
              flexible exploitation of spatial locality. This property is in contrast to
              existing distributed systems that confine their data to a small number of
              physical servers within the network.
     Given the fluid analogy, the EWASS
              prototype described within this proposal is called the "Oceanic Data Utility"
              or "OceanStore".  The project outlines five assumptions for the OceanStore
              utility:
     (1) The "Mostly Well-Connected" Assumption: Most of the network
              is comprised of high-bandwidth links
and periods of disconnection are brief -
              even at the leaves.
      (2) The "Promiscuous Caching" Assumption: Data can
              be cached anywhere, anytime.
      (3)The "Operations-based Interface with
              Conflict Resolution" Assumption: Applications utilize an operation-based
              interface that is oriented toward conflict resolution.
      (4)The "Untrusted
              Infrastructure" Assumption: The infrastructure is fundamentally untrusted. This
              means that only ciphertext is stored in the network.
      (5)The "Responsible
              Party" Assumption: Each repository of data has at least one responsible party
              that is charged with knowing where the data actually resides and ensuring that
              it is properly replicated.
     These assumptions define the OceanStore
              infrastructure. In constructing this infrastructure, the research proposes to
              utilize a number of technologies, some of them mature, others relatively new:

                   (1)Organization of data as a series of "pools" of information. Each pool
              will include a randomized tree indexing structures (e.g., treaps) connected via
              Bloom-filter summaries.
      (2)Transaction-like operation structures to
              describe updates and permit infrastructure-side conflict resolution (similar to
              Bayou), combined with incremental cryptographic techniques to operate directly
              on encrypted information in the infrastructure.
      (3)Use of
              erasure-tolerant coding and replication to enhance the survivability of data.

                  (4)  Online Introspection to detect and exploit patterns of access in order
              to optimize the position of nomadic data.
     The research proposes two
              distinct phases of OceanStore prototype, one read-only, the other complete with
              conflict resolution. This phased style of implementation permits incremental
              testing and analysis of components of the system that are somewhat orthogonal.
              Further, we propose to use the OceanStore infrastructure to enhance education
              at Berkeley in several ways. Among them:
      (1) Collaborate with other
              faculty to combine the persistent storage system with experimental wireless
              infrastructures in order to exploit online content during class and to provide
              novel faculty/student interactions at nonstandard venues such as cafes.
     
              (2) Provide a fundamental infrastructure for undergraduates and graduates
              exploiting the consequences of ubiquitous computing.
     OceanStore provides
              a foundation for ubiquitous computing, and as such will doubtless have a major
              impact on educational paradigms.

