Title       : A Systems Ecology Approach to Life-Cycle Product Assessment and Process Design
               (TSE99-H)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a9985554

Award Number: 9985554
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267381             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bhavik R. Bakshi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1238,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9985554  Bakshi   This work is motivated by the paradigm of industrial ecology
              which suggests that to achieve environmental sustainability, industrial systems
              should emulate ecological systems.  The research is based on considering energy
              to be the primary driving force for the development and health of ecological
              systems.  Thus, the ecological contribution into any product or service can be
              measured in terms of the amount of energy required directly or indirectly for
              its manufacture.  This embodied energy, or emergy, is a measure of the
              ecological resources invested in any product or service, or its ecological
              cost.  The objective of this project is to develop new methods for life cycle
              product assessment and process design based on emergy analysis.  Emergy-based
              life cycle assessment (LCA) of products will combine the features of LCA with
              emergy analysis to result in a method that overcomes the shortcomings of these
              techniques individually.  The resulting method will combine ecological and
              economic considerations, and provide ways of comparing the environmental and
              economic sustainability of various products.  
New approaches will be
              developed for an ecologically-based valuation of environmental impacts.  The
              existing hierarchical approach to process design will be augmented by
              evaluating the ecological cost at each scale of the hierarchy.  Such an
              approach will also be developed for retrofitting existing processes to minimize
              ecological impact or to meet sustainability standards.  A mathematical
              programming approach to design will use the economic and ecological objective
              functions together, with sustainability requirements posed as constraints.  New
              teaching material for introducing life cycle thinking into the chemical
              engineering curriculum will be developed, forming the basis for a new course in
              ecologically sensitive process engineering. This grant is made pursuant to the
              NSF/EPA Partnership competition Technologies for a Sustainable Environment.
              ***

