Title       : CAREER: Information Visualization Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a9985136

Award Number: 9985136
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashim Garg agarg@cse.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research goal of this project is to develop more effective techniques for
              visualizing information that will facilitate and enhance information-processing
              tasks. In particular, the project develops four novel techniques, for: (1)
              constructing better graph visualizations, (2) detecting clusters in a database
              using visualization, (3) constructing visualizations faster using
              previsualizations, and (4) compressing 3D models. The graph visualization
              technique uses a novel graph-decomposition-based approach to construct more
              effective graph visualizations, which can help the user to more easily
              understand the information represented in a graph. The cluster detection
              technique allows the user to visually detect clusters in a database by
              visualizing its contents, and can be a useful aid in datamining applications.
              The previsualization-based technique can significantly reduce the average time
              needed to construct visualizations in interactive applications, where
              visualizations are repeatedly constructed, by storing precomputed and
              previously computed visualizations in a previsualization cache, and checking
              the cache first before constructing a new visualization from the scratch. This
              technique can help in developing visualizations systems with better response
              times. The technique for compressing 3D models uses the concept of canonical
              ordering to efficiently compress 3D polygonal models, and reduce their space
              requirements and transmission times over a network. The educational goals of
              this project consist of teaching a course on information visualization,
              developing the corresponding course-material, advising graduate students,
              mentoring undergraduate students and initiating them to research in information
              visualization. The results of this project will benefit researchers and users
              in the areas of datamining, computer graphics and interactive visualization,
              and in applications such as software engineering, where information can be
              represented using graphs. 
