Title       : Interfacial Compositions and Polypeptide Topologies in Surfactant Assemblies:
               New Applications of the Chemical Trapping Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2002 
File        : a9985774

Award Number: 9985774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence S. Romsted romsted@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this renewal award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is
              continuing support for the work of Dr. Laurence S. Romsted in the Department of
              Chemistry at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, NJ.   Dr. Romsted's work is
              focused on understanding the species concentrations and chemical reactions that
              take place at the oil-water interface of micelles, microemulsions, and
              vesicles.   Part of the rationale for doing the work is to understand the
              behavior of antioxidants at interfaces of this type.  Lipid peroxidation, which
              is decreased by the presence of antioxidants, takes place in a number of
              diseases and is also involved in the formation of off-flavors and odors in
              foods as they spoil.

Dr. Romsted has developed a method for studying the
              concentrations and orientations of molecules at oil-water interfaces using
              aggregate bound arenediazonium ion as a trap for weakly basic nucleophiles,
              such as water, hydroxyl group, halide and carboxylate ions, the N and O atoms
              of peptides, and the head groups of ionic and nonionic surfactants.   He has
              used a variety of methods to probe the interfacial region, including NMR,
              UV/Vis spectroscopy, fluorescence, IR, and EPR, and shown that his trapping
              method gives complementary and sometimes unique information not available by
              the other methods.
