Title       : CAREER: Team-Based Research as an Integrative Teaching Tool for Secondary,
               Post-Secondary and Graduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a9985077

Award Number: 9985077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301348             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin K. Schulte Pyschulte@alpha.ulm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana - Monroe
	      700 University Avenue
	      Monroe, LA  712090001    318/342-1010

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1096,1187,9125,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
This project explores the fundamental mechanisms by which human central
              nervous system nicotinic and serotonin receptors interact with endogenous
              compounds as well as therapeutic drugs and drugs of abuse.   This project is
              unique in that it utilizes general anesthetics to probe the receptor's
              molecular structure. Anesthetics exert a wide range of effects on these
              receptors, displaying different effects on different receptors.  Using cloned
              receptors and modern molecular techniques, this project will identify the
              differences between these receptors at a molecular level that give rise to
              these differential effects.  By utilizing this information, an improved
              understanding of the relationship between the site of drug interaction and the
              functional effects on the receptor can be achieved.   The focus on general
              anesthetics increases the scope of the project by enabling the mapping of
              several different functional regions of the receptor.  These functional regions
              may provide additional targets for drug development, thus permitting a "fine
              tuning" of the receptors function via novel pharmaceutical agents.
 New drug
              types developed as a result of this research would be potentially useful in the
              treatment and prevention of a number of human diseases including Alzheimer's
              disease, Parkinson's disease, age associated memory impairment, nausea
              associated with chemotherapy and withdrawal from drugs of abuse.  Since this
              project investigates fundamental structural and functional relationships of
              receptor proteins, this research will also increase our knowledge of other
              similar proteins - thus facilitating a broader understanding of protein/drug
              interactions.  In addition to scientific benefits, the educational impact of
              this project is also substantial.  Students from widely different educational
              backgrounds will conduct much of the proposed research.  High school teachers,
              high school students, undergraduate college students and graduate students will
              work as a team to accomplish the research goals of the project.  The
              composition of the research team is designed to establish improved ties between
              secondary and post-secondary education and encourage high school students to
              pursue careers in biomedical research. 

	

