Title       : Monoterpenoid Pheromone Production in Coleoptera: Characterization of Geranyl
               Diphosphate Synthase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9985828

Award Number: 9985828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Blomquist blomquis@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Welch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Claus Tittiger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Insects in the order Coleoptera are among the most destructive pests in the
              United States.  Bark beetles are responsible for losses of billions of cubic
              feet of coniferous standing timber each year in North America.  The cotton boll
              weevil Anthonomas grandis accounts for over $300 million average annual yield
              loss and control costs.  The bark beetles and the boll weevil are unique among
              animals in that both produce monoterpenes, C10 pheromone components that are
              required for mating and reproduction.  The long term goal of this project is to
              develop new and effective pest management tactics based on insect pheromone
              systems.  To fully exploit pheromone-mediated bark beetle and cotton boll
              weevil behavior from a management standpoint, a thorough understanding of the
              origin, expression and activity of these signals is important.  Recent work in
              the Blomquist/Tittiger laboratory has demonstrated that the male pine engraver
              beetle, Ips pini, synthesizes ipsdienol de novo, and that production is
              controlled by juvenile hormone (JH) which induces
              3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (HMG-R) and HMG-CoA synthase (HMG-S)
              transcript levels.  Another key enzyme in monoterpenoid pheromone production is
              geranyl diphosphate synthase (GPPS), which controls the chain length of the
              isoprenoid product. Work is proposed to gain an understanding of the regulation
              of the activity of this enzyme in relationship to pheromone production and to
              clone, sequence and model the enzyme. 
	The studies outlined in this proposal
              are significant because of their impact on isoprenoid biochemistry and basic
              insect molecular biology.  It is becoming clear that plant monoterpenes are
              synthesized entirely via the non-mevalonate pathway, making Ips spp. and A.
              grandis relatively novel systems for the study of the regulation of
              mevalonate-based monoterpenoid biosynthesis.  Furthermore, there are few other
              insect models in which the molecular biology of isoprenyl diphosphate synthases
              have been studied, and none of these have involved GPPS or modeling studies. 
              Also, none of these other models has a monoterpenoid end product that can be
              readily recovered in mg quantities as is the case with I. pini and A. grandis. 
              Finally, Ips pini and A. grandis pheromone biosynthesis, and specifically the
              transcription of key isoprenoid enzymes, represents a non-developmental model
              system for the study of JH regulated gene expression.  This work builds upon
              and expands the pioneering work on the molecular biological studies of insect
              pheromone regulation performed in the Blomquist/Tittiger laboratories.  

