Title       : Regulation of Neuron Development by a Nuclear Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a9985734

Award Number: 9985734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253886             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce C. Wightman wightman@muhlenberg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth R. McCain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Muhlenberg College
	      24th and Chew Streets
	      Allentown, PA  18104    215/433-3191

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              During nervous system development, neurons are generated from embryonic
              precursor cells. Subsequently, neurons diverge from each other to create myriad
              neuronal cell types, each with  distinct identities. For example, neurons
              involved in smell are quite different from those that function in regulation of
              breathing. Thus neurons come to differ from each other in terms of physiology,
              neurotransmitter expression, axonal morphology, and synaptic connectivity. The
              mechanisms by which individual neuron identities are specified are not well
              understood, but are known to involve the activity of proteins that "turn on"
              and "off" other genes. 
	
The objective of this research is to increase
              understanding of the process of specification of neuron identity by studying
              the fax-1 gene of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. fax-1 encodes a nuclear
              hormone receptor protein, the type of protein that turns on and off other
              genes. When the fax-1 gene is mutated, some neurons don't form properly.
              

The nematode is an excellent model system in which to study the mechanisms
              of nervous system development by virtue of its well-characterized 302-cell
              nervous system and its virtually completely-sequenced genome. Other molecules
              that function in invertebrate nervous system development have been shown to
              perform similar functions in vertebrates. A human nuclear hormone receptor
              related to fax-1 has been identified and shown to be expressed specifically in
              human photoreceptor cells. Therefore, a study of fax-1 in C. elegans may inform
              on the function of a human nervous system-specific gene.
	
This study will
              investigate the molecular mechanism of specification of neuron identity by
              identifying some of the genes that are regulated by fax-1. First, the DNA
              sequence to which the FAX-1 protein binds will be defined. Second, the genes
              that are regulated by fax-1 will be identified through two major experimental
              approaches. In one approach specific DNA fragments to which the FAX-1 protein
              binds are identified in a yeast-based system. In a second approach, genes that
              are turned on or off in response to fax-1 are identified using state-of-the-art
              DNA microarray technology.
	
This research will advance our knowledge about
              the basic biological question of how different neuronal cell types are
              specified and may define a new developmental mechanism that is conserved from
              nematodes to humans. An additional major goal is to advance undergraduate
              education by giving students primary roles in a molecular genetic research
              project that involves both "classical" recombinant DNA and current genomic
              technologies.

