Title       : Role of FAK in Migrating Cells During Sea Urchin Embryogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9985756

Award Number: 9985756
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279265             (Estimated)
Investigator: Merrill B. Hille mbhille@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Many cell movements depend on dynamic interactions between
              the
extracellular matrix and focal adhesion protein complexes, which
              anchor
the intracellular cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix.  The
              proposal
is to study the regulatory role of focal adhesion kinase or FAK in
              the
morphogenesis of the translucent sea urchin embryo. 

     (1) The
              initial goal is to determine in which cells and types of cell
movements FAK
              found.  Confocal microscopy will allow three-dimension
reconstruction of the
              embryos.  Preliminary studies show that FAK is found
in the thickening vegetal
              plate of blastula embryos, in primary mesenchyme
cells migrating in the
              blastocoel, in secondary mesenchyme cells
responsible for fusion of the
              archenteron with the oral plate, and in the
thickening animal pole from which
              the pluteus arms extend. 

     (2) The second goal will be to determine the
              functional role of FAK by
microinjecting into embryos a construct of FAK that
              contains only the
targeting domain.  The hypothesis is that this domain will
              compete with
endogenous FAK and result in abnormal gastrulation by slowing or
              aborting
the normal movements of cells.

     (3) Sea urchin embryos have at
              least three isoforms of FAK. The goal is to
determine whether these isoforms
              of FAK are differentially expressed in
sea urchin embryos and when each is
              expressed.  This information could be
significant since multiple isoforms of
              FAK have also been isolated from
Xenopus and mouse embryos, but the function
              of the various isoforms is not
known. 

     (4) The last goal is to
              determine how focal adhesion complexes dynamically
change in embryos. mRNAs
              and cDNAs of FAK-green fluorescent protein
constructs will be injected into
              eggs to watch the dynamics of focal
adhesion formation in motile cells of the
              embryos.  These observations
will be done with confocal microscopy in real
              time. 

     Significance: Although the roles of focal adhesions during the
              migration
of embryonic fibroblast cells in culture are being extensively
              studied,
little has been published on the roles of focal adhesions
              during
embryogenesis and none in living embryos.  This proposal introduces
              new
technology to address fundamental mechanisms of cell movements in
              embryos
that have not been studied in such a dynamic and complex system. 
              



