Title       : CAREER: The Effect of Mechanical Loading History on Gene Expression During
               Distraction Osteogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a9985500

Award Number: 9985500
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Harten   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      New Jersey Medical School, MSB C
	      Newark, NJ  07103    973/972-7090

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9985500
Harten
The objective of this proposal is to examine the effect of
              specific mechanical loading conditions on the expression of genes critical to
              the bone repair process.  A rabbit distraction osteogenesis model coupled with
              highly controlled loading conditions will serve as the experimental model for
              this study.  The genetic analysis will consist of quantitative reverse
              transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to assess differences in gene
              expression, and in situ hybridization studies to localize the cells responsible
              for producing the genes.  Further analyses examining cellular proliferating
              patterns, histological changes, as well as alterations in the downstream
              mechanical and micromechanical properties of the regenerating tissues will be
              performed.  Finally, an analytical dynamic finite element model will be
              developed to predict the loading conditions in the tissues in response to the
              different loading protocols.  These results will be compared to the
              experimental data in order to formulate the relationships between tissue level
              stresses and strains and the production of genes that are key to the process of
              bone repair.

Integrated with this research plan are specific educational
              goals.  The PI intends to enhance his current orthopaedic resident teaching
              activities by incorporating new presentation media, develop new courses for the
              medical student curriculum at his institution, and continue with the
              development of new biomedical engineering courses at Rutgers University.  The
              proposed research plan will also strengthen these teaching activities by
              providing a real world context to the basic science material covered in these
              courses.  Additionally the proposed research plan will provide research
              opportunities for at least 3 graduate students.  The skills and education
              gained by the students through this experience will be invaluable as they
              prepare to enter the biomedical job market.

This research plan will also
              provide educational opportunities for at least three other groups of
              individuals.  Medical students and residents will also be involved with the
              execution of these experiments.  The experience gained by these individuals
              will become very important for them as they progress to the next step in their
              education.  Local high school students will also benefit from this research
              activity.  Through a program run by the New Jersey Medical School, students
              from minority districts who have been identified as having "college potential"
              are given the opportunity to work in a research setting.  This project will
              support at least two of these young people per year over its four year
              timeline.

Through the synthesis of the data generated in the various aspects
              of the study, the objective of this research project is to refine our current
              concepts regarding the mechanobiology of bone.  At present, our understanding
              of this phenomenon is very qualitative.  The ultimate goal of this project is
              to develop quantifiable relationships that may be used to predict and regulate
              the bone formation process.  Such algorithms may be useful in understanding and
              treating clinical pathologies, as well as advancing the basic science of
              skeletal tissue differentiation.

