Title       : CAREER: Informal Tools for Multimodal User Interface Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9985111

Award Number: 9985111
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Landay landay@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year of funding of a 4 year continuing award. Multimodal user
              interfaces are likely to be the predominant interface of the future. These
              interfaces can take advantage of a wide variety of human perceptual and motor
              abilities, such as speech and gesture, to achieve a more natural human computer
              communication. This project addresses the current difficulty in building such
              interfaces. The P1 will create new interactive tools for designing multimodal
              user interfaces targeted at a range of devices, from the palmtop to the desktop
              to wall sized displays. These tools will support an iterative design
              methodology which  supports the informal techniques designers currently use in
              the early stages of design, such as sketching, storyboarding, and "Wizard of
              Oz". Programming by demonstration will allow specification of events that are
              not screen based, such as speech I/O or body gesture input. The goal is to
              allow designers to rapidly create "rough cuts" of their ideas, which can be
              quickly tested and modified. When ready, the designer can use these tools to
              generate user interface code for a variety of devices. This code can then be
              extended with the final interface details and application code. As an example
              application, the PI will apply the new tools to develop a set of informal
              presentation tools for classroom lectures. He will carry out both informal and
              controlled experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of the design tools and to
              inforin iterative refinement of both the tools and the example application.
              This research will result in new techniques for specifying visual and nonvisual
              input, which will be applicable to both multimodal and unimodal interface
              design tools, so that people can more easily create interfaces than is
              currently the case. The findings will also impact systems for people with
              disabilities (especially the vision impaired), as well as for mainstream users
              working in non traditional settings such as mobile and wearable computing.
