Title       : Ceria-Based Water-Gas Shift Catalysts for Fuel Cell Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9985305

Award Number: 9985305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300629             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Flytzani-Stephanopoulos mflytzan@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard Saltsburg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Proposal Title: 	Ceria-based Water Gas Shift Catalysts for Fuel
              Cell Applications
Proposal Number:		CTS-9985305
Principal Investigator:	Maria
              Flytzani-Stephanopoulos
Institution:			Tufts University


A new class of
              highly active and stable catalysts for the water-gas shift reaction will be
              studied.  In preliminary work a cerium oxide-based catalyst containing a small
              amount of a non-precious metal (e.g., Cu or Ni) has been identified as most
              promising for a low-temperature water-gas shift reactor of practical interest
              to polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells.  The focus is on developing a
              better understanding of the activity of the new ceria-based catalysts.  The
              origin of the synergy between the metal and ceria for the shift reaction will
              be investigated.  The effect is magnified when nanoscale metal/metal oxide
              particles are stabilized on ceria nonoparticles.  Whether the metal-ceria
              interface or the metal particle size controls the activity will be
              investigated.  Layered synthetic microstructures will be prepared by vapor
              deposition of catalyst and support followed by photolithography and etching to
              produce geometrically defined, nonporous, supported catalysts.  The catalyst
              structures will be characterized by various techniques including electron
              microscopy, X-ray diffraction, and atomic force microscopy to examine the
              surface.  A practical, highly active, low temperature water gas shift catalyst
              will facilitate implementation of liquid-fuel powered fuel cell vehicles.



