Title       : CAREER: Innovative Research and Teaching in Modern Welded Structures Engineering
               and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2000        
File        : a9985170

Award Number: 9985170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjeev K. Khanna   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1045,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Welded structural members are a very important factor in our economy and are
              widely used in the construction and transportation industries.  Despite the
              vast application of welding technology, students in engineering (especially
              mechanical and civil) are seldom formally educated in the science of welding
              and its applications.  Moreover, there is a need to establish the linkage
              between mechanics, materials science, and structures in the context of welded
              structures in the engineering curricula.  This proposal seeks to remedy such
              deficiencies that currently exist in the education of engineers. 

This
              project has a multi-faceted and multi-disciplinary research thrust.  It will
              focus on the prediction of durability of spot welded sheet metal structures and
              their degradation during their life cycles.  These structures are very widely
              used in the transportation industry, especially the automobile industry. 
              Prediction of the remaining service life of an automobile body due to fatigue,
              fractures, residual stresses, etc., and the interaction between these phenomena
              is challenging and little understood.  For example, we seriously lack in the
              understanding of the mechanical response and durability of spot-welded sheet
              metal structures under dynamic service loads.  A fundamental understanding and
              development of failure criteria and design criteria for such structures will be
              immensely beneficial.  


