Title       : Theory of Fluids, Phase Transitions, and Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2002   
File        : a9985787

Award Number: 9985787
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $518800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin Widom bw24@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ben Widom of Cornell University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to continue his research on fluids, phase
              transitions, and interfaces.  He will employ statistical mechanical methods to
              study the properties of liquids and liquid mixtures, the phase transitions that
              such fluids undergo, and the thermodynamics and structural transformations of
              the interfaces between fluid phases.  Five research topics will be explored: 1)
              modeling of interfacial tensions of binary phase-separated liquid mixtures; 2)
              an extension of a one-dimensional model for hydrophobic interaction to higher
              dimensions and more water-like solvent; 3) a theoretical treatment of a recent
              unexpected experimental observation regarding the two-stage wetting transition
              for the temperature dependence of hydrocarbon spreading on water; 4) a study to
              determine the effect of the presence of surfactants on the fluctuations in the
              structure of interfaces; 5) a collaborative study with researchers from the
              Netherlands to analyze experimental results on mixed colloids and
              polymers.

Both in the laboratory and in industrial practice it is often
              necessary to predict the interfacial tensions of phase-separated liquid
              mixtures.  This research project address the interfacial tensions in
              two-component mixtures.  The effective attraction between two nonpolar,
              hydrophobic molecules in a  water solution is a fundamental and much studied
              phenomenon in physical chemistry and biology.  A recently proposed model
              suggests an inverse relation between the range and strength of the hydrophobic
              attraction, and this work will extend that model to higher dimensions and
              include more "water-like" solvent behavior.  Collaborative work with
              experimentalists will analyze results on mixed colloids and polymers.
