Title       : State-Resolved and Bond-Selected Bimolecular Reactions in Gases and Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a9985317

Award Number: 9985317
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $501000             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Fleming Crim fcrim@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Fleming Crim of the University of Wisconsin is supported by the
              Experimental Physical Chemistry program to perform experimental studies on
              state-resolved bimolecular reactions in gases and liquids.    Specific
              vibrations will be studied that lead to chemical reactions.   This field has
              been active for some twenty years, and Professor Crim's work represents a
              transition in this field from gas phase to liquid phase studies.  The most
              detailed information on vibrations in chemical reactions comes from studies of
              gases, but most industrial processes occur in the condensed phase.  This
              proposal seeks to extend the principles about selective vibrational excitation
              chemistry learned from gas phase work to liquids.  The PI proposes to study the
              reaction of cyanide with methanol, acetonitrile and propylene carbonate using
              femtosecond IR absorption spectroscopy, learning about rates and product
              states, and then to add vibrational excitation to drive the reaction.   A
              successful outcome of this proposal would be demonstration of different liquid
              phase bimolecular reaction rates depending on the vibrational excitation
              imparted to the reactants -- and a mechanistic understanding of the
              differences.  In addition, development of gas phase methodology for more
              complex molecules will be continued by adding new excitation and detection
              capabilities.   

Understanding how vibrations of molecules affect their
              chemistry will allow control of the course of chemical reactions.  Successful
              control of chemical reactions using light could have exciting implications in
              industrial synthesis, reducing the need for toxic catalysts or solvents.

