Title       : Career: Electronic Structure Measurements of Strongly Correlated Electronic
               Systems in the Time, Energy, and Momentum Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a9985492

Award Number: 9985492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel S. Dessau dessau@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9985492
Dessau

This is a CAREER award to a young faculty member at the
              University of Colorado who plans to study the electronic structure and physics
              of novel electronic systems, with particular emphasis on the high Tc
              superconductors.  The project investigates the extension of angle-resolved
              photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) using novel pump-probe techniques for
              measuring the unfilled density of states of materials near the Fermi level,
              complementary to standard ARPES.  This technique gives the momentum-resolved
              electronic structure of a solid, information that can not be obtained by any
              other means.  The data should be helpful for formulating theories of the
              mechanism of the superconductivity in these novel materials.  Integrated with
              this research is an educational plan that will add to the involvement of
              students at all levels in coursework and
research, enhance student
              communication activities, and include peer instruction.  The PI will develop a
              special topics class in analytical techniques.
%%%
This CAREER award to a
              young faculty member at the University of Colorado supports research to explore
              the electronic structure and physics of highly correlated electron systems. 
              One question that the research will attempt to address is, "What causes the
              superconductivity in the high temperature superconductors?"  Although these
              materials have been studied for over ten years, the reasons they behave the way
              they do are still open to debate. The major experimental technique utilized
              will be angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) which directly gives
              unique information about the electronic structure of a solid.
Integrated with
              this research is an educational plan that includes all types of students:
              undergraduate, graduate, physics majors, and non-science majors.  Alternate
              teaching methods including small discussion groups and peer instruction will be
              implemented at the undergraduate level.  A special topics course in analytical
              techniques will be developed for graduate students. For all students an
              emphasis will be placed on developing problem solving and communication
              skills.
***


