Title       : CAREER: Energy-Filtered STM: A Novel Technique for Imaging and Spectroscopy of
               Single Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a9985178

Award Number: 9985178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320880             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Sutter psutter@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This integrated education and research project is aimed at developing scanning
              tunneling microscopy (STM) instrumentation that will provide chemical
              specificity by measuring inelastic scattering of tunneling electrons that
              undergo energy losses characteristic of specific surface chemical bonding
              arrangements.  The goal is to develop a novel substrate structure comprising a
              superlattice energy analyzer which together with the development of STM tips
              from semiconductor materials will make possible the detection of inelastically
              scattered carriers and the suppression of a large background of electrons that
              do not scatter when they tunnel through specific surface adsorbate molecular
              structures.  The education project focuses on student research and design
              needed to advance the STM instrumentation development.  Advising and mentoring
              student research, course development and outreach that includes stimulating
              interest in science for both students and families through the Denver Museum of
              Natural History are the central activities in the overall integrated research
              and education plan.
%%%
This well integrated research and education project
              will provide student training in an important area of atomic and molecular
              level characterization and manipulation that serve for nanoscience and
              nanotechnology.  These areas are highly relevant to applied science and
              engineering, and crucial to advancing the U.S. position in the modern high
              technology world.  Students trained in these areas will gain significant
              advantages in the overall competition for high-powered industrial jobs.
***

