Title       : CAREER: Tunable Monolithic MEMS Elements for Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a9985142

Award Number: 9985142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman C. Tien   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Tunable monolithic inductor and capacitor (LC) circuits for use in miniature
              wireless transceivers will be developed using microelectromechanical systems
              (MEMS) technology.  Smaller, higher performing, and less-costly integrated
              systems are the goal of wireless personal communication systems (PCS). 
              Advances in nanofabrication technology are enabling the creation of complex
              mechanical structures such as inductors (L), and tunable capacitors (C) that
              can be monolithically integrated on silicon and thus reduce the number of
              off-chip discrete elements.  A copper-encapsulated polysilicon spiral inductor
              suspended over a cavity in silicon has been fabricated and achieved a quality
              factor (Q) of 36 at 5 GHz.  Through this new fabrication technology of
              integrated polysilicon and bulk silicon micromachining, other high-performance
              rf (radio-frequency) elements will be developed.  Among them are parallel-plate
              variable capacitors tuned by microactuators, transformers, and tunable LC
              filter circuits. The fabrication and microactuator technologies to be developed
              will have far reaching benefit to the MEMS and nanotechnology community by
              enabling new classes of devices in areas beyond wireless communications.

The
              success of the MEMS field depends not only on new enabling technologies, but
              also on the education and training of a pool of skilled engineers and
              researchers.  As MEMS open new markets, and with the growing efforts in
              nanotechnology, a critical need for MEMS-trained engineers will develop.  The
              MEMS curriculum development will involve refinement of the senior-level
              undergraduate MEMS course; establishment of a new MEMS project design course;
              and the building of MEMS instructional infrastructure, specifically an
              Instructional Laboratory for MEMS characterization, simulation and design that
              will facilitate cross-disciplinary exchange.  The interdisciplinary nature of
              MEMS makes it an ideal environment for the training of a new generation of
              students who will receive exposure to a broad range of concepts 

