Title       : Theoretical Chemistry Methodologies to Generate Thermodynamic Properties for
               Chemical Process Simulation and Pollutant Behavior Prediction (TSE99-G)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a9985574

Award Number: 9985574
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Goddard wag@wag.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mario -. Blanco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Seinfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1238,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              William Goddard, Mario Blanco, and John Seinfeld of the California Institute of
              Technology are supported by the Division of Chemistry, the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities, and the Division of Chemical and Transport
              Systems to develop theoretical methodologies which generate thermodynamic
              properties for use in chemical process simulation and pollutant behavior
              prediction.  This grant is made under the NSF/EPA Partnership for Environmental
              Research (Technology for a Sustainable Environment).  This research will
              integrate quantum mechanics, molecular dynamics, and statistical mechanics into
              the next generation of chemical process simulation and design technology. 
              Needed thermodynamic data, such as excess free energies, activity coefficients,
              and phase diagrams, will be accurately provided by first-principles molecular
              simulations of aqueous mixtures of organic solvents.

Efficiency in chemical
              manufacturing is greatly dependent on the quality of the thermodynamic data
              employed during the chemical process design phase.  Due to the enormous number
              of possible binary and multicomponent mixtures present in a chemical process,
              such data are often unavailable.  Recent advances in atomistic simulations,
              combined with statistical models for predicting thermodynamic properties of
              mixtures, will lead to a new approach of achieving pollution prevention through
              more optimal design of chemical processes.
