Title       : Classical Combinatorics: An International Conference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9985949

Award Number: 9985949
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : January 1,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Doron Zeilberger zeilberg@math.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron J. Robertson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The term `Classical Combinatorics,' coined by Dominique Foata, is
              roughly the combinatorial analog of `Classical Analysis'.  Today it is better
              known as enumerative and algebraic combinatorics.  One of the fastest-growing
              areas of modern mathematics, it touches upon many areas of mathematics and
              science, as well as forming one of the foundations of computer science.  This
              conference will emphasize the more classical aspects of enumerative
              combinatorics, like permutation statistics, tableaux, q-series, words,
              combinatorial special function theory, commutation monoids, and related
              subjects, as well as their relation to computer science, physics, and
              statistics.  Classical Combinatorics is applied in the theory of algorithms,
              where permutations and tableaux form the theoretical foundation for Sorting and
              Searching, in the theory of parallel programming, statistical physics, and many
              other places.  To cite just one very recent example, the Foata-Zeilberger
              extension of Bass's evaluation of the Ihara Zeta function of a graph was used
              in knot theory, by Lin and Wang, to great advantage.  The investigators and
              their colleagues study various aspects of Classical Combinatorics and use
              conferences as a key tool in the proliferation of new research in this
              area.

One of the goals of Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of
              studying how discrete collections of objects can be arranged.  The behavoir of
              discrete systems is extremely important to modern communications.  For example,
              the design of large networks, such as those occurring in telephone systems, and
              the design of algorithms in computer science deal with discrete sets of
              objects, and this makes use of combinatorial research.  This conference will
              bring together leaders in the field and emerging researchers to discuss new
              ideas in the field of Combinatorics.

