Title       : CAREER: An Integrated Framework for Data-Adaptive Representations and Algorithms
               in Visual Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a9985482

Award Number: 9985482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329749             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ioannis A. Kakadiaris ioannisk@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a four-year continuing award. The goal of this
              CAREER project is to develop the theoretical framework, algorithms, and
              computational tools for improved data representation, analysis, and
              visualization. To that end, we propose to develop data-adaptive algorithms for
              both low-level signal processing tasks (e.g., interpolation) and high-level
              data interrogation tasks. For the high-level tasks, we propose to develop
              hybrid representations for volumetric data (multiresolution volumetric
              deformable models) that will be useful for both detection and simulation. The
              proposed representations and algorithms will be tested on 3D MR data (breast
              cancer detection and surgery planning) and seismic data (detection of sequence
              stratigraphy derived objects). The educational component seeks to address some
              important challenges in the effective teaching and training of students in the
              Visual Computing field. In particular, the educational goals of this CAREER
              plan are the following: (1) to promote an interdisciplinary Visual Computing
              education at the University of Houston by fostering cross-departmental teaching
              activities, (ii) to provide a practitioner's perspective in Visual Computing
              education and to address "real-world" problems in the Visual Computing
              Curriculum, and (iv) to attract incoming students into Visual Computing and to
              motivate high-school students towards the sciences. A project on a prototype
              minimal invasive heart surgery simulator will be used as a demonstration
              paradigm for the interdisciplinary teaching of Visual Computing. Domain
              expertise and domain data will be provided through close collaborations with
              the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center and Veritas Exploration Services.

