Title       : High-Temperature Water as a Medium for Industrial Chemistry (TSE99-F)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a9985456

Award Number: 9985456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237342             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip E. Savage psavage@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Water near its critical point is an environmentally benign medium for organic
              chemical reactions.  Additionally the properties of water (dielectric constant,
              density, viscosity, etc.) near its critical point (called high temperature
              water - HTW) are strong functions of temperature and pressure, which offers the
              possibility of manipulating these variables to optimize the properties of this
              reaction medium for a given chemical transformation. The use of HTW as a medium
              for organic chemical synthesis, rather than organic solvents, is thus one
              approach to pollution prevention.  The PI's long-range goal is to determine
              reaction mechanisms and quantitative kinetics in HTW to assess the economic
              feasibility of doing chemical synthesis is HTW.

The key objectives of this
              project are to determine the reaction networks for two different organic
              chemical reaction systems in HTW, to obtain quantitative reaction rate laws for
              each reaction network, and to identify reaction mechanisms consistent with the
              kinetics.  The systems chosen for investigation are the reactions of
              cyclohexanol and the partial oxidation of xylenes.  Cyclohaxonol and its
              reaction products can undergo different reactions (dehydration,
              dehydrogenation, rearrangement and oxidation) in HTW, so the results would be
              generally relevant to a broad range of potential chemistries in HTW.  The
              catalytic partial oxidation of xylenes to the corresponding carboxylic acids is
              done on a very large scale (billions of pounds annually) commercially to
              produce terephthalic acid and phthalic anhydride, which are important
              intermediates in the plastics industry.  Commercial processes for terephthalic
              acid production currently use high-pressure, high-temperature acetic acid,
              which is corrosive, as the reaction medium.  The kinetics in HTW are needed to
              assess economic feasibility of this alternative solvent.

