Title       : Clathrate Hydrates in Water-in-CO2 Microemulsions - Exploratory Research on the
               Fundamental Concepts and Applications to Synthesis and Separations Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a9985598

Award Number: 9985598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay T. John vijay.john@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              V. Ramamurthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9985598
Vijay John, Tulane University

The research seeks to
              exploit the concept of clathrate hydrate formation in water-in CO2  for the
              design and enhanced operation of environmentally benign processes.  Clathrate
              hydrates are crystalline inclusion compounds of water and gas. Carbon dioxide
              is a hydrate forming gas and the thermodynamics of CO2  hydrate formation in
              bulk aqueous systems is well understood.  But the formation of clathrate
              hydrates in the water droplets of water-in-CO2 microemulsions is an entirely
              new concept and exploratory research will be conducted on the thermodynamics of
              the phenomenon.  The hypothesis is that hydrate formation in these systems will
              lead to a method of controlling the amount and properties of intramicellar
              solutes, with consequent applications in synthesis and separations processes. 
              The research will identify the phase behavior of clathrate hydrate formation in
              water-in-CO2 microemulsions and probe the microstructural environment through
              spectroscopy and scattering techniques.

Exploratory research on the
              applications of hydrate formation in the development of new and environmentally
              benign technologies will also be conducted as follows:

1. The use of hydrate
              formation in water-in-CO2 microemulsions to synthesize catalytic,
              semiconductor, and magnetic nanoparticles that have a uniform size
              distribution.  The hypothesis is that hydrate formation subsequent to particle
              and prevent further growth.

2. The development of separation technologies
              using molecular recognition agents such as the cyclodextrins solubilized in
              water-in-CO2 microemulsions and stabilized through hydrate formation.  These
              agents can then be used to enhance extraction into the gas phase.

3. The
              preparation of nanoparticles hydrogels in water-in-CO2 microemulsions as aided
              by the formation of clathrate hydrates.  Again, the formation of clathrate
              hydrates can be exploited to control micelle size, thereby allowing the
              formation of extremely small hydrogel particles that may have applications in
              drug delivery technologies.  We will also use the hydrate technology to
              stabilize enzyme activity in water-in-CO2 microemulsions. 

