Title       : Regulation of Intestinal Fructose Transport in Neonatal Rats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9985808

Award Number: 9985808
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309170             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronaldo P. Ferraris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      New Jersey Medical School, MSB C
	      Newark, NJ  07103    973/972-7090

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	At birth, placental nutrition ceases and enteral nutrition begins.  The small
              intestine abruptly acquires a new function: to absorb nutrients from milk. 
              Shortly thereafter, the small intestine in weaning mammals faces a new
              challenge: to synthesize different types or different numbers of transporters
              to match expected changes in concentrations of different types of nutrients
              from the diet.  How do intestinal cells make, and 'know' when to make, these
              transporters?  Unlike other cells, intestinal cells are directly exposed to
              environmental signals present in the intestinal lumen.  Hormones are known to
              regulate the appearance of intestinal enzymes, but their role in regulating
              intestinal nutrient transporters is not known.  What is the importance of
              dietary or luminal signals relative to hormonal signals in modulating nutrient
              transporters?  The long term objective of this project is to determine the
              mechanisms regulating intestinal nutrient transport during development. The
              intestinal fructose transporter GLUT5 is normally not made until after
              completion of weaning.  However, precocious introduction of its substrate,
              dietary fructose, induces the early appearance of this transporter.  GLUT5 will
              therefore be used as a model to evaluate the role of dietary and hormonal
              signals in modulating postnatal increases in intestinal nutrient transport. 
              This project will attempt to identify nutrient-responsive regulatory mechanisms
              controlling gut development, and to reprogram normal developmental patterns of
              absorption in order to allow the intestine to process nutrients at an earlier
              stage of development.  It will be important in furthering an understanding of
              mechanisms that control intestinal growth and maturation in premature infants. 
               Fructose is an increasingly important component in American diets, and studies
              on intestinal fructose absorption per se, which have lagged way behind those on
              glucose and amino acid transport, have major nutritional significance.  
