Title       : CAREER: Molecular Systematics of Ray-finned Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9985045

Award Number: 9985045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo Orti gorti1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9985045
Orti

The ray-finned fishes (Class Actinopterygii) comprise the
              largest group of living fishes, with more than 23,000 species. They are the
              most successful of all vertebrate classes and a key component to understanding
              the evolutionary radiation of vertebrates. Although a well-corroborated
              hypothesis of relationships among all major groups of ray-finned fishes is
              lacking, much progress towards a phylogenetic synthesis has been achieved by
              cladistic analysis of morphological characters of living and fossil taxa. In
              contrast, molecular systematic studies among major groups of ray-finned fishes
              have not kept pace with morphological studies. This project involves a
              large-scale effort to develop suitable molecular markers for higher-level
              systematics and to compile a large data set of DNA sequences for candidate
              nuclear genes, for at least 150 representative fish taxa. At the same time, an
              alternative strategy is also proposed whereby ten carefully selected fish
              mitochondrial genomes will be sequenced and phylogenetically compared to
              published sequences that already include 13 complete mitochondrial genomes of
              sharks and rays, lungfish, and other actinopterygians. The data generated by
              these two approaches will be used to study phylogenetic relationships among the
              major groups of ray-finned fishes and to improve our understanding of the major
              evolutionary transitions in the radiation of fishes. The existing morphological
              information will be brought together with the new molecular data for analysis.
              The research proposed should establish a sound framework of reference for
              future phylogenetic studies of fishes. The goal of the educational component of
              the project is to develop an integrated program in systematics in general with
              emphases in vertebrate zoology and molecular systematics, to enhance
              undergraduate and graduate learning of evolutionary biology.  A new five-week,
              hands-on laboratory course on molecular techniques for ecology and evolution
              will be developed. Application of both established and innovative teaching
              resources are proposed as a means to enhance student involvement in the
              learning process.   Active participation in cooperative learning groups,
              exploration and analysis of WWW resources, and critical evaluation of the
              primary literature are some of the proposed activities to complement more
              traditional teaching practices. Web sites for the courses are an integral part
              to achieving these goals.  The tight relationship between active research and
              the learning process will be emphasized throughout, steadily pursuing promising
              answers rather than final truths.  


