Title       : Studies on the Mechanism and Control of Enzyme Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a9985565

Award Number: 9985565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert J. Fromm hjfromm@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard B. Honzatko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9985565
Fromm
Adenylosuccinate synthetase, a ubiquitous enzyme, participates
              in two important metabolic pathways, the purine nucleotide cycle and the de
              novo biosynthesis of adenine nucleotides.  The former maintains ATP levels in
              active muscle tissue, whereas the latter provides essential precursors for RNA
              and DNA biosynthesis.  Even in organisms that lack a pathway for de novo purine
              biosynthesis, adenylosuccinate synthetase still plays a central role in salvage
              mechanisms for adenine nucleotides. This research seeks a detailed
              understanding of the structure-function relationships of the synthetases from
              Escherichia coli and from mouse.  Of central interest is the monomer-dimer
              subunit equilibrium of adenylosuccinate synthetases and its effect on enzyme
              activity.  Does IMP, one of the substrates of the synthetase, induce a
              transition from inactive monomers to active synthetase dimers, and if so, is
              this phenomenon a universal mechanism of regulation for all synthetases?  In
              addition, the mechanism by which stringent effectors influence activity of the
              E. coli enzyme is unsettled.  The stringent effect is a response by E. coli to
              conditions of stress, such as starvation, resulting in elevated levels of
              guanine nucleotides, which putatively inhibit adenylosuccinate synthetase and
              many other enzymes.  Is inhibition by some stringent effectors enhanced by the
              chemical action of adenylosuccinate synthetase, and do stringent effectors
              inhibit the synthetase by a single mechanism?  The synthetase-catalyzed
              reaction is second order with respect to the essential metal cation, yet in
              crystal structures only one Mg2+ is present, associated with GDP.  The second
              Mg2+ binds putatively to L-aspartate.  Experiments will be designed to test
              whether the a-carboxyl group of L-aspartate is an essential recognition element
              for the binding of the second Mg2+.  The synthetase catalyzes its overall
              reaction as a sequence of two partial reactions.  Experiments will determine
              whether the synthesis of 6-phosphoryl-IMP (first reaction) or the synthesis of
              adenylosuccinate (second reaction) is rate limiting.  The proposed research
              will employ a variety of techniques in physical biochemistry, including X-ray
              crystallography, 31P NMR, analytical ultracentrifugation, and kinetics.  The
              studies will employ recombinant E. coli and/or mouse synthetases, expressed in
              and isolated from E. coli.  Specific mutants of the E. coli and mouse
              synthetases will be constructed in order to test several structure-function
              hypotheses.


