Title       : Regulation of Protein Cross-Linking Reactions for Insect Cuticle Sclerotization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9985959

Award Number: 9985959
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Kanost kanost@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl J. Kramer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Insect cuticle sclerotization or tanning is a vital process that occurs during
              each stage of development to harden and stabilize the newly secreted cuticular
              exoskeleton.  The exoskeleton serves many functions including protection,
              locomotion, respiration and communication, and has unique mechanical and
              chemical properties to optimize each function.  The structural polymers,
              protein and chitin, make up the bulk of the cuticle.  Chemical interactions of
              one or both of these polymers with quinonoid tanning agents are largely
              responsible for the final properties of the exoskeleton. We wish to investigate
              the reactions which help to stabilize the pupal cuticle of the tobacco
              hornworm, Manduca sexta, our model insect. The main hypothesis for
              sclerotization involves the formation of carbon-nitrogen bonds to cross-link
              histidine side chains in cuticular proteins to the ring or side-chain carbons
              of o-quinones and p-quinone methides derived from  catechols.  This research
              will address how insects use structural proteins, catechols, and oxidative
              enzymes to stabilize their exoskeletons.  The first objective of this project
              is to identify directly the naturally occurring chemicals in cuticle, which
              crosslink structural proteins. The second objective is to further characterize
              a tanning phenoloxidase, laccase, which catalyzes quinonoid formation in the
              cuticle during sclerotization. We will investigate the regulation of expression
              of the laccase gene and the localization of laccase in the integument. The
              third objective will be to clone the cDNAs for three of the major cuticular
              proteins that become cross-linked during sclerotization, express these as
              recombinant proteins, and use them for in vitro model cuticle reconstitution
              experiments, where, together with the catechols, the recombinant phenoloxidases
              should generate proteins cross-linked via catechols. These studies of the
              oxidative conjugation of catechols and proteins in the insect exoskeleton will
              provide new fundamental information about the natural cross-linking agents and
              their covalent interactions with cuticular proteins.  Understanding how this
              metabolic biochemistry facilitates cuticle sclerotization via protein
              cross-linking is of vital importance to insect biology. Specific interference
              with this process would be detrimental to insect growth and development, and
              also may facilitate the development of new approaches to selective insect pest
              control.
 
