Title       : Gordon Research Conference on Macromolecular Organization and Cell Function to
               be held on August 6-11, 2000 at Queen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2000     
File        : a9985952

Award Number: 9985952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 1,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Natalie S. Cohen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlyle B. Storm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1136,1154,1164,1166,1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Gordon Research conference on Macromolecular Organization and CellFunction
              has met since 1987; this will be the eighth conference in this series.  The
              most recent one met at Queens College, Oxford University, U.K. in September,
              1998.  This proposal requests partial funding for the next conference, to be
              held again in Oxford, August 6-11, 2000.  This conference focuses on the
              intracellular organization of cellular
components, the principles and
              mechanisms underlying that organization, and the essential role of such
              organization in cell function and its regulation.  The first conferences
              concentrated on the role of enzyme organization in metabolic regulation, but
              the subject matter has been greatly broadened over the years, so that it now
              includes virtually all aspects of cell function.  Macromolecular organization
              is critical not
only for the maintenance of various static cell structures,
              but also for the dynamic events that are coupled to key processes such as
              chromatin remodeling, transcription, RNA editing and transport, nuclear
              import/export, translation, protein degradation, cytoskeletal function,
              organelle transport, signal transduction, metabolic pathways, and apoptosis. 
              Conference topics include the mechanisms of macromolecular interactions, and
              the responses of such mechanisms to changes in metabolic or hormonal status. 
              The functional implications of interactions, such as channeling of metabolic
              intermediates or of signaling molecules, or the translocation of cellular
              components are of central interest, as are the characteristics of
              macromolecular complexes, both stable and transient.  In previous conferences
              it has become very clear that many interactions may be altered or even lost
              when cells or tissues are disrupted for study, and a major interest is the
              development and application of methods to analyze interactions in the
living
              cell.  This is an interdisciplinary conference.  It attracts not only
              experimental scientists with interests and expertise ranging from biochemistry,
              cell biology, and molecular biology to biophysics, physics, and
              instrumentation, but also theoreticians and modelers.  The interdisciplinary
              atmosphere produces excellent discussions and scientific interactions that are
              stimulating and highly valued by the participants.  Eighteen excellent speakers
              and eight prominent discussion leaders have already
accepted invitations to
              participate in the formal sessions of the next conference.  A number of slots
              have been kept open for the most recent developments in this rapidly moving
              field.



