Title       : Research Planning Grant: Studies of Maternal T-Cell Trafficking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a9985780

Award Number: 9985780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17978              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Bonney ebonney@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental unanswered question in cellular immunology is why the
              fetal-placental unit, a semi-allogeneic graft in direct contact with maternal
              tissue, is normally not rejected by the maternal immune system.  Full
              investigation of this phenomenon promises to reveal basic methods by which the
              immune system, and by inference other complex biological systems, maintain
              homeostasis and meet complex and often competing requirements.  That the mother
              does not reject the fetus because her immune system is physically limited or
              suppressed is a fundamental tenet of immunology.  However, it is difficult to
              reconcile this long-held view with the fact that the fetus and the mother must
              be protected from infection. Moreover, there is evidence from studies of
              maternal immunity to the male H-Y antigen that refutes this concept.  The H-Y
              antigen is expressed on male cells in all mammals as early as the blastocyst
              stage, and immunity can be easily generated in female mice by injection of male
              spleen cells.  It has been found that maternal immunity to this antigen is not
              limited or suppressed by pregnancy.  Yet, male fetuses are not rejected in
              immunized mothers.  This project focuses on this apparent inconsistency through
              the use of transgenic mice and tetramer analysis to examine H-Y specific
              T-cells in immunized mothers.  The overall hypothesis is that there may be
              unique patterns of fetal antigen-specific T-cell circulation in pregnanct mice.
               The work is likely to reveal novel mechanisms of immune cell homeostasis and
              circulation, and will further the understanding of molecular mechanisms of
              cellular trafficking to and across the maternal fetal interface.  The  project
              will also support the training of African American students, from high school
              to graduate and postdoctoral levels of training.
