Title       : CAREER: Efficient I/O for Modern Database Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a9985019

Award Number: 9985019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sunil K. Prabhakar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Recent developments in hardware have fueled the growth of applications that
              store and manipulate very large volumes of data. Unfortunately, due to the
              limitations of physical motion, I/O devices have not made commensurate
              advances, resulting in a performance bottleneck. The goal of this project is to
              develop a broad class of innovative techniques to alleviate the I/O bottleneck
              for modern database applications. The project focuses on data-intensive
              applications that handle multi-dimensional and multimedia data. The research
              has two major directions. The first is the development of declustering schemes
              for the efficient execution of range and nearest-neighbor queries over large
              multi-dimensional datasets under realistic assumptions such as non-constant
              disk I/O times, and non-uniform data and query distributions. The second
              addresses the storage and content-based retrieval of multimedia documents that
              can be viewed at various levels of quality (e.g., resolution). The goal of this
              research is to provide integrated techniques for placement, scheduling,
              migration, and reliability of continuous media data on secondary and tertiary
              storage. The approach is to design, develop, implement, and test the schemes on
              real datasets such as sanitized medical records. In this manner the effects of
              the simplifying assumptions typically made to make analysis tractable can be
              identified and addressed. The project will result in a collection of new
              techniques as well a prototype implementation and test results on real
              applications. These will be made available for public access over the
              world-wide-web. The expected impact is a 10-50% improvement in performance for
              a broad class of applications. The education component aims to integrate I/O
              related issues for modern systems into the graduate curriculum. This involves
              the development of new web-based tools and projects that will enable students
              to understand and experiment with I/O issues and solutions, and facilitate
              distance learning.
http://www.cs.purdue.edu/~sunil/


