Title       : Dynamics of Gas Hydrates and Permafrost in the Eurasian and North American
               Arctic Land-Shelf System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a9985826

Award Number: 9985826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194599             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Osterkamp   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nikolai N. Romanovskii  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-998586
Osterkamp

Methane hydrates occur when methane and water
              exist in close proximity at low temperatures and elevated pressures.  These
              conditions are present in permafrost regions and beneath the sea along the
              outer continental margins.  Consequently, methane hydrates are thought to be
              widespread in the onshore permafrost regions of the North American and the
              Russian Arctic and in the shallow continental shelves of the Arctic Ocean where
              subsea permafrost is found.  These gas hydrates are a potential and abundant
              source of energy, a major sink for global carbon, and could influence seafloor
              stability.

Low sea levels 20,000 years ago exposed the shallow continental
              shelves of the Arctic Ocean to the cold climate, allowing permafrost and stable
              gas hydrates to form in these shelves.  Climatic warming and changes in sea
              level warm the permafrost and destabilize the hydrates.  Methane gas is
              produced during hydrate destabilization and may eventually be released to the
              atmosphere. Permafrost temperatures are known to have increased 2-4oC during
              this century and current climatic models predict continued warming.  With
              present knowledge, it is not possible to predict the amount or timing of
              methane releases by gas hydrate decomposition as a result of permafrost,
              especially subsea permafrost, degradation.

The Principal Investigators will
              survey existing data on gas hydrate and permafrost conditions in the Russian
              Arctic land-shelf system to establish boundary conditions, properties,
              occurrence and distribution.  This information will be used as in the future as
              input data for a two dimensional numerical model of gas hydrates and
              permafrost.  A model was developed by the Principal Investigators in the late
              1980s and modified in the early 1990s specifically for studies of permafrost,
              subsea permafrost and gas hydrates over long time scales.   The Principal
              Investigators will collect and synthesize existing data on the occurrence of
              gas hydrate in permafrost on the Russian Arctic land-sea margin.  The data will
              be evaluated for reliability, standardized, and translated into English.   This
              project will address the synergism between gas hydrates, climate and sea level
              and help to increase our understanding of how gas hydrates destabilize over
              geological time scales.  The research will be conducted jointly by the
              Geophysical Institute and Russian investigators.



