Title       : Disorder and Interactions in Two-Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9985785

Award Number: 9985785
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris I. Shklovskii Shklovskii@physics.spa.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
9985785
Shklovskii

This grant supports the work of a distinguished PI;
              well known for his contributions to the properties of electrons in a disordered
              medium and as influenced by the electron-electron interaction.  There are three
              projects here:  (1) In Integer Quantum Hall Effect at fields corresponding to
              larger integers, the ground state appears to break up in to parallel stripes. 
              This effect was predicted earlier by the PI and has been experimentally
              observed recently in the form of an anisotropy in the transport properties. 
              The experiments have also discovered several anomalies which are  challenges
              for more theoretical work involving the effects of pinning and localization on
              the transport anisotropies.   In another project,  (2) the metal-insulator
              transition in 2-d will be studied on the insulating, low-density electron gas
              in a relatively clean environment.  The critically important states at the
              Fermi level can be shown to be related to the core states in disorder induced
              dislocations.  Finally in project (3) the focus is on the properties of
              biologically charged macroions such as DNA, actin and charged lipid
              membranes.
%%%
This grant supports the research  program of a distinguished
              PI who has made several, seminal contributions to the general subject of the
              collective properties of electrons as influenced by disorder and
              electron-electron interactions.  He continues this program by studying the
              properties of electrons in modest magnetic fields where his surprising
              predictions of a specific spatial arrangement have been experimentally
              verified.  And yet the experiments have raised more questions and theoretical
              challenges.  In addressing an old problem, namely a changeover from a metal to
              an insulator, the PI plans to take a different approach, namely how does an
              insulating, otherwise clean film become metallic.  In an insightful  approach
              to a complex problem of the collective properties of  large ions, the PI is
              hoping to gain important insight into the properties of biological macroions
              such as DNA, actin and charged lipid membranes.
*** 

