Title       : CAREER: Resolving Lexical Ambiguities in Natural Language Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9985033

Award Number: 9985033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Yarowsky yarowsky@cs.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year of funding of a 4 year, continuing award. One of the
              major roadblocks in the
efficient and accurate communication between humans
              and machines is the resolution of the
ambiguity inherent in natural languages.
              A major bottleneck in developing solutions is the severe
shortage of training
              data that distinguishes word senses, and the high cost of inputting
              this
information manually. A focus of this project is the development of
              unsupervised and minimally
supervised algorithms for acquiring such skills
              without costly hand-tagged training data. Such
methods will exploit the
              distribution properties observed in very large text corpora (over 10
              billion
words); the PI will also investigate richer representations of feature
              space, class models,
smoothing methods and learning algorithms specialized for
              classification in very high-dimensional
featurespaces. In addition to the
              problem of word-sense disambiguation, this project will explore
shared
              solutions to a closely related set of lexical-ambiguity tasks including
              spelling correction,
propername classification, capitalization restoration,
              accent and diacritic restoration for, diverse
languages, vowel restoration in
              Hebrew and Arabic, speech synthesis on homographs, lexical
choice in machine
              translation, and certain aspects of choosing among phonetically
              confusable
candidates in speech recognition. These diverse problems are not
              normally recognized as being
members of the same class, and this project seeks
              to exploit the synergies present by developing
methods and training data on
              one member of the class and utilizing the methods and data on other.
problems
              in the class. Thus this unified approach offers the potential for rapid
              parallel progress on
key problems in human-computer interaction and
              information extraction.

