Title       : NSF/EPA Technology for a Sustainable Environment: Investigation of a Novel
               Capillary Non-Thermal, Ambient Pressure Plasma for Cleaning Aluminum Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a9985359

Award Number: 9985359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349943             (Estimated)
Investigator: George P. Korfiatis gkorfiat@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt H. Becker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Crowe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Erich E. Kunhardt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry Wieserman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christos Christodoulatos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1238,1407,1467,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this NSF/EPA Technology for a Sustainable Environment research
              program is to investigate the plasma-contaminant-surface chemistry required for
              the development of the Atmospheric pressure, Capillary Electrode Plasma
              (AP-CEP) technology suitable for destruction of organic contaminants in
              aluminum surfaces for industrial applications.  The research plan is based upon
              a novel technique the investigators have demonstrated generating large volume
              non-thermal plasmas under atmospheric pressure conditions that. This has been
              accomplished by utilizing a self-stabilizing diffuse glow discharge using a
              specially designed cathode configuration.  The AP-CEP technique offers three
              important advantages over existing state-of-the-art plasma generation, (1) a
              more effective energy utilization per unit volume of plasma,  (2) engineering
              simplicity in developing efficient, easily scaleable reactors operating under
              ambient conditions, and (3) a very small power to plasma volume ratio leading
              to small system footprint and potentially very cost effective technology. 
              Destruction of contaminants will be explored by performing (1) a comprehensive
              characterization of the AP-CEP for applications in surface cleaning; (2) a
              detailed evaluation and optimization of the effectiveness and efficiency of the
              capillary plasma in the destruction of hydrocarbons deposited on surfaces; (3)
              an evaluation of by-products resulting from capillary plasma processing;  (4)
              an evaluation of chemical and physical changes in the treated surface;  (5) an
              estimation of the power required for capillary plasma cleaning; and (6) an
              identification and determination of parameters pertinent to industrial
              application of the capillary plasma cleaning process. 

This new technology
              has the potential to be a cost-effective alternative to solvent-based
              processes, thus addressing environmental issues at the source.
