Title       : General Monte Carlo Computer Simulation of Subcellular Biochemical Signaling:
               Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a9985964

Award Number: 9985964
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $513982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrence J. Sejnowski terry@salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              General Monte Carlo Simulation of Subcellular Biochemical Signaling, Phase
              II

At the molecular level, cells are highly organized and disorganized at
              the same time.  Many of the protein building blocks of cells form highly
              organized structures used for a variety of purposes, such as communication
              between cells and holding cells together. On the other hand, when small
              signaling molecules are released they can bounce around in random directions in
              a seemingly disorganized way, until they find a binding site on another
              molecule like a protein or section of DNA. These two forms of organization and
              disorganization are at the heart of a new computer program called MCell.  This
              program follows individual molecules as they bounce around a realistic
              three-dimensional world populated with large proteins and other highly
              organized structures that accurately mimic the shape and contents of a cell. 
              The purpose of this grant is to expand MCell's ability to simulate the
              molecular processes that take place inside cells and the communication that
              occurs between cells.  

The research will be carried out jointly between The
              Salk Institute (T.J. Sejnowski and T.M. Bartol), Carnegie Mellon University
              (J.R. Stiles), and Cornell University (E.E. Salpeter).  Over 21 laboratories
              around the world are currently using MCell to study synaptic transmission at
              the nerve-muscle synapse and a wide variety of synapses in the brain, as well
              as biochemical processes in cells of other organs such as the liver.  The grant
              will also provide for the development of a graphical user interface, which will
              make it easier and faster to use the program, and extensive documentation to
              make MCell more accessible to new users.  One of the most important new
              features of MCell is its ability to model the complex three-dimensional
              structure of real cells, which can be highly convoluted and difficult to
              visualize.  A new graphical tool for reconstructing, editing, and visualizing
              three-dimensional cellular structures at the level observed only with electron
              microscopes will be incorporated into the next generation of MCell.  This will
              also make it possible for MCell users to deposit their reconstructed models
              into a web-based archive, which will promote the accumulation and free exchange
              of models among researchers.  There will be several hundred additional MCell
              users by 2003.  MCell simulations may be run on a wide range of platforms, from
              hand-held calculators, to standard personal computers, to large-scale
              supercomputers.  The additions to MCell that will be supported on this grant
              will greatly expand the range of problems that can be examined using MCell,
              bringing closer the day when it will be possible to simulate the functions of
              an entire cell in a computer.  

With the addition of the graphical user
              interface, a major aim of a future phase of development will be to make MCell
              available as a teaching tool both for students who are beginning their science
              education, to help them visualize the properties of cells, and for advanced
              students, who can use the program as a means to explore the complex and
              sometimes counterintuitive world at the molecular level.  For more information
              about MCell and computer-generated images of what cells might look like at the
              molecular level, see http://www.mcell.cnl.salk.edu or http://www.mcell.psc

