Title       : CAREER: Oxygen & Iron Isotopic Analyses of Bacterially-Produced Iron Oxides in
               the Laboratory & in Acid Mine Drainage: A Watershed Approach to Classroom
               Instruction & Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a9985234

Award Number: 9985234
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312792             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin W. Mandernack kmandern@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9985234
Mandernack

Oxygen and Iron Isotopic Analyses of Bacterially-Produced
              Fe Oxides in the Laboratory and in Acid Mine Drainage: A Watershed Approach to
              Classroom Instruction and Research

Bacteria serve as important catalysts in
              many geochemical cycles, including the oxidation of Fe(II) and Mn(II) in
              aquatic and terrestrial environments. As catalysts, bacteria influence the
              mobilization and precipitation of these metals. The formation of insoluble
              Fe(III) and Mn(III, IV) oxides that result from bacterial oxidation in turn can
              control the fate of other trace metals, as these oxides can actively adsorb
              metal cations. In soils and in freshwater and marine nodules, iron and
              manganese oxides often coexist as ferromanganese deposits. In the case of acid
              mine drainage (AMD) where pH is low (e.g., <3.0), Mn(II) oxidation is inhibited
              and bacterial Fe(II) oxidation is favored. Therefore, pure (Mn-free) Fe(III)
              oxides of bacterial origin are likely to be formed in AMD environments, and in
              turn can control the fate and transport of other trace metals that are common
              to AMD waters. The importance of bacteria in the formation of AMD and in the
              precipitation of iron oxides is well documented. The bacterial influence on
              Fe(II) oxidation  may be preserved in the oxygen isotopic signatures of the Fe
              oxide products. Previous results of mine from oxygen isotope analyses of Mn(IV)
              manganates indicated that the d18O values of chemically and biologically
              produced manganates may be discerned due to differences in isotopic
              fractionation and oxidation pathways. Furthermore, evidence suggests that the
              binding of Mn2+ or Fe2+ to the bacterial cell wall may be the rate limiting
              step for subsequent oxidation and mineral formation, and thus exert an
              important kinetic control on the final d18O value of bacterially-produced Fe
              and Mn oxides. Coexisting Fe and Mn oxides in a freshwater nodule had very
              different d18O values as a result of different oxidation pathways .
              Consequently, the d18O values of iron and manganese oxides may independently
              reflect different types of information (Fe oxides can reflect temperature and
              the d18O of water, whereas Mn oxides have been shown to reflect bacterial
              origins by incorporation of molecular O2, and consequently may also serve as
              paleo-oxygen indicators). The d18O signatures of mixed phases of iron and
              manganese oxides, therefore, may reflect abundant information for
              paleo-environmental studies. This will be examined from additional d18O studies
              of deep-sea ferromanganese nodules that are part of the extensive collection at
              the Smithsonian Natural History Museum. 
Although, iron oxides are the most
              abundant metal oxide in soils and sediments, there has been no systematic
              laboratory study of the bacterial influences on the d18O signatures of Fe(III)
              oxides. Therefore, this study will examine the d18O and d 56Fe values of
              Fe(III) oxides produced from laboratory cultures of Fe2+-oxidizing bacteria, as
              well as those produced in AMD environments. AMD environments provide a
              convenient location to study the activities of certain iron oxidizing bacteria
              that are important in AMD formation and to collect bacterially-produced Fe(III)
              oxides for stable isotopic anlysis. The close proximity of AMD sites that drain
              into the Clear Creek watershed near the Colorado School of Mines Campus
              provides an ideal opportunity for students to participate in this research and
              be engaged in an active learning experience as part of my ongoing courses in
              environmental microbiology. The students will receive instruction in
              microbiological principles that directly apply  to a geochemical problem common
              in Colorado watersheds. The focus of my classes will shift from a classic
              lecture-style approach, to hands-on instruction whereby students learn
              microbiological principles as they apply to a local watershed. This will
              provide the students with an experiential and highly visual means for learning
              microbiology while engaged in original research. 

