Title       : CAREER: Polyarylene Networks and Hybrid Molecular Composites - An
               Inter-disciplined Approach to Polymer Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a9985160

Award Number: 9985160
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis W. Smith dwsmith@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A new family of polyarylene derivatives is proposed which are of interest and
              potentially useful in a variety of high performance, optoelectronic, and high
              yield carbon applications.  Polyarylenes, in general, are currently limited by
              poor melt and solution processability and traditional strategies to improve
              processability typically sacrifice performance.  To enable the use of
              polyarylenes as fabricated high performance materials and as functional hybrid
              molecular composites, the proposed research will provide access to polyarylene
              networks from processable intermediates.  The recently discovered synthetic
              approach consists of three steps starting from commercial bisphenols and
              affords bis-ortho-diynylarene(BODA) monomers in high yield.  When heated, BODA
              tetraynes undergo Bergman cyclopolymerization and further thermal cure results
              in high performance networks, optoelectroactive materials, and high yield
              semiconductor glassy carbon.  As a significant extension to this projects
              preliminary results, this work seeks to:  (1) Prepare new BODA compounds and
              determine structure/property relationships for both thermal and
              catalytic/initiated routes.  (2) Combine monomers and reactive intermediates
              with inorganic spacers, metal complexes, sol-gel precursors, and polymer
              electrolytes.  (3) Expand preliminary microfabrication and pyrolysis studies to
              tailored semi-conductive glassy carbon and carbon/inorganic hybrid molecular
              composites.

This project offers a new approach to processable and
              property-timable architectures for advanced application such as light emitting
              diodes, optical waveguides, low dielectric insulators, polymer electrolyte
              membranes, membrane electrode assemblies, and bipolar plates for batteries and
              fuel cells, microelectro/magnetomechanical systems, and microsemiconductors for
              optical signal processors, sensors, and switches.  An inter-disciplinary
              approach spanning synthesis, materials science, polymer physics, and device
              fabrication is planned.  Over the next five years, the proposed education and
              outreach plan will:  (1) Establish an interdisciplinary basic polymer science
              curriculum that complements the rich variety of applied polymer studies
              currently offered at Clemson University.  (2) Expose undergraduate and graduate
              students to inter-disciplinary collaborations on campus and industrial
              cooperative education/internships.  (3) Team with the Intersociety Polymer
              Education Council (IPEC) and education faculty to implement a plan for teacher
              training workshops in polymer chemistry.  (4) Use current and future positions
              at the national ACS level to enhance the local ACS section and extend
              leadership to the student affiliate programs.

