Title       : CAREER: BioPolymer Physics-Understanding Protein Conformational Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a9985493

Award Number: 9985493
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498749             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah K. Fygenson deborah@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1132,1164,1187,1228,1710,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The project will measure structural and dynamical properties of aggregates of
              the protein tubulin. These measurements will test the current understanding of
              microtubule dynamic instability, improve the ability to discriminate between
              competing models of the conformational change of tubulin and, within those
              models, refine the description of the structure-function relationship. This
              approach is inspired by the hypothesis that GTP-hydrolysis results in the
              unfolding of a portion of the beta-monomer of the tubulin dimer into a
              random-coil. This hypothesis is part of a unique, physical approach to
              understanding protein design. This radical new approach could have profound
              impact. In the context of tubulin, the hypothesis, if supported, will inform
              proposed mechanisms for how various proteins and drugs interact with tubulin to
              affect the stability of its aggregates. More broadly, evidence of the proposed
              'simple' conformational change will stimulate novel applications of polymer
              physics to protein design, which might elucidate the engineering of single
              molecule machines. One set of experiments will involve varying assembly
              conditions and measuring structural differences among the resulting tubulin
              aggregates. Parameters to be varied include tubulin concentration, proportion
              of non-hydrolyzable GTP analog, and concentration of non-specific solutes (e.g.
              glycerol) which, by altering the solvation of polypeptides, predictably change
              the effective size of a random coil. Structural measurements will be made using
              transmission electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy. Another set of
              experiments will involve observing single microtubules by video-enhanced DIC
              microscopy and characterizing their dynamic instability as a function of
              similar parameters. The focus will be on microtubule disassembly and the
              distribution of lengths lost. The innovation is to observe disassembly in
              microtubules that were intentionally grown to very long lengths under one set
              of solution conditions and then switched to the solution conditions of interest
              and/or severed in situ, so as to optimize the chances of observing a transition
              to the growing state. These experiments are biochemically simple, but
              technically complex. Their interpretation will demand quantitative analysis and
              rigorous physical modeling. Thus, they are ideally suited for physics students
              at both the graduate and undergraduate level, providing a concrete and tested
              path for introducing them to the basics of biochemistry and cell biology. A
              final experiment will involve directly engineering a variant of tubulin to have
              a smaller random-coil domain. It offers a well-motivated introduction to the
              powerful techniques of molecular biology for a student with interdisciplinary
              undergraduate training. As a result, students involved in this educational
              program will be well prepared to appreciate and contribute to the unfolding
              "biotech" renaissance. Meanwhile, their experience will be vital in formalizing
              an interdisciplinary education along such lines, including a minor in
              biophysics and a graduate program in bioengineering and physics. Educational
              aspects of this proposal that are not directly related to the research plan,
              are also designed to involve students in hands-on discovery. The central aim of
              the educational component of this project will be to place students at the
              limits of their knowledge in an environment where they can learn by doing. 
