Title       : CAREER: Dendritic Polymers and Polymer Science Curriculum Development at the
               Colorado School of Mines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a9985221

Award Number: 9985221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel M. Knauss dknauss@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9985221
Knauss

This award will support research on the continued development
              of a technique for the formation of dendritically branched polymers and the
              characterization of the resulting products.  The technique combines living
              polymerization methods with a convergent synthesis approach and can be designed
              to produce dendritic polystyrenes, polydienes, poly(alkyl methacrylate)s, and
              others with relatively narrow molecular weight distributions.  The synthesis is
              done by first initiating and polymerizing a low molecular weight chain through
              living methods; the living end is then reacted with a compound having both a
              polymerizable group and a moiety capable of quantitatively  coupling with the
              growing chain end.  The slow addition of this reactant either alone or with a
              comonomomer results in a convergence of chains and ultimately in a dendritic
              polymer with a living chain end at the core.  This chain end can then be
              functionalized with a variety of groups or can be used to initiate an added
              comonomer.  The synthetic method allows for a large number of architectural
              variations resulting in many different dendritically branched polymers.  Main
              aspects to be studied include the progression of the reaction, the synthesis of
              different dendritic polymer backbones, the molecular weight between branch
              points, the morphology of architectural copolymer, and the solution,
              rheological, and other physical properties of these materials and their blends
              with linear polymers.  Characterization of these novel materials will improve
              the understanding of the relationship between branching structure and physical
              properties and direct comparison with the linear version of the polymer can be
              accomplished.  Because this method can be used to readily produce considerable
              quantities of accomplished.  Because this method can be used to readily produce
              considerable quantities of material, the utility of such dendrititc polymers
              can be determined.  The educational aspects of the project will result in an
              improved polymer science curriculum, with laboratory experience and the
              availability of new classes in the polymer area and more research experience
              for undergraduates.   Undergraduate seniors in the chemistry department will be
              required to do research in the coming academic year and students will work on
              meaningful research projects.  This award will in part support the
              undergraduate research program.  Outreach to K-12 and to professionals working
              in the field of polymers will be accomplished by incorporation of polymer
              demonstrations into the current K-12 outreach program and through the
              development of continuing education classes in polymers.

The research is
              expected to improve the understanding of the relationship between branching
              structure and physical properties for polymers such that new materials can be
              designed and produced.  This will impact society in a positive manner by
              improving current materials and producing new ones that can be sued in current
              application and in applications that will be developed for the future.  The
              students supported by this grant will be educated to be capable of continuing
              the development of new materials and new applications that will further benefit
              society and improve the standard of living.

