Title       : Life Cycle Optimization of Vehicle Replacement (TSE99-H)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a9985625

Award Number: 9985625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $444137             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Keoleian gregak@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc H. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Bean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan W. Bulkley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1238,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9985625   Keoleian   Automobiles are among society's most resource intensive
              products.  They have significant environmental impacts throughout their entire
              life cycle, including material production, manufacturing, use, service and
              end-of-life management stages.  In the United States, approximately ten million
              vehicles are retired each year due to poor reliability of parts and components,
              degraded performance, and loss of structural integrity from corrosion or
              accidents.  While retirement decisions are most often guided by economic
              considerations, the optimal vehicle service life also poses a complex resource
              and environmental management problem for both manufacturers and consumers.  For
              example, there is an environmental cost-benefit tradeoff between investing in a
              new, more energy-efficient, lower polluting automobile versus continuing to
              operate an older, less-efficient, more polluting vehicle.  Further complexities
              arise from differences in environmental burdens between older and newer
              vehicles during their production and during their use.  This research will
              integrate Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and vehicle replacement optimization and
              lead to novel developments in each field.  The state of the art in LCA will be
              advanced through the treatment of dynamic systems.  Thus, the boundaries for
              analysis will encompass a sequence of products where the design variable
              becomes the optimal service life of each vehicle.  Previous work in dynamic
              vehicle replacement modeling has focused on cost optimization but has not yet
              considered life cycle environmental and energy criteria.  A life cycle dynamic
              replacement model will be developed through the application of dynamic
              programming methods to LCA.  The results are expected to have direct relevance
              to other product systems, such as computers and appliances.  This work will be
              accomplished by an interdisciplinary team of experts from the School of Natural
              Resources and Environment, Industrial and Operations Engineering, Civil and
              Environmental Engineering and the Physics Department specializing in life cycle
              assessment and design, optimization theory, reliability theory and vehicle
              emissions and fuel economy modeling.  It will provide unique interdisciplinary
              education and training opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate
              students. This grant is made pursuant to the NSF/EPA Partnership competition
              Technologies for a Sustainable Environment. ***
