Title       : Relationship Among Demographic, Social and Genetic Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a9985910

Award Number: 9985910
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257118             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne Altmann altj@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research characterizes and tests hypotheses regarding the bidirectional
              inter-relationships among individual behavior, social structure, and genetic
              structure in a natural population of non-human primates.  The study population
              of savannah baboons, Papio cynocephalus, has been under study by PI and
              colleagues for over two decades.  We elucidate the role of behavior in
              providing the organism's immediate response  to variable conditions, and in
              shaping the future  through  determining  the context within which development
              and gene expression occur.  Behavior thereby determines , to great extent, the
              phenotype that is subject to selection.  Genetic analyses will identify
              relatedness among pairs of individuals for most of whom behavioral and
              demographic data are available.  These will be integrated with PI's recently
              developed database, permitting analyses of related forms of behavioral and
              demographic data.  Hypotheses to be tested address (1) the relationships among
              several types of individual and pairwise behaviors (mating, agonistic, and
              affiliative), (2) the relationships of these lower-level behavioral processes
              to group-level behavioral processes (dominance hierarchies, grooming networks),
              and demographic processes (fission and demographic structure of groups), and
              (3) the relationships of the pairwise and group-level processes to genetic
              structure within social groups.  These relationships are at the core of models
              of primate socio-ecology and the evolution of behavior.


