Title       : Characterization of a Family of Pheromonal Attractants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a9985778

Award Number: 9985778
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherry D. Painter sdpainte@utmb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregg T. Nagle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Med Branch Gal
	      301 University Boulevard
	      Galveston, TX  775550136    409/761-1011

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1193,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Animals use a variety of signals to coordinate their activity with that of other
              members of their species.  Some of these signals are visual (e.g., bright
              colors or posturing), others are verbal (e.g., singing, growling, or
              whimpering), and still others are chemical (e.g., marking territories or
              inducing spawning).  The chemical signals are known as pheromones, which to
              date have been most thoroughly investigated in insects.  Pheromones are
              involved in coordinating the activities of aquatic animals, yet little is known
              about the chemical identities or specific activities of these substances.  This
              is particularly true of water-borne peptide pheromones, which are difficult to
              isolate and characterize because: (a) only small numbers of animals secrete
              pheromones at any one time; (b) little is known about the stimulus that induces
              pheromone secretion; (c) relatively small amounts of pheromones are secreted;
              (d) secretion occurs into large volumes of water that has contacted a variety
              of animals and their products; and (e) there is a strong possibility that the
              pheromone is rapidly degraded.

Two characteristics of the reproductive
              system in Aplysia, a marine mollusk, make it possible to address some of these
              problems.  For example, injection of egg laying hormone causes Aplysia to lay a
              long string of eggs (an egg cordon), which is the source of pheromones that
              attract other animals to the area and induce them to lay eggs and/or mate. 
              This useful tool to induce egg laying makes it possible to control the number
              of animals laying eggs, the timing and synchronization of egg laying, the
              general area where eggs are deposited, and the relative purity of the
              surrounding seawater.  Using Aplysia, a water-borne peptide pheromone
              ("attractin") has been isolated and chemically characterized.  This pheromone
              has multiple activities in laboratory bioassays and belongs to a family of
              attractin-related peptides in different species of Aplysia and perhaps other
              aquatic gastropods.

The experiments in this proposal will use molecular,
              biochemical and behavioral techniques to test three hypotheses:  (1) There are
              attractin-related peptide pheromones in other species of Aplysia, in other
              opisthobranchs (Bursatella), and in aquatic pulomonates (Lymnaea).  (2) Egg
              cordons are a source of multiple pheromonal attractants.  (3) There is a family
              of peptide pheromones that trigger mass spawning in oysters.

Biochemical and
              behavioral characterization of Aplysia attractin and related peptides will
              contribute to understanding of pheromonal regulation of reproductive behavior
              in mollusks; of peptide pheromones and their function(s); of attractin's active
              site; and the nature and mechanism of action of the attractin receptor.

