Title       : Arginine Catabolism in Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9985660

Award Number: 9985660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chung-Dar Lu biocdl@panther.gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmed T. Abdelal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The significance of arginine in the physiology of P. aeruginosa is reflected in
              the presence of four catabolic pathways for its utilization as a source of
              carbon, energy, and nitrogen as well as its ability to serve as one of the
              strongest chemotactic attractants for this organism. The long-term objective of
              this research is to elucidate the regulatory mechanisms for arginine
              catabolism. The first aim of this project is to determine the role of
              C4-dicarboxylate of the TCA cycle in reverse catabolite repression. In P.
              aeruginosa, the presence of acetate and the TCA cycle intermediates inhibits
              the utilization of sugars as well as other compounds including arginine.
              Studies in this laboratory have established that arginine-specific regulatory
              protein, ArgR, is essential for the induction of arginine catabolic operons.
              Preliminary data also indicated that auto-induction of ArgR in the presence of
              exogenous arginine was abolished in the mutants of argSU genes encoding a pair
              of sensor kinase/response regulator of a two-component regulatory system. In
              addition, the utilization of a variety of compounds including glucose, but not
              succinate, was severely affected in the argSU mutant. (i) Studies employing
              gene fusions will be conducted to test the hypothesis of C4-dicarboxylates in
              the TCA cycle as the signal compound of the argSU regulatory system. (ii) In
              vitro phosphorylation assays with either intact or His-tagged fusion proteins
              of ArgS and ArgU will be employed to demonstrate signal transduction in these
              two proteins, and effects of any of the C4-dicarboxylates on the kinetics of
              these biochemical reactions will also be analyzed. The second aim of this
              project is to identify the regulatory elements that function in reverse
              catabolite repression. The ArgSU system is proposed here to play a role in
              reverse catabolite repression. Since ArgU appears as an NtrC-like
              transcriptional regulator, it is expected that it could only have a direct
              effect on operons transcribed from s54 promoters. Its effects on operons that
              are transcribed from s70 promoters could be mediated by an additional
              regulator. (i) To identify the genomic targets of ArgU, a nickel sulfate
              affinity column containing His-tagged ArgU will be employed in a selection
              strategy to isolate its binding candidates from a cosmid genomic library.
              Alternatively, genomic targets of ArgU can be identified by analyses of growth
              suppressors of the argSU null mutant and the subsequent cloning by
              complementation tests. (ii) To identify the missing linking between ArgU and
              its affected s70 promoters, transposon mutagenesis will be employed to isolate
              mutants with altered expression level of b-galactosidase from an aotJ::lacZ
              fusion, which is known to be under the control of ArgSU. The affected gene can
              then be identified after sequence analysis of clones containing
              antibiotic-resistant genes of the transposon and its flanking regions.
              Alternatively, standard reverse genetics procedures will be adapted to identify
              this missing element. Fractions containing proteins other than ArgR that bind
              to the aotJ regulatory region will be identified by mobility shift assays, and
              subject to further purification from a DNA affinity column. Identification of
              the encoding gene can then be achieved after determination of the N-terminal
              amino acid sequence and BLAST search on the completed genomic sequence of P.
              aeruginosa.

The enormous catabolic capability of P. aeruginosa and other
              related bacteria have led to a wide recognition of its potential significance
              in industrial and environmental biotechnology. The potential pathogenicity of
              P. aeruginosa in human and its related bacteria to plants is greatly enhanced
              by a remarkable nutritional versatility that enables this organism to survive
              in diverse and in harsh environments prior to infection and to efficiently
              adjust its metabolic activity to the existing environmental constraints
              following infection. These capacities have necessitated the evolution of
              mechanisms in control of metabolic activities that are significantly different
              from those found in enteric bacteria and gram-positive bacteria. Completion of
              this research will contribute to our knowledge of the diverse biochemical
              reactions and the regulatory mechanisms that is critical for long term efforts
              to prevent and control diseases, and to apply these microorganisms in
              biotechnology.

