Title       : CAREER: Molecular Genetic Analysis of the Dictyostelium discoideum Developmental
               Regulator FbxA -- A Strategy for Integrating Research and Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9985265

Award Number: 9985265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279207             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret K. Nelson mnelson@allegheny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Allegheny College
	      520 North Main Street
	      Meadville, PA  16335    814/332-5380

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9183,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project describes a strategy for integrating research and teaching in the
              undergraduate Biology curriculum at Allegheny College. The research interests
              of the PI, Dr. Margaret K. Nelson, focus on understanding the mechanisms by
              which distinct cell fates are established and maintained over the course of
              development.  She uses the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum as her
              experimental system.  Dr. Nelson's analysis of FbxA, a protein that regulates
              several aspects of development, has three specific aims: 1) to identify of the
              signaling pathway(s) regulated by FbxA, 2) to characterize FbxA structure,
              function, and transcriptional regulation, and 3) to use Dictyostelium as a
              vehicle for incorporating investigative labwork at the introductory
              undergraduate level.  
FbxA is a member of a family of proteins that regulate
              developmental signaling pathways via targeted protein degradation.  Identifying
              the targets of FbxA-mediated degradation is a crucial step in determining which
              developmental pathways FbxA regulates.  Two parallel approaches will be
              employed to achieve this goal.  FbxA itself will also be more completely
              characterized, via determination of its cell type-specific roles, creation of a
              dominant-negative allele, and promoter analysis.  The importance of targeted
              protein degradation as a developmental regulatory mechanism is only now being
              realized.  More detailed analysis of FbxA and the pathway(s) it regulates is
              likely to make a significant contribution to this growing field. 
This CAREER
              project illustrates how Dictyostelium, which is both student-accessible and
              amenable to sophisticated molecular genetic analysis, can be used to integrate
              research into courses at all levels of the curriculum.  Through its junior
              seminar and senior project requirements, the Allegheny Biology Department has a
              long history of successfully involving undergraduates in independent research.
              This award supports the use of Dictyostelium in a new laboratory course,
              Biology 290: Investigative Approaches in Biology, making research training an
              integral part of the introductory curriculum.  Students will work in small
              groups to design and execute independent experiments.  Assistance with
              experimental design and interpretation will be provided as part of a weekly
              discussion section.  Student projects will culminate in written and oral
              presentations. This proposal describes several related sets of four-week
              modules, incorporating research questions raised by investigations of FbxA and
              introducing students to a variety of techniques.


