Title       : CAREER: Comparative Vertebrate Phylogeography as a Tool for Reconstructing
               Environmental Change and Effect in Madagascar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9985205

Award Number: 9985205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408133             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne D. Yoder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9985205 
Yoder 

	Madagascar is home to some of the most rare and endangered
              organisms on Earth. Unfortunately, many of these unique species are under
              immediate threat of extinction due to a combination of natural and
              human-induced alteration of the environment (e.g., deforestation).  This career
              development plan will explore the evolutionary history of Malagasy vertebrates
              using "comparative phylogeographic" methods and will reveal aspects of the
              recent history of landscape evolution in Madagascar and its impact on the
              native vertebrates. The results will be significant for understanding the
              consequences of natural climate change for vertebrate speciation mechanisms and
              dispersal patterns and of human impact on genetic diversity of forest-dependent
              taxa.  In addition to revealing the impact of environmental events on
              vertebrate evolution, the research has the potential to inform conservation
              policy for one of earth's most ecologically-diverse and threatened
              environments.  The research is highly collaborative in that each taxon-specific
              project will be coordinated with the research efforts of an individual
              Malagasy-student collaborator.  The advantages of this system are two-fold in
              that it offers research training to Malagasy scientists while also providing
              the research program with unprecedented access to biological samples from an
              array of rare and endangered Malagasy vertebrates. A fundamental strength of
              the research is that it so naturally integrates research with training and
              education.  The educational link will be further enhanced via a new course in
              conservation genetics to be offered at the undergraduate level.  The objectives
              of this course are threefold:  1) to convey an understanding of the
              evolutionary process and its outcome, 2) to educate students in the basics of
              evolutionary-genetic and phylogenetic techniques, and their applications for
              conservation strategy, and 3) to confront the difficult practicalities of
              instituting conservation measures in the real world.  The Malagasy-student
              collaborators will participate in the course both as students and as visiting
              scholars.  It is anticipated that the interaction of international and U. S.
              students from very different cultural and economic backgrounds will be a
              revealing experience for both. 


