Title       : CAREER: Economic Theory at Northwestern
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a9985462

Award Number: 9985462
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214533             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey C. Ely ely@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1187,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project consists of research and education in economic theory at
              Northwestern University. The research is an extension of my recent work on
              repeated games with private monitoring. This is an active area of research
              among game theorists with many open questions and few generally useful sets of
              analytical techniques. These are important games to analyze because they have
              many economically important applications. An often cited, but as yet unsolved,
              example is the secret price cutting game introduced by Stigler. While it is
              well-known how oligopolistic firms can sustain collusion when there is
              available a publicly observable statistic of past performance, it is an open
              question whether this sort of behavior survives as an equilibrium when
              information is private as in Stigler's model.

In a recent paper, Juuso
              Valimaki and I have proven a version of the notorious "folk theorem" for the
              repeated Prisoner's Dilemma game with private monitoring. This result states
              that collusive outcomes can be sustained in equilibrium when the players are
              sufficiently patient and monitoring is good enough. In this proposal I show how
              the techniques used in that paper can be generalized to other games, including
              a standard model of duopoly. The collusive result extends to this duopoly
              model. This shows that our techniques have the potential to provide a general
              approach to repeated games. The research I propose is to develop these
              techniques and apply them to economic problems: One such problem is the Stigler
              model. Another set of problems is described in the proposal under the heading
              "Bad Reputations."

The educational activities I propose are designed to
              promote graduate research in economic theory at Northwestern by stimulating
              student participation in the theory seminar series. I would like to organize
              and run a weekly research seminar in which students are required to critically
              read papers to be presented in the week's workshop, meet as a group to discuss
              the paper and prepare to be an informed participant in the actual seminar.

