Title       : Calcium-Dependent Protein Kinase and Stress Signal Transduction in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a9985881

Award Number: 9985881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jen Sheen sheen@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shu-Hua Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of this research is to elucidate the molecular mechanisms
              underlying stress and abscisic acid (ABA) signal transduction mediated by
              calcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs) in plants. The experimental plan is
              based on the recent discovery that CDPK1 and CDPK1a (96% similarity) act as
              specific positive regulators to activate multiple stress responsive promoters
              in maize leaf protoplasts. This is the first demonstration that intracellular
              calcium signals triggered by stresses or a plant stress hormone can be
              perceived by specific CDPKs and alter transcription in the nucleus of plant
              cells. Furthermore, two closely related protein phosphatase 2Cs (ABI1 and
              AtPP2C) have been shown to be negative regulators in the CDPK1 signal pathway.
              It is proposed that CDPK1 and CDPK1a are key regulators in stress signal
              transduction pathways that use calcium as a second messenger in plant cells. 
              Experiments will test the hypotheses that CDPK1 plays an essential role in
              stress and ABA responses during plant growth and development, and that CDPK1
              directly or indirectly phosphorylates and activates specific transcription
              factors that control stress and ABA responsive genes. There are five specific
              objectives:  (1) to establish the function of CDPK1 in plants, (2) to identify
              and analyze regulatory components downstream of CDPK1, (3) to determine CDPK1
              subcellular location and action, (4) to investigate the role of PP2C as a
              negative regulator, and (5) to isolate and characterize CDPK1-interacting
              proteins and substrates.  Abiotic stresses, such as drought, cold, and
              salinity, reduce crop productivity by an order of magnitude greater than all
              biotic factors combined. Understanding the molecular basis of stress signal
              transduction may provide valuable and novel tools for agricultural improvement.
              CDPK1 is the focus of this research, since it is potentially one of the master
              switches that can turn on many downstream genes and confer multiple stress
              tolerance in plants.
