Title       : CAREER: High Force, High Speed Electro-Thermal Micro-Actuators: Design,
               Fabrications, and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a9985422

Award Number: 9985422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yogesh Gianchandani   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The absence of suitable actuators limits the development of silicon-based
              microsystems.  For in-plane actuation, the best contenders are electrostatic
              and thermal actuators, but the former require high drive voltages, and both
              deliver forces in the range of only about 1-10 uN.  This proposal addresses a
              new class of electrothermal microactuators that promises 100X increase force
              and 10X reduction in drive voltage.  They leverage deformations caused by
              localized thermal stresses to efficiently produce large forces without
              compromising displacement.
The devices will be designed by two complementary
              approaches, and further refined by numerical analysis in conjunction with
              optimal design of experiments.  Designs that offer rectilinear, circular and
              customized loci of motion will be developed and evaluated for performance
              criteria  such as output force and displacement, input power, drive voltage,
              response speed, device lifetime, trajectory errors, mechanical vibration, etc. 
              Time-sequenced engines such as inchworms, which offer high displacement and
              force with negligible standby power, will also be developed.  Designs will be
              fabricated in multiple technologies to permit comparative evaluations of
              performance and degradation mechanisms. Maskless process variations are
              proposed for standard technologies for selective confinement of heat and
              current flux, which minimize power consumption and response time.
Preliminary
              results indicate that static displacements >100 microns and peak forces >1 mN
              are feasible with standard technologies.  Several applications are proposed,
              with complementary demands on various performance aspects: a positioner for
              scanning probe microscopy; a positioner for optical elements in a
              micro-optomechanical system; and a sliding shunt for high-frequency
              telecommunication systems.  In the long term these actuators will also be used
              to develop haptic interfaces, e.g. for simulating microsurgery.
One
              educational objective is to increase the participation of under-represented
              groups in the MEMS research community using early recruitment programs and
              interaction with student groups.  Another is to facilitate interdisciplinary
              education using practical engineering projects that force the convergence of
              multiple specialties to fill the pedagogical gaps between relevant departments.
               These efforts will be reinforced by interactions with industry.

