Title       : GOALI: Environmentally Benign Dry Particle Coating Processes for the Synthesis
               of Engineered Particulates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a9985618

Award Number: 9985618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210113             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Pfeffer pfeffer@adm.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. C. Huang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rajesh N. Dave  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Willie Hendrickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1238,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-9985618
R. Pfeffer and R. Dave, NJIT

GOALI: Environmentally
              Benign Dry Particle Coating Processes for the Synthesis of Engineered
              Particulates (Technology for a Sustainable Environment)

Dry particle coating
              can be used to produce advanced powder composites or engineered
particulates
              with tailored surface properties. In addition to forming a barrier between the
              particle and its
environment, dry particle coating can be used for changing
              the functionality or the properties of the
original host particles producing
              composites that show improved flowability, wettability,
              dispersibility,
electrical, electro-magnetic, optical, thermal and other
              specific physical or chemical properties. In this
process, tiny, sub-micron
              sized (guest or fine) particles are coated onto relatively larger, micron
              sized
(host or core) particles in order to create value-added composite
              particulate materials. In contrast to wet
particle coating, which requires
              organic solvents, liquid melts, or aqueous solutions/suspensions, the
              guest
particles are brought into close contact with the host particles through
              the application of mechanical
forces, creating either discrete or continuos
              coatings. Hence these processes are environmentally friendly,
requiring no
              solvents, binders or even water. However they are relatively new, are still in
              the early stage
of development and are rarely used commercially. Yet they have
              potential applications in many industries
including pharmaceuticals, food,
              cosmetics, ceramics, electronics and specialty chemicals. This proposal
is
              aimed at research and development of these dry particulate processes with the
              long-term goal of making
them a viable option for replacing many current wet
              coating applications, creating new applications, and
advancing the technology
              so as to be ready for the anticipated high demand for particle coatings in
              the
future.

It is proposed to investigate the following state-of-the-art
              dry coating devices available at NJIT: (1)
Magnetically Assisted Impaction
              Coating (MAIC), in which intense particle fluidization and random
collisions
              created by magnetic media produce coatings; (2) Mechanofusion, in which high
              normal and shear stresses are applied to the powder mix to achieve coating.
              These processes will be systematically studied both experimentally and by
              computer modeling, so as to determine the conditions (operating
parameters of
              the devices as well as the characteristics of the particles, including size,
              shape, and
mechanical and other properties) under which they will work, and
              the type of coatings (discrete,
continuous, embedded or film type) they can
              achieve. Computer modeling will be based on discrete
element simulation
              studies.  It is expected to develop a predictive capability, which is currently
              non-existent, and is necessary not only to determine which of the devices would
              give the best results for a specific application, but also to scale-up and
              optimize the operating conditions for obtaining the best possible coated
              particles.

Successful completion of this project will have a major
              scientific and environmental impact on a
number of industries that deal with
              particulates. Through collaboration with industrial partners, it is expected
              that some of these new applications will be successfully demonstrated.
              Furthermore, it is expected that systematic research study will serve as an
              impetus for more work in this area and
the eventual replacement of many wet
              coating processes by dry coating processes in industry will
help to prevent
              pollution at the source. A secondary objective of this proposal involves
              training of undergraduate and graduate students in particle technology, a
              relatively neglected area in engineering
education of extreme technological,
              economic and environmental importance. This will be carried out
              by
incorporating the results of research into the newly developed
              interdisciplinary three-course concentration in particle technology at NJIT.

