Title       : The Evolutionary Psychology of Social Behavior: Examining the New Science of
               Human Nature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9985820

Award Number: 9985820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Buller buller@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-85820 - David J. Buller (Northern Illinois University)
"The Evolutionary
              Psychology of Social Behavior:  Examining the 'New Science of Human
              Nature'"

This project undertakes a comprehensive, critical examination of
              the theoretical tenets and methodology of Evolutionary Psychology.

The term
              "evolutionary psychology" is sometimes used to designate a field of inquiry
              that encompasses an extremely broad range of work, which has in common only a
              very general commitment to the idea that an evolutionary perspective will
              inform us about human cognition, emotion, and behavior. In contrast, the term
              "evolutionary psychology" is also frequently used to designate only work
              conducted within a specific set of theoretical and methodological commitments
              shared by a prominent and highly influential group of researchers in this field
              (most notably, David Buss, Leda Cosmides, Martin Daly, Steven Pinker, Donald
              Symons, John Tooby, and Margo Wilson). The shared theoretical commitments of
              this group are: (1) the human mind consists of "hundreds or thousands" of
              modules, which are (2) adaptations to the hunter-gatherer lifestyle of our
              Pleistocene ancestors; (3) these adaptations are universal in Homo sapiens, so
              (4) evolved human psychology consists in "a single, universal panhuman design,"
              which constitutes "human nature"; consequently, (5) individual psychological
              differences are not adaptive. In addition to these tenets, this group of
              researchers is united in its commitment to a core set of exemplars of empirical
              research (for example, Buss's work on mate preferences, Cosmides's work on
              cheater detection, and Daly and Wilson's work on "discriminative parental
              solicitude"). In this narrower sense, then, "evolutionary psychology"
              designates research within a framework that strongly resembles a Kuhnian
              paradigm. The focus of this project is this paradigm, designated "Evolutionary
              Psychology" (in upper case, so as to distinguish it from evolutionary
              psychology, the field of inquiry).

The purpose of this project is twofold.
              First, the PI will investigate theoretical and empirical problems with each of
              the above five tenets of Evolutionary Psychology. Second, the PI will
              investigate methodological problems with Evolutionary Psychology's most
              prominent explanatory exemplars concerning the psychology of mate choice,
              infidelity, jealousy, parental care, and social cooperation. These
              investigations will show that the field of evolutionary psychology will
              progress toward a more accurate evolutionary understanding of human psychology
              only once the Evolutionary Psychology paradigm has been replaced.  

The
              project will result in a book, which will be the first sustained and
              comprehensive critical examination of the Evolutionary Psychology paradigm in
              the literature. The intended audience of this book consists of three primary
              groups: (1) philosophers whose areas of interest are philosophy of science,
              philosophy of psychology, philosophy of biology, or philosophy of human nature;
              (2) behavioral scientists whose areas of research are evolutionary psychology,
              behavioral biology, or anthropology; and (3) students of these fields.

