Title       : Role of Fibroblast Growth Factor - 4 in the Early Mouse Embryo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a9985953

Award Number: 9985953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia E. Papaioannou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Papaioannou
9985953

Stem cells are self renewing.  That is, they divide
              and give rise to a cell that differentiates as well as a cell that maintains
              its identity as a stem cell.  Understanding how stem cells are regulated is
              fundamental to understanding how mutlicellular organisms form.  Dr. Papioannou
              is investigating the potential role of growth factors in regulating stem cell
              populations.  Given the critical role of stem cells in development, this work
              will lead to a deeper understanding of the regulation of embryo
              development.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) comprise a family of related
              signaling molecules that bind and activate fibroblast growth factor receptors
              (FGFRs).  FGF-4, which is expressed in the inner cell mass (ICM) of the
              blastocyst and in the later epiblast, is essential for peri-implantation
              development.  Mouse embryos lacking this factor through gene targeting of Fgf4
              implant in the uterus but fail to undergo further development.  The experiments
              proposed will investigate the potential role of FGF-4 as a stem cell factor in
              early embryos by examining three hypotheses: (1) FGF-4 is an autocrine
              proliferation or survival factor for the ICM.  (2) FGF-4 promotes the
              differentiation of primitive endoderm.  (3) FGF-4 is a paracrine stem cell
              factor for the diploid trophoblast.

Dr. Papaioannou's first approach will be
              a detailed examination of cell number and differentiated cell distribution in
              mutant Fgf4 embryos throughout peri-implantation development.  The second will
              be to attempt rescue of mutant effects by supplying exogenous recombinant FGF-4
              to intact embryos.  The third approach makes use of chimera analysis using both
              mutant embryonic stem (ES) cells combined with normal embryos and vice versa. 
              Each of the hypotheses has specific predictions with respect to the cell
              composition of chimeras and the potential rescue of the mutant phenotype. 
              Taken together, these studies will provide specific information about the in
              vivo effect of FGF-4 on stem cell populations of the early embryo and have
              general implications for the role of FGFs on the control of other embryonic or
              adult stem cell populations.


