Title       : Integrating Topology and Numerics at CAD Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2000   
File        : a9985802

Award Number: 9985802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Fogwell                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Peters tpeters@engr.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9985802

A typical geometric model for Computer-Aided Design (CAD) is
              represented as a finite collection of compact 2-manifolds, joinedalong
              boundaries formed by their intersection sets.  Hence, these representations
              critically depend upon intersection algorithms.  To minimize data volume and
              improve algorithmic performance, the intersection sets are only approximated. 
              The consequences of these approximation errors may be far from trivial and can
              lead to `gaps' or `cracks' between surfaces that are understood to be
              adjoining.  Unfortunately, the prevalent practice is that intersection
              algorithms do not give any error bounds on these approximations.  This research
              focuses upon the central issue of the interdependencies between topology of a
              model and the approximations within numerical algorithms.  Any formal notion of
              topology for computational representations of geometric sets must specifically
              acknowledge the role of approximation and finite arithmetic.  This project will
              develop formal definitions and computational representations for needed
              approximation bounds.  Computational experiments will be performed to test the
              communication of the critical approximation information across programmatic
              interfaces.  The expected result is a formal framework for reasoning about the
              propagation of topological tolerances within large software systems.

Three
              recent workshops (OPAAL '97 in New Orleans, CAD/CFD '99 at Davis, and MSRI '99
              at Berkeley) have directed attention to the need for rigorous mathematical
              foundations for computer-aided design.  Particularly troublesome are regions
              where surfaces should meet, as computational models are limited to only
              approximating such surface joinings.  A computational model of a coffee cup
              will necessarily have small cracks along its base and near its handle.  If
              fluid were to be placed in this cup in a computer simulation, the fluid would
              leak out of the cup.  Of course, similar cracks will exist in a computational
              model of an airplane; for example, where the wing joins the fuselage.  The
              performance characteristics of this joint during flight are crucial to aircraft
              safety.  Fluid dynamic simulations are performed on airplane models to verify
              critical engineering performance characteristics.  Even small errors in the
              geometric model can cause large errors in these engineering simulations.  These
              simulations hold the promise of significant cost savings by permitting creation
              of a reliable airplane directly from the electronic model.  However, to attain
              that goal, the interface between modeling and simulation must accept the
              inevitability of modeling `cracks' and still produce valid engineering
              analyses.  This project will create new mathematical formulations and
              computational representations as a necessary step for reliable engineering
              simulations.  Recent economic studies done for NIST indicate that these
              engineering problems cost about 1 billion dollars annually, for the automotive
              industry alone.  Hence, there is opportunity for significant practical economic
              impact from this new theory, as it will improve results from complex
              engineering simulations which must be executed within high-performance
              computing environments.  Utilization of these high performance computing
              resources will be improved and the more reliable engineering estimates will
              also lead to direct savings in material and manufacturing costs for major
              industries.


