Title       : Membrane Recovery of Homogeneous Catalysts (TSE 99-D)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a9985552

Award Number: 9985552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haskell W. Beckham haskell.beckham@tfe.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary E. Rezac  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Proposal number:		CTS-9985552
Proposal type:	Response to NSF
              99-108,  NSF/EPA Technology for a Sustainable Environment Program
Principal
              investigators:	Mary Rezac and  Haskell Beckham
Affiliation:			Georgia
              Institute of Technology 
Membrane Recovery of Homogeneous
              Catalysts
Homogeneous catalysts are employed for chemical production because
              of their high reaction rates and selectivity.  However, recovery and recycle of
              these catalysts is difficult and produces significant waste (approximately 4
              million tons in 1996).  Conventional techniques are not well suited to this
              separation.  This research program examines the ability of chemically stable
              membranes developed from crosslinked diacetylene-functionalized polymers to
              selectively recover homogeneous catalysts from either aqueous or non-aqueous
              reaction mixtures. If successful, this technology could greatly expand the use
              of highly selective but often expensive homogeneous catalysts and dramatically
              reduce the volume of undesired by-products formed via conventional
              heterogeneous catalysis systems.
The hypothesis of this study is that the
              separation of an organic product from a metal-ligand catalyst can be achieved
              with an organic polymer membrane that provides selectivity based on differences
              in the diffusion rates of the two compounds.  Tailoring of mobility-based
              selectivity can be realized through control of the molecular motion of the
              polymer chains.  Selective crosslinking of the polymer matrix can be used to
              gain this control.  Polymers topochemically crosslinked via a diacetylene
              functionality will be investigated to probe the ability of this unit to prevent
              polymer swelling and the concurrent loss of selectivity without markedly
              reducing transport rates of desired penetrants.  The crosslink density of the
              samples will be systematically varied to evaluate the posed hypothesis.
              Measurement of the solubility and diffusion coefficient for each penetrant will
              be made. The performance of the membrane in the recovery of homogeneous
              catalyst and the subsequent activity of the recovered catalyst are being
              evaluated.


