Title       : Coenzyme Biosynthesis in Archaea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a9985712

Award Number: 9985712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. White rhwhite@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Coenzymes are essential components for more than half of all known enzymatic
              reactions.  One would thus expect the evolution of the biosynthesis of
              coenzymes to have been a central event during the early evolution of life. 
              Despite the importance of coenzymes to living systems, our current knowledge
              concerning their biosynthesis is far from complete.  In many cases we do not
              know the exact pathways for their biosynthesis and/or the enzymes/genes
              involved in their biosynthesis. This problem is very acute for the Archaeal
              coenzymes.  For the pathways in which the enzymes/genes are known, it is
              becoming increasingly clear that many of the steps are carried out either by
              non-orthologous enzymes or enzymes that are only distantly related to enzymes
              present in the other two Domains of life the Bacteria and the Eukarya.  Because
              of many chemical steps common to the biosynthesis of different coenzymes, there
              may be connections between the biosynthesis of the methanogenic Archaeal
              coenzymes and the biosynthesis of the common Bacterial coenzymes such as FAD,
              NAD, coenzyme A, etc.  Research funded by this grant will address these
              concerns by continuing the work in my laboratory to explore the following
              aspects of coenzyme biosynthesis: 1) determination of the biosynthetic pathway
              for the Archaeal coenzymes whose pathways are not known,  2) establishing the
              genes and thus the enzymes in the Archaea responsible for the individual steps
              in the pathways for selected coenzymes, and 3) searching for evolutionary
              relationships between the enzymes involved in coenzyme biosynthetic pathways
              based on sequence/structural homologies of these biosynthetic enzymes.
The
              research to be undertaken by this grant will explore the evolutionary
              development of metabolism by establishing the biosynthesis of
              vitamins/coenzymes in present day organisms.  Since these vitamins/coenzymes
              are essential for all living organisms, an understanding of how vitamins are
              formed in the many different organisms that inhabit our planet can be used to
              give us insight into how living metabolic systems evolved on earth and possibly
              in other places in the universe.


