Title       : CAREER: Multicast Protocols and Topology Models for the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a9985195

Award Number: 9985195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $376926             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michalis Faloutsos michalis@cs.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              	The proposed research focuses on practical solutions that will advance the
              current Internet technology to meet the challenge of the Next Generation
              Internet.  The educational component of the project aims to train the network
              experts that the industry needs. 
	One of the main problems of the current
              Internet infrastructure is its inability to provide services at high
              Quality-of-Service (QoS) levels.  The lack of such quality guarantees affects
              the reliability and the commercial value of the services.  New protocols and
              architectures are needed to support the emerging applications.  An impediment
              in the development of such architectures is our limited ability to understand,
              model and simulate the Internet and its topology.  The proposed work tackles
              these two problems.  First, the project proposes to develop a multicast
              protocol for the Internet that will support group applications with high QoS
              requirements such as tele-conferencing.  Second, the project proposes to
              develop a novel method to characterize the topology of the Internet and explore
              its applications.
	The project proposes the QoSMIC Internet routing protocol
              to support QoS in group (multicast) communications.  The researcher's Ph.D.
              work  introduced QoSMIC, a new QoS0sensitive multicast protocol.  QoSMIC
              differs from the previous protocols in that it identifies multiple paths and
              selects the one that can provide the QoS level the applications requires.  In
              addition, QoSMIC is resource-efficient and flexible without compromising its
              scalability.  Preliminary simulations show that QoSMIC can support 4 times as
              many users with a specified QoS level compared to the current protocols.  There
              are a lot of research issues that are needed to complete the protocol.  The
              research proposes to develop, implement and test protocol in three steps:
              extensive simulations, software implementation, and testing in the researcher's
              network campus. The long-term goal is to incorporate QoSMIC in commercial
              routers through an industrial collaboration.
	One of the most difficult tasks
              in the design and the testing of a new protocol is predicting its behavior in a
              large-scale realistic network.  Thus, the research proposes to model,
              re-create, and predict the growth of the Internet topology.  The research
              presents a novel way to describe topological properties of large networks using
              power-laws.  Despite the randomness of the Internet, the researcher has
              discovered that some surprisingly simple power-laws can describe the Internet
              topology based on measurement data during the year 1998.  The power-laws fit
              the real data very well, with correlation coefficients of 96% of higher.  The
              rsearcher's initial set of power-laws is only the beginning of a new way to
              view and model the Internet.  The project proposes to continue  work focusing
              on three major research directions.  First, it will identify more power-law
              properties and thus characterize and classify graphs effectively.  Second, it
              will develop a new graph model for realistic topologies.  Finally, it will
              measure and predict the growth patterns of Internet.  In all three areas, 
              software tools will be developed to analyze, generate, and predict graphs and
              their topological properties.
	The project proposes to develop a strong
              educational program as a vital part of the career development plan.  The goal
              of the educational plan is to provide students with a soled theoretical
              background and practical experience on cutting-edge technologies.  The project
              proposes an educational framework that is based on a) a strong theoretical and
              technical curriculum, b) early student involvement in research and teaching,
              and c) collaboration with the industry through internships and
              sponsorships.
	


