Title       : CAREER: Physically-Based Approach to Geometric Problems in Engineering Design
               and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a9985288

Award Number: 9985288
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenji Shimada shimada@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER grant provides funding for the effort to bridge industry demand and
              academic research and education programs in the area of computational
              engineering, in particular the rapid generation and evaluation of design
              alternatives.  The project aims to provide what industry needs from academia:
              (1) research on new computational methods that can improve design and analysis
              processes drastically; and (2) educational programs that will provide students
              with a rigorous understanding of the underlying theories of modern
              computational tools.  The proposed research will focus on expanding the
              theories and applications of a physically-based method of solving the geometric
              problems that are currently bottlenecks in the design and analysis cycle, such
              as finite element mesh generation, surface filleting, and parametric design. 
              The proposed education effort will prepare students to become leaders in the
              current transformation from drawing-and-calculator-based engineering to
              computer-integrated engineering.  This educational goal will be achieved by
              establishing two unique academic programs, an undergraduate minor and an
              industry-oriented graduate degree in computational engineering.

The research
              proposed should lead to: (1) development of more fundamental theories of the
              physically-based approach, (2) exploration of other geometric problems in
              engineering that can be effectively solved by the physically-based approach,
              and (3) creation of a methodology to unite the physically-based approach with
              more conventional approaches.  The proposed new academic programs will enhance
              students' understanding of the underlying theories and methodologies used in
              modern computational tools.  Because the functionality of these computational
              tools and the ways they are utilized in industry are changing rapidly and
              constantly with new research results, the proposed approach to integrating
              research and education will help foster closer ties between industry and
              academia.

