Title       : Arabidopsis DDM1: DNA Methylation and Epigenetic Stability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a9985348

Award Number: 9985348
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Richards richards@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Although a general understanding that methylation of DNA serves to
              silence gene expression has been accepted, information about how that
              methylation is regulated and what other functions, if any, it serves is still
              forthcoming. A genetic approach to those questions has produced a collection of
              Arabidopsis thaliana mutants (ddm) that contain reduced cytosine methylation.
              ddm1 loss of function mutations lead to a rapid loss of methylation from most
              repetitive sequences in the genome, but only a slow loss of methylation from
              low copy sequences.  The DDM1 gene has been recently cloned and found to encode
              a SW12/SNF2-like protein, implicating chromatin dynamics as an important
              process in DNA methylation. An experimental plan to test different models of
              DDM1 action has been created.  Specific goals are to  1) test purified
              recombinant DDM1 and DDM1-associated complexes for DNA-dependent ATPase
              activity, nucleosome remodeling and chromatin assembly, 2) investigate whether
              DDM1 associates with cytosine methyltransferases or other chromatin modifying
              activities, 3) compare the ability of ddm1 and wild-type nuclear extracts to
              methylate chromatin substrates.  A series of experiments to understand the
              consequences of DDM1 loss of function will be undertaken. Genetic analysis
              indicates that the ddm1-induced defects are due to the generation of stable
              variant alleles or epialleles at unlinked loci. The genomic region affected has
              been localized in one ddm1-induced dwarfing line (bal) to a 147 kb interval
              containing a leucine-rich repeat (LRR) "disease resistance" gene cluster. A
              change in gene expression in this cluster has been identified as a possible
              cause of the bal phenotype. Methylation and chromatin changes associated with
              bal variant (epi) alleles will be characterized. Transgenic experiments to
              determine if misexpression of the gene cluster is sufficient to cause the
              dwarfing phenotype will be done.

Although knowing the DNA sequence is
              necessary to an understanding of genetic control of life processes, it is not
              sufficient. The type of information gained from studies of this sort will have
              critical impact upon both our understanding and genetic engineering of both
              plants and animals.




