Title       : CAREER Proposal: Fundamental Algorithmic, Architectural and Economic Issues in
               Designing High Speed QoS-capable Data Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a9985446

Award Number: 9985446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Balaji S. Prabhakar balaji@isl.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   A broad research program is outlined for investigating fundamental issues
              arising in the design of high speed, quality-of-service (QoS) capable data
              networks. Several key problems are identified within an over all architectural
              framework, similar to that considered by the IETF Working Group on
              Differentiated Services (DIFFSERV) for the Next Generation Internet (NGI). The
              research program consists of technological and economic components, each
              containing several problems that confront the research community.
     The
              essential issue of providing differentiated QoS to individual users is the fair
              allocation of network resources among the users. The network can accomplish
              this by employing packet scheduling mechanisms like Weighted Fair Queueing
              (WFQ) at the switching nodes.  It has been shown that these schemes effectively
              erect bandwidth firewalls between the flows of different users, thus
              guaranteeing that the QoS of one flow is not at the mercy of other flows. But
              schemes like WFQ suffer from the curse of dimensionality: They require
              switches/routers to maintain flow state information for distinguishing the
              packets of individual flows. This renders them too complex to be used in large
              high speed networks.
     Alternatively, if users can be incentivised to
              condition their flows to prescribed parameters, then the network can be spared
              the burden of having to erect bandwidth firewalls. This considerably reduces
              the complexity of router design. Using economic thinking researchers argue that
              the requisite incentive can be provided by charging users for the damage caused
              to other traffics by their ill-conditioned flows. But the feasibility of
              charging schemes depends on their implementability: Although they reduce the
              cost of routers, they require the installation of devices for monitoring each
              flow and for producing a charge accordingly.
     This research program taps
              into both these interrelated currents and takes a unified
approach. The
              central questions addressed are: (i) Can implementationally simple
              router
mechanisms be designed for providing QoS guarantees to individual
              flows? (ii) Can simple and effective charging mechanisms be devised for
              incentivising users to condition their flows? Preliminary work conducted by the
              proposer gives an encouraging answer to these questions, and suggests a general
              approach to the problem of providing QoS with minimal implementation overhead.
              The overall program involves devising algorithms, considering architectural
              issues, analyzing mathematical models, and using game theoretic and economic
              ideas. The robustness of solutions will be tested through extensive simulation
              of a wide range of network topologies and parameter values. The complexity of
              implementing them will be explored through simulation and possibly through
              prototype design.
     The education plan consists of developing an advanced
              networking course which aims to closely integrate theory and practice,
              developing an undergraduate course in Networking over the next two years,
              initiating cross-disciplinary education and research activities, and involving
              undergraduate and graduate students in research.

