Title       : BU/NSF Workshop on Internet Measurement, Instrumentation and Characterization
               held on August 30, 1999 at Boston University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1999 
File        : a9985484

Award Number: 9985484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11494              (Estimated)
Investigator: Azer Bestavros best@cs.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Byers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Crovella  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Because of its growth in size, scope, and complexity --- as well as its
              increasingly central role in society --- the Internet has become an important
              object of study and evaluation.  Many significant innovations in the networking
              community in recent years have been directed at obtaining a more accurate
              understanding of the fundamental behavior of the complex system that is the
              Internet.  These innovations have come in the form of better models of
              components of the system, better tools which enable us to measure the
              performance of the system more accurately, and new techniques coupled with
              performance evaluation which have delivered better system utilization.  The
              continued development and improvement of our understanding of the properties of
              the Internet is essential to guide designers of hardware, protocols, and
              applications for the next decade of Internet growth.
  As a research
              community, an important next step would involve an introspective look at the
              challenges that lie ahead in this area.  This would entail an assessment of the
              progress that has been made to date, an evaluation of both the unsolved
              challenges and the challenges that the Internet will present us with in the
              near future, and a discussion of the promising new techniques that innovators
              in the field are currently developing.  To this end, the Networking Research
              Group at Boston University propose a one-day workshop with this agenda to be
              held at Boston University on Monday, August 30, 1999 and which will immediately
              precede SIGCOMM '99.
  The BU/NSF Internet Measurement, Instrumentation and
              Characterization(IMIC) workshop will feature four sessions: (1) Modeling and
              Characterization; (2) Internet Instrumentation and Measurement; (3) End-to-End
              Protocols and Services; (4) Network Support for Next Generation Internet
              Applications.  Each session will consist of 3 presentations to be followed by
              an open discussion.  The workshop will conclude with a panel of researchers
              from academia and industry, as well as representatives from funding agencies,
              who will discuss opportunities and challenges that lie ahead, and initiatives
              to be undertaken.  Proceedings of the workshop will be made available on-line
              as an NSF report.

