Title       : CAREER: Theory of the Conducting--Insulating Transition Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2003    
File        : a9985255

Award Number: 9985255
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon M. Balents balents@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER grant supports the integration of research and education in the
              career plan of this young theoretical physicist and faculty member at the
              University of California, Santa Barbara.  The research plan includes four
              problems.  The first deals with a description of a metal-insulator transition
              in a 2-dimensional electron gas in terms of a dual Ginzburg-Landau theory.  The
              second concerns the properties of recently discovered itinerant ferromagnetism
              in lightly doped hexaborides.  A third concerns a study of possibly
              inhomogeneous states preceding the transition, and finally a fourth project
              deals with the properties of linear and nonlinear transport in a
              one-dimensional object, such as a carbon  nanotube.  For education, the PI
              plans to supervise students, teach courses and be a mentor.  In addition, he is
              planning a special seminar series on quantum condensed matter physics,
              involving the department of physics (where the students are) and the Institute
              for Theoretical Physics, with its relatively large membership of postdoctoral
              fellows.  Finally he plans to conduct another seminar about career options for
              undergraduate and graduate students.
%%%
This CAREER award supports the
              research and education plans of this young, theorist member of the physics
              department at the University of California, Santa Barbara.  The research
              interest consists of four projects, all related to the properties of electrons
              in insulators which are on the threshold of becoming metallic conductors.   The
              first project is the most general one and involves a search for a theoretical,
              unified description of a metal-insulator phase transition.  The second project
              concerns the properties of the remarkable ferromagnetic phase when calcium
              hexaboride, an insulator, is very lightly doped with lanthanum to make it
              slightly conducting.  The third project studies possible pathways to the change
              between an insulator and a conductor and how each is reflected in the linear
              and nonlinear transport properties.  Finally the fourth project is an extensive
              study of the remarkable conducting properties of nanowires, for example the
              carbon nanotubes.  In education, there are plans to teach courses, supervise
              graduate students and mentor postdoctoral fellows.  In addition there are plans
              to conduct seminars on career options for undergraduates; an exploration of
              alternative applications of physics education.
*** 
 



