Title       : Magnetic Separations for Environmentally Benign Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9985489

Award Number: 9985489
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Ritter ritter@engr.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry J. Ploehn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Proposal Number:  	CTS-9985489 
Proposal type:	Response to NSF
              99-108,  NSF/EPA Technology for a Sustainable Environment Program
Principal
              Investigators:	James A. Ritter and Harry J. Ploehn
Institution:  			University
              of South Carolina at Columbia


MAGNETIC SEPARATIONS FOR ENVIRONMENTALLY
              BENIGN PROCESSING

This project is developing a sound theoretical foundation
              and operational understanding of a novel magnetic-field-enhanced separation
              process.  The new high-gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) process is based on
              the use of a magnetic adsorbent such as magnetite supported on a fixed bed. 
              Due to its ferromagnetic property, magnetite can be used not only as an
              adsorbent for removing metal ions from solution but also as a magnetically
              energizable element for attracting and retaining paramagnetic nanoparticles
              from suspension.  In such a system, the magnetite serves as a metal ion
              adsorbent,  a high-gradient magnetic filter, or both, depending on the
              characteristics of the stream to be treated.  Specifically, this research
              describes, analyzes, and demonstrates the advantages of this new magnetic
              separation process over other magnetic-field-enhanced separations and
              conventional metal-ion adsorption processes.

Applications for this new,
              magnetic-field-enhanced separation process abound.  In the area of
              environmentally benign processing, applications include the recovery and
              recycling of metal species at the source in mining and metallurgical operations
              and for desulfurization of coal by removing  FeS2, thereby avoiding the
              generation of pollutants at the source.  Another promising application is the
              use of HGMS in biomagnetic separations, in which viruses and cells can be
              separated through selective tagging with functionalized magnetic oxides. Also,
              proteins and enzymes can be fractionated by coupling to magnetic particles
              bearing bio-selective functional groups.  The primary advantage of the proposed
              HGMS process for these applications lies in the small magnetite particle size
              and the concomitant high local magnetic field gradients.  This leads to
              order-of-magnitude reductions in the particle sizes that can be captured and in
              the applied magnetic fields required.  It may even be possible to capture
              individual protein molecules complexed with parmagnetic ions.  The reduction in
              the externally applied magnetic field required enables, for the first time, the
              use of permanent ceramic magnets with relatively high magnetic field strengths
              (up to 1 Tesla) in the HGMS operations.  These kinds of magnets do not require
              an external power source and thus are truly benign to the environment.  By
              establishing a sound theoretical and operational understanding of the proposed
              HGMS technology, this research opens up many different avenues for removing,
              concentrating, recovering, and recycling weakly paramagnetic metal species in
              chemical process streams.

