Title       : An Analysis of Economic Expertise in U.S. Global Climate Change Policy
               Deliberations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9985760

Award Number: 9985760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89053              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Zehr szehr@usi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Indiana
	      8600 Univ Blvd Box 6227
	      Evansville, IN  477123534    812/464-8600

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Scientific expertise performs an important role in political and public contexts
              where environmental problems are evaluated and mitigative actions debated. This
              study will contribute to science and technology studies (STS) research on the
              construction and use of scientific expertise in policy deliberations on
              environmental problems, by examining economic expertise in the context of U.S.
              global climate change policy deliberations. Several key processes will be
              examined. (1) Why has economic expertise become more salient in policy
              proceedings on global climate change and environmental policy-making more
              generally? (2) How are social and cultural boundaries maintained between
              economic expertise and policy and between economic experts and policy actors?
              (3) How are controversies on climate change issues within the economics
              community either reproduced or closed off as their expertise is reproduced in
              policy contexts? (4) How are economic uncertainties interpreted and managed in
              the policy context? The project will proceed inductively. Two qualitative
              research methods will be used: content analysis and personal interviews.
              Economists' testimony at Congressional hearings and their written contributions
              to policy deliberations within federal government departments active in global
              climate change policy-making will accessed and analyzed for important themes
              related to the above questions. In addition, personal interviews will be
              conducted with economists and government bureaucrats who are active in both of
              these settings to enhance analyses of documentary material.  The investigation
              includes components to improve education at the sponsoring undergraduate
              institution.  Publications in scholarly and scientific journals and
              presentations at professional and public forums will result.   

The results
              of the project will be to further our understanding of how scientific expertise
              more generally and economic expertise more specifically is constructed,
              managed, and used in U.S. environmental policy deliberations. The results may
              also speak to a broader theoretical question involving scieritific expertise.
              Is scientific expertise something that should be examined as a relatively
              stable entity from context to context, or as something that is much more
              emergent within particular contexts?

