Title       : CAREER: Internet Telephony Services and Mobile Multimedia Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9985325

Award Number: 9985325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382267             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henning Schulzrinne hgs@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research project is focused on Internet telephony and novel
              ad-hoc data distribution
techniques.
     In the area of Internet telephony
              research, the research proposes to focus on the following topics:

    
              Programming Internet telephony services: The research proposes new mechanisms
              for programming In-ternet telephony services, usable by both end users and
              service providers.  The mechanisms
are designed to be robust, offer
              predictable performance and allow a large set of users to
safely share server
              resources. The programming facilities are to be enhanced with a
              graphical
service creation environment for Internet telephony.
     Feature
              interaction: The research plans to investigate the problem of feature
              interaction in Internet telephony, as the feature interaction problem differs
              significantly from that encountered in traditional
telephony.
    
              Collaborative call filtering: The research plans to design, implement and
              analyze a system that allows Internet users to collaborate in filtering
              undesirable calls, based on group preferences.  This
avoids the current
              reliance on unlisted phone numbers and answering machines for call filtering.

                  Scaling Resource Reservation: Particularly for the large number of small
              flows anticipated for
Internet telephony, associated with their stringent
              delay and loss requirements, scaling resource
reservations is of vital
              importance.  The research proposes to investigate the performance of two
new
              scaling mechanisms, sink-tree reservations as part of the Border Gateway
              Reservation
Protocol (BGRP) and partial reservations.
     Performance
              prediction: The research plans to investigate simple statistical
              characterizations that predict
the performance of a variety of standard
              forward error correction and playout delay algorithms
for packet voice.
    
              911 services: Internet telephony offers the opportunity to significantly
              enhance emergency call
services compared to existing mechanisms.  The research
              plans to investigate how to reliably identify
users and grant temporary access
              to personal data to medical personnel, without having to
store medical data in
              centralized locations.
     Mobility: The research proposes to investigate
              application-layer mobility mechanisms to complement traditional IP-layer
              mobility, potentially affording greater security and faster hand-off, with
              no
network infrastructure modifications required.
     In addition, the
              research proposes a new data and media distribution system, e*meme, that allows
              data to
propagate in ad-hoc networks where network nodes are only sporadically
              connected to the wide-area
network, as is the case in areas where wireless
              connectivity is spotty.  The research plans to investigate
efficient,
              popularity-based cache replication algorithms, taking into account the
              particular considerations
of power- and storage-limited mobile computers.


