Title       : CAREER: Advancing Teacher Development and Mathematics Learning Through the
               Integration of Knowledge and Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a9985146

Award Number: 9985146
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $462942             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jo Boaler joboaler@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Advancing Teacher Development and Mathematics Learning through the Integration
              of Knowledge and Practice.


The broad aim of this proposal is to better
              understand the mathematics teaching and learning process for communities of
              students and teachers and to improve that process. The research will explore
              the relationship between individual understanding and the broader communities
              in which people learn, drawing upon a range of qualitative and quantitative
              methods. In-depth, longitudinal case studies of 3 high schools will be
              conducted, focusing jointly upon teachers and students. Two of the schools
              teach both 'traditional' and 'reform' mathematics programs; the third offers a
              curriculum that combines different approaches. Approximately 1000 students will
              be monitored in the 3 schools as they progress through their different programs
              from freshman to senior years. In addition, the relationships between teaching
              and learning will be examined in a number of focus classes in each school. An
              integrated analysis of the mathematics teaching and learning process will be
              conducted. This will examine the relationships among the knowledge, beliefs,
              and practices that constitute learning, and that have traditionally been
              treated as distinct. The complexity of such an analysis will be made possible
              through the use of an analytical framework that will address the identities
              that teachers and students develop within the mathematics teaching and learning
              experience.

The results of the research will help define new courses for
              prospective mathematics teachers and teacher educators. The courses will be
              based upon the principle of learning through analysis of practice. A variety of
              issues will be identified, such as teaching methods, technology, assessment,
              and cultural diversity. For each issue, educational research findings will be
              combined with one or more particular exemplars, carefully selected from the
              case-study schools. An exemplar could illustrate, for example, a
              student-teacher interaction; an example of innovative teaching or assessment; a
              departmental conflict or a particular use of technology. Exemplars will be
              presented to student teachers using videotapes of classroom lessons, along with
              teachers' reflections and plans, student work, and student reflections on their
              learning. One of the aims of the new programs is to cultivate sustained
              professional discourse. The use of particular cases drawn from the case study
              schools will encourage such inquiry by providing shared reference points and
              the development of a common vocabulary. The prospective teachers and teacher
              educators will have the opportunity to discuss and learn from complexly related
              practices of teaching and learning for individuals and groups of students. Such
              conversations can provide a means for teachers not only to develop and clarify
              their own understandings, but also to develop an identity as a contributing
              member of a profession. In addition to the new courses that will be developed
              at Stanford, case-based analyses of teaching and learning will be disseminated
              to the broader mathematics education community. 

