Title       : CAREER: Software Frameworks to Enable Parallel, Adaptive, Multiscale Simulation
               of Turbulence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a9985340

Award Number: 9985340
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256432             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth E. Jansen jansen@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CAREER: Software Frameworks to Enable Parallel, Adaptive, Multiscale Simulation
              of Turbulence

Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) is the numerical simulation
              of the behavior of fluids, such as the flow of air over a car body or airplane
              wing or the flow of water past a ship. This is a classic problem in
              computational science, with great implications for both science (understanding
              the fluids) and industry (improving performance of land, air, and sea
              vehicles). Important cases of CFD - particularly turbulence, where a broad
              range of scales interact - are still unsolved problems. This project will
              attack those problems using modern multiscale computational methods.

The
              goal of this project is the development of computational frameworks necessary
              to efficiently simulate turbulent flows at different approximation and
              resolution levels. It will integrate existing physics-based turbulence models
              with modern multiscale methods, where subgrid-scale models are based on
              mathematical analyses of the discrete methods used to solve the underlying
              partial diffential equations. The project will develop a parallel and adaptive
              computational environment that automatically combines mesh refinement and
              coarsening with method-order variation to achieve high efficiency. The
              resulting framework will also support dynamic load-balancing, new a  posteriori
              error estimation procedures, and appropriate data structures for high
              performance on a variety of modern computer architectures. Lessons learned from
              this framework will provide insight into frameworks for other complex
              phenomena. The framework will also enable rich educational rewards. Young
              children are fascinated by interactive computer simulations of the world (e.g.
              why do airplanes fly, or baseballs curve); the framework can be packaged to let
              them play with these concepts, and eventually attract them into a career in
              science and engineering. At the college level, the framework can be used to
              explain fluid mechanics concepts to engineering students, let CS students
              analyze communication behavior in a real application, and illustrate numerical
              analysis to undergraduate and graduate students.

