Title       : Affinity, that Elusive Dream: A Counter-Story of the Chemical Revolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9985886

Award Number: 9985886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77804              (Estimated)
Investigator: MiGyung Kim kim@social.chass.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-85886 - MiGyung Kim (North Carolina State University) 
"Affinity, that
              Elusive Dream:  A Counter-Story of the Chemical Revolution"

This project
              aims at configuring the development of theoretical chemistry prior to and
              throughout the Chemical Revolution. Taking seriously the genealogies of French
              elite chemists at the Jardin du roi and the Academie royale des sciences, the
              P.I. seeks to configure the two major theory domains of chemistry they
              stabilized -- composition and affinity --- between the domains of chemical
              philosophy and chemical practice. It was precisely the ability of chemical
              teachers at the Jardin to mediate between the imperative of chemical philosophy
              and the requirements of chemical practice which made French chemistry
              successful in the second half of the eighteenth century. Lavoisier and Guyton
              each picked up one of these main theory-domains and pursued them systematically
              with new experimental techniques, forging the Chemical Revolution. Affinity,
              rather than composition, constituted the theoretical frontier of French
              chemistry during the period.

The emphasis on theoretical chemistry does not
              endorse a return to the history-of-ideas tradition in historiography. The P.I.
              intends to dissociate the domain of chemical theory from that of chemical
              philosophy. While chemical philosophy -- be it Aristotelian, Paracelsian,
              Cartesian or Newtonian -- aimed at explaining chemical phenomena as a part of
              the general order of the universe, chemical theories catered to the demands of
              chemical practice. It was the need to organize the expanding chemical territory
              in a meaningful way that gave rise to chemical theories. In contrast to a
              number of specific theories such as the phlogiston or the oxygen theory which
              were used to make sense of a limited range of phenomena, composition and
              affinity reflected more broad, yet essential practical strategies chemists
              relied on in their practice. Chemical philosophies, largely useless in guiding
              laboratory practice, nevertheless performed important functions in the social
              legitimation and the pedagogy of chemistry. As the analytic tools of chemistry
              became more and more refined and philosophical fashions kept changing, the two
              theory-domains of composition and affinity were reformulated at each stage to
              accommodate them. By configuring the domain of chemical theory, therefore, the
              P.I. is layering pre-Lavoisian chemistry into the three domains of philosophy,
              theory and practice. The stability and the vitality of French chemical
              tradition depended on the interactive stabilization of these three
              domains.

To the degree that the Chemical Revolution is perceived as a
              "paradigmatic example of a revolution in science," this work will have an
              impact on the philosophical modeling of scientific revolutions. The didactic
              tradition of chemistry played in important function in regulating the long-term
              development of the discipline by nurturing stable domains of theory and by
              re-inventing them at each stage of analytic refinements.

