Title       : CAREER: Biomimetic Carbon Dioxide Fixation Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a9985266

Award Number: 9985266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew T. Caudle TCaudle@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
              program supports research to characterize the mechanism of biotin-dependent
              carboxylase (BDC) enzymes, by Professor Matthew Caudle of the Department of
              Chemistry and Biochemistry at the Arizona State University. This class of
              enzymes, along with related enzymes, is responsible for the bioconversion of
              carbon dioxide and carbonates into organic compounds. The strategy employed
              involves the preparation of Mg(II), Mn(II), Zn(II) and other first-row divalent
              metal complexes functionally similar to BDC enzymes using ligands ranging from
              simple amido anions to biotin itself. Following synthesis and characterization
              of these complexes, they will be examined for carbon dioxide uptake, transfer
              and reaction in the presence of potential organic substrates. The specific
              chemico-structural features of those complexes which result in carbon dioxide
              sequestration and carbon-carbon bond formation will be identified.

The goal
              of this research is to develop non-biological chemical compounds that can fix
              carbon dioxide by analogy to the functioning of  the relevant enzymes. These
              materials contain metal ions complexed to amino acids and related ligands and
              will provide new insight into the mechanism of carbon dioxide fixation by
              biological systems, as well as contribute to the design of synthetic catalysts.
               Such catalysts will have considerable environmental and industrial impacts by
              converting a greenhouse gas into useful substances. There is a strong focus on
              motivating undergraduates to become involved in research through direct
              participation in departmental seminars. A significant feature of this effort is
              a corresponding assessment plan which will evaluate the effectiveness of the
              program and provide a means for continuous improvement.  


