Title       : CAREER: Genetic Dissection of The Signaling Pathway of A Family of Cell
               Wall-Associated Protein Receptor Kinases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a9985135

Award Number: 9985135
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499060             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zheng-Hui He zhe@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The overall scientific objective of this CAREER development project is to
              dissect genetically the signaling pathway of a family of cell wall-associated
              protein kinases (WAKs) in the plant, Arabidopsis.  The extracellular cell wall
              serves a vital role in plant development and survival.  Despite its importance,
              however, it is not well understood how the wall interacts with the
              intracellular compartment.  Preliminary studies have identified a family of
              five WAKs.  All members have an extracellular domain tightly linked to the cell
              wall, a single transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic serine/threonine kinase.
               WAKs are required for normal plant development and play an important role
              during pathogen responses.  More recent results have shown that transgenic
              suppression of WAKs results in the inhibition of cell elongation, a complete
              arrest in development, and cell death.  In these studies extragenic suppressor
              screening will be used to identify and characterize components in the signaling
              pathway mediated by WAKs.  The specific scientific aims are (1) to create an
              inducible transgenic line that will be used for suppressor screening, (2) to
              identify and characterize extragenic suppressor mutants, and (3) to analyze the
              interactions between suppressors and specific WAKs.  The overall educational
              goal for this project is to integrate this research with a teaching program
              that will educate students in plant molecular genetics.  Part of this goal will
              be to foster the excitement of scientific discovery in undergraduate and
              graduate students at San Francisco State University, and to provide them with
              tools to pursue a successful career in science.   Specific educational aims are
              (1) to incorporate modern molecular genetic techniques into a plant physiology
              laboratory course, (2) to develop a new course in plant molecular biology, (3)
              to recruit and mentor minority students in the fields of plant molecular
              biology and genetics.  This last aim will include participation in
              institutional and community outreach programs for minorities, and the mentoring
              of minority students undertaking independent research. These objectives are
              firmly supported by both the faculty in the department of biology and the
              university administration.  Both believe strongly that an active research
              program provides students with opportunities to gain first hand experience in
              how science operates and gives them skills not attainable in a traditional
              classroom setting.  In addition, the university at large is committed to the
              education of the ethnically diverse Bay Area population.
