Title       : CAREER: In-Situ Characterization of Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a9985264

Award Number: 9985264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324513             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ersan Ustundag ersan@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9985264
Ustundag

This grant presents a detailed CAREER plan that will employ
              the latest improvements in neutron and X-ray diffraction instruments to
              characterize the response of individual phases in a composite to applied
              loading. Model specimens are prepared that are essentially fibrous composites,
              and progress from a single fiber to an array of fibers and finally to a
              three-dimensional stacking of fibers approaching the geometry of  "real"
              composites. The specimens are loaded under an X-ray or neutron beam to measure
              the strain response of each phase. By varying applied stress and temperature,
              crucial phenomena is determined, such as in-situ yield stress, matrix or fiber
              cracking, interface debonding, evolution of load sharing due to creep in one
              phase, interactions between neighboring fibers, and evolution of damage zones.
              The overall macroscopic response of the composite is measured via strain gauges
              or extensometers attached to its surface. The main goal is to provide reliable
              mechanical behavior data that will lead to development of constitutive
              equations that take into account the in-situ behavior of each phase. The
              education activities include research experience for undergraduate students at
              Caltech and in national laboratories; new course development that leads to a
              more balanced Materials Science curriculum at Caltech; and adaptation of
              advanced computational tools in teaching, especially the use of the Internet in
              research and education. 
%%%
Materials with complicated microstructures or
              multiple phases (composites) are becoming increasingly prevalent, especially in
              critical applications such as aerospace structures and engine components. The
              successful application of these complex materials requires knowledge about the
              in-situ, co-deformation of each phase. This deformation, however, has not been
              investigated systematically. In order to develop more sophisticated
              micromechanics models and to eventually improve the design of composites,
              detailed information on multiscale deformation behavior of each phase
              comprising a composite is needed.
*** 


