Title       : Optical Probe Studies of Polymer Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1999  
File        : a9985782

Award Number: 9985782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George D. J. Phillies phillies@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9985782
Phillies

Polymer solution dynamics arises in a wide variety of
              scientific, technical, and social contexts, from  the totally fundamental (e.g.
              polymer transport as a puzzle for many-body physics) to the utterly practical
              (e.g., polymeric additives as thickeners for fast-food-chain milk shakes). 
              Physical properties of dissolved polymers are critical in a vast range of
              industrial and commercial applications.  Under this grant experimental studies
              of relaxations in polymer solutions will be conducted.  The primary
              experimental technique will be quasielastic light scattering from mesoscopic
              isotropic and optically anisotropic probe particles, permitting measurement of
              translational and rotational couplings in solution on mesoscopic distance
              scales.  Comparison of probe diffusion in solutions of flexible and
              semiflexible chains will test the validity of modern models of semiflexible
              chain dynamics.  Study of small probes in concentrated polymer solutions will
              be compared with competing models of polymer solutions.  Experimental and
              literature data will be employed to learn how transport properties of polymer
              solutions follow from macromolecular properties.  Summer fellowships will
              encourage undergraduates to pursue careers in research.

The proposed work
              has potential scientific importance and broader implications.  Understanding
              polymer solution dynamics would end an outstanding challenge to the theory of
              many-body systems.  An exemplary societal impact of the work arises in the
              modern biotechnical industry: understanding transport in concentrated polymer
              solutions will permit biopolymer product purification to be performed in
              concentrated solutions, avoiding the current general need for dilute solutions
              and expensive reconcentration steps.

