Title       : Control of Seed Dispersal in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a9985530

Award Number: 9985530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin F. Yanofsky marty@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Control of seed dispersal in Arabidopsis

Fruit dehiscence, or pod shatter, is
              the result of a carefully orchestrated series of events late in fruit
              development resulting in seed dispersal. Programmed cell separation between
              dehiscence zone cells, presumably by secretion of pectin degrading enzymes,
              allows for separation of the fruit valves from the replum and release of the
              seeds. Lignification of specific cells within the fruit is also proposed to
              contribute to pod shatter, providing a "coiled spring" that actively pops the
              valves off of the replum. The PI has shown that the SHATTERPROOF1 and
              SHATTERPROOF2 (SHP1 and SHP2) MADS-box genes are required for differentiation
              of the dehiscence zone at the valve margin and for ignification of adjacent
              cells such that shp1 shp2 double mutants are indehiscent. The focus of this
              proposal is the cascade of gene activity beginning with SHP1 and SHP2 gene
              expression early in carpel development, and culminating in the secretion of
              pectin degrading enzymes from dehiscence zone cells and the subsequent
              detachment of the valves from the replum. Our research plan involves parallel
              genetic and molecular approaches toward unraveling this cascade. Genetic
              screens will be used to uncover additional loci involved in fruit dehiscence by
              identifying indehiscent mutants as well as suppressors of the shp1 shp2 mutant
              phenotype. Molecular approaches will use gene- and enhancer-trap lines that
              show valve margin expression domains. These markers will allow further
              haracterization of genes and mutants involved in the dehiscence process and
              provide a source of candidate genes that act downstream of SHP1 and SHP2. Use
              will also be made of DNA microarrays to identify additional genes regulated by
              SHP1 and SHP2. Mutant screens have already identified at least one additional
              locus required for fruit dehiscence, INDEHISCENT1 (IND1). The IND1 gene encodes
              a putative MYC-like basic helix loop helix transcription factor that requires
              SHP1 and SHP2 for expression. Based on our preliminary results we have
              developed a simple model for the interactions of genes during valve margin
              development. The use of the genes and mutants described in this proposal will
              allow us to directly test this model and to refine it as additional genes
              involved in valve margin development are revealed. The specific nature of the
              shp1 shp2 double mutant phenotype provides a unique system for understanding
              the cell differentiation process in plants as well as for examining the sharp
              boundary that forms between the distinct cell types that compose the fruit
              valves and the replum. In addition, investigating the processes which result in
              seed dispersal and lignification in Arabidopsis could lead to important
              contributions to crop improvement.

