Title       : Pubertal Development of Brain and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a9985876

Award Number: 9985876
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372577             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl L. Sisk sisk@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The primary functions of the nervous system are to sense, interpret,
              and
integrate external and internal stimuli and to generate
              appropriate
behavioral responses.  The influence of external and internal
              stimuli on
the nervous system and behavior changes across the life span. 
              In
particular, puberty is a period of development during which
              significant
neural and physiological changes result in the emergence of
              adult
behaviors.  Maturation of the nervous system during pubertal
              development
results in different responses to external and internal stimuli
              in
adulthood.  The overall objective of this research is to
              understand
developmental events during puberty that alter the integration of
              external
and internal stimuli within behavioral neural circuits.  

This
              project focuses on pubertal maturation of the neural circuit that
mediates
              male mating behavior in the hamster.  The perception of olfactory
cues from a
              female and the presence of circulating steroid hormones are
both obligatory
              for mating behavior in this species.  These sensory and
hormonal stimuli
              activate neurons within a well-characterized neural
circuit in the adult, and
              the neural integration of these external and
internal cues leads to expression
              of mating behavior.  Previous research
has determined that olfactory stimuli
              and steroid hormones do not impact
the nervous system of juvenile males in the
              same way, and therefore mating
behavior is not expressed.  This project will
              investigate pubertal change
in the interactions among steroid receptors and
              neurochemical responses to
olfactory cues.  The working hypothesis is that in
              the adult nervous
system, the cellular basis for the integration of sensory
              and hormonal
information involves activation of progesterone receptors
              by
neurotransmitters or neuropeptides released in response to female
              olfactory
cues.  We hypothesize that such sensory/hormonal integration is
              not
accomplished prior to puberty for two reasons: 1) estrogen does not
              induce
progesterone receptors in neurons of the hypothalamus of juvenile
              males;
and 2) female olfactory cues do not elicit the neurotransmitter
              or
neuropeptide responses needed for activation of the progesterone
              receptor
in prepubertal males.  Experiments are designed to test both aspects
              of
this hypothesis, which is proposed to account for the inability of
              juvenile
males to express mating behavior.  This project will contribute to
              our
understanding of the cellular mechanisms underlying pubertal maturation
              of
the neural integration of sensory and hormonal stimuli required
              for
expression of adult-typical behaviors.  

