Title       : CAREER: A New Framework of Dynamic Monitoring and Control for Semiconductor
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2001   
File        : a9985074

Award Number: 9985074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Joe Qin qin@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI's research plan consists of theoretical development and a collaboration
              between the University of Texas at Austin (UT) and Advanced Micro Devices (AMD)
              to develop the next generation dynamic fault monitoring and control framework
              for semiconductor processing.  AMD has an award from NIST to develop an
              advanced process control framework (APCFW) jointly with Honeywell.  The PI is
              collaborating with AMD to develop a new generation of monitoring and control
              methodologies using equipment tool measurements, wafer state measurements, and
              lab-based wafer electrical tests (WET).

This research plan consists of two
              parts.  Part one aims to develop a new dynamic fault monitoring framework using
              error-in-variables model identification and dynamic structured residuals with
              maximized sensitivity for fault identification.  Part two applies the fault
              monitoring framework to semiconductor  processing and develop a run-to-run
              control methodology using equipment measurements, optical emission spectroscopy
              (OES), and WET properties from laboratory tests.  Non-intrusive OES sensors
              developed at Sandia will be used to collect data at very high resolution over a
              wide spectrum of wavelengths at sub-second sampling intervals.  The
              collaboration with AMD allows the PI to access their manufacturing equipment
              and real-time data that are not available in a university environment.

The
              education plan emphasizes the integration of research and education in
              semiconductor processing and fault monitoring and control.  Specific tasks will
              be:
1. Develop an undergraduate/professional text on "Unit Operations and
              Control of Semiconductor Processes" based on this research.
2. Develop an
              internet-based multimedia teaching package to provide students with live
              demonstrations of engineering concepts and self-paced interactive learning.
3.
              Establish a bi-directional education infrastructure to educate students with
              practical experience at AMD and educate practicing engineers with modern
              control.
4. Encourage female graduate students to pursue research in process
              control as women engineers are historically underrepresented in the process
              control field.

