Title       : CAREER: The Relationship Between Transcription Termination and Replication in
               Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2000      
File        : a9985156

Award Number: 9985156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404849             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christi L. Magrath cmagrath@trojan.troyst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Troy State U Main Campus
	      University Avenue
	      Troy, AL  36082    334/670-3102

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MAGRATH
The molecular processes that occur on a chromosome must either tolerate
              an overlap of factors and structures required for the independent molecular
              events or the processes must be separated. This research investigation will
              establish the relationship between two distinct molecular processes that
              require the utilization of genomic DNA as the primary molecular substrate -
              transcription termination by RNA polymerase II and DNA replication.  Previous
              research has demonstrated that the sequences that mediate termination of
              transcription by RNA polymerase II are localized to the same genomic region as
              ARS (autonomous replication sequence) elements, and transcription directed into
              an ARS element can interfere with normal replicative activity. To extend these
              findings, the extent of protection from transcriptional interference that the
              transcriptional terminators that flank ARS elements provide will be
              established. Using the model eukaryote, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the maximal
              level of transcriptional activity that can be directed into an ARS/terminator
              cassette, while still maintaining replicative efficiency, will be established. 
              The creation of a battery of mutants will establish if an ARS/terminator
              cassette can be dissected into two independent activities. The level of
              transcription read-through from yeast genes located upstream of genomic ARS
              elements will be assessed, and the effect of disrupting normal transcription
              termination on replicative activity will be evaluated. In that all ARSs do not
              function as origins under all conditions, the level of transcription
              termination evident at various ARS sequences that are both replicatively
              functional and non-functional will be determined. Finally, to expand our
              studies to other diverse molecular processes, non-coding sequences within the
              yeast genome will be examined to determine the relative ability to terminate
              transcription and potentially reveal a more global role for transcription
              termination signals as molecular shields. In summary, this research
              investigates the potential overlap of different processes and determines if
              conflict among the different processes on the DNA exists. This project is ideal
              for inclusion into a molecular biology curriculum. While enriching students'
              education on the scientific process, this project will also give students a
              thorough and complete understanding of the molecular processes occurring on the
              chromosome.

