Title       : CAREER: Decadal Variability in the Tropical Pacific and Indian Oceans -An
               Interdisciplinary Pathway for Global Change Education and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a9985557

Award Number: 9985557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $462800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia E. Cole jcole@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The teaching and research program for this CAREER award is a continuum from
              basic education through leading-edge research, involving students at every
              step. A new educational initiative aims to expand the pipeline of talented
              students entering the field by developing a new web-based educational resource
              for high-school teaching of global change science and linking secondary school
              classrooms with university researchers. Research on decadal climate variability
              will incorporate undergraduate and graduate participation. Classroom teaching
              will cover diverse aspects of global change at all levels (from introductory
              undergraduate through advanced graduate seminars) with a multidisciplinary
              approach. The research component aims to characterize decadal variability in
              the tropical Indian and Pacific Ocean, building on new results that indicate a
              dominant and far-reaching role for the tropical Pacific even at this time
              scale. Using multiple geochemical tracers in long-lived coral skeletons, this
              project will expand the record of variability in the central Pacific and
              western Indian Oceans. Coral records from the central Pacific clearly record
              the multiple time scales of variability in this region: they offer
              reconstructions of ENSO that are comparable in quality to instrumental data,
              and they reveal decadal variability that is coherent with other records in the
              tropics. This project will expand on previous work by recovering longer cores
              from this key region and by developing reconstructions from multiple tracers
              that allow the separation of salinity (rainfall) and temperature variance.
              Additional coring in the western Indian Ocean will extend the record of
              variance in that region both spatially and temporally, allowing
              characterization of the extent to which regional variance is driven by Pacific
              versus more regional (e.g. monsoonal) processes. 


