Title       : CAREER: Designing Hypertext Materials for the Science Classroom: Understanding
               Students' Changing Cognitive Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a9985158

Award Number: 9985158
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356578             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sadhana Puntambekar sadhana@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
               
My research and teaching plans are geared towards designing and implementing
              online science resources to help students learn science, and providing
              professional development activities for teachers. My plans integrate an
              interdisciplinary approach to designing and using hypertext resources in
              science classrooms, evaluating the cognitive demands of student learning while
              using such material, as well as associated professional development initiatives
              for teachers. 

The aims of my research plan are: (1) Design, implement and
              evaluate hypertext material for the science classroom. These materials will
              focus on helping students understand interrelationships between principles and
              concepts so that they learn science as an integrated body of knowledge, not as
              a set of isolated facts. There are numerous interrelationships that students
              need to understand in order to effectively use and do science. For example, in
              understanding planets, physics shades into chemistry, astronomy, and geology,
              and biology shades into chemistry, in understanding osmosis. (2) Through
              empirical studies, understand students' changing cognitive representations as
              they learn from these materials. This will help not only in understanding
              student learning but will also help understand how students learn from
              hypertext materials, thus providing guidelines for better design.

My
              teaching plan has the following aims. (1) Continue developing the graduate
              program in Instructional Media and Technology. (2) Integrate professional
              development activities for teachers along with design and implementation of
              research materials. (3) Build an interdisciplinary team of students to enable
              the design and integration of technology in science classrooms.

