Title       : The Diffusion of New Technology and the Evolution of Industry Structure: The
               North American Maritime Industries Since c.1789
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2001     
File        : a9985962

Award Number: 9985962
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program is concerned with empirical investigations of the
              diffusion of new technology, the evolution of industry structure, and firm
              survival, all in the context of the North American merchant shipbuilding and
              merchant shipping industries from c.1789 to the twentieth century. The two main
              pur-poses of this project are: (1) to test between two competing theories of
              technological diffusion based on vintage-specific human capital and on
              learning, and (2) to study patterns of industry evolution and the determinants
              of firm survival with the particular focus of conducting discriminating tests
              between recent models of industry shakeouts.

These tests will be conducted
              using new panel data on US shipyards and Canadian shippers, and on a large
              dataset of individual wage contracts struck between mariners and their
              employers on voyages leav-ing Canadian Atlantic ports. The data span periods of
              between 80 and 120 years. The Canadian data were recently made available to
              researchers, while the US data will be constructed from primary sources. These
              data are uniquely valuable for the study of technology because they identify
              the precise technology em-ployed by firms and the precise technology with which
              employees were working.

Tests of theories of diffusion will focus on the
              discriminating predictions arising from models in which human capital is
              specific to technology of a given vintage, and those in which individual firms
              and workers learn about, and expend resources in order to switch to, new
              technologies. At the firm level, the vintage-specific human capital model
              predicts a negative correlation between the rate of technological diffusion and
              the variance of technologies in uses, while the learning model predicts a
              positive correla-tion. At the individual worker level, the vintage-specific
              human capital model predicts a steeper age-earnings profile for employees
              matched with recent vintages of technology, but that expected lifetime earnings
              for all workers are the same. The learning model, in contrast, predicts higher
              expected lifetime earnings for workers who master new technologies
              earlier.

Recent theories of industry evolution have focused on the shakeout,
              a robust feature of the industry life cycle in which firm exit rates rise
              dramatically in a short period of time. Several recent studies have explained
              the shakeout in terms of differential success in adopting new technologies,
              while others have argued that variations in exit rates are simply a result of
              earlier variations in entry rates. Among studies arguing for the importance of
              technology, the role of firm scale has been treated differently. The research
              focuses on two main lines of inquiry: First, to what extent does the adoption
              of new technology matter for firm survival? Put another way, is firm age a
              sufficient statistic for firm growth and survival, or does technology choice
              matter? Second, is current scale an important indicator of the probability that
              a firm will eventually succeed in adopting new technology? These questions will
              be addressed using the panel of shipyards to measure the effects of firm size.
              firm age, and current technology on firm growth and sur-vival.

