Title       : Body Size and Tracheal Function in Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a9985857

Award Number: 9985857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon F. Harrison j.harrison@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Like all animals, insect cells must obtain oxygen from the atmosphere, and
              excrete the volatile waste product, carbon dioxide.  Insects use a relatively
              unique type of respiratory system to engage in this process, the tracheal
              respiratory system.  With the tracheal respiratory system, gases move between
              the atmosphere and the cells primarily via air-filled tubes called trachea. 
              The goal of this study is to investigate the basic physiological mechanisms of
              function in the insect tracheal system, primarily using grasshoppers as model
              systems.  Specifically, this project will assess the relationship between
              structure and function comparing insects of different sizes, and insect tissues
              of different metabolic rates.  Tracheal structure will be measured using light
              and electron microscopy to quantify tracheal dimensions, while tracheal
              function will be assessed by monitoring gas exchange and ventilation volume in
              response to exposure to low or high oxygen levels. The relative importance of
              diffusion and convection in insect tracheal systems will be investigated by
              manipulating the diffusion rate of oxygen by changing the inert gas composition
              of the atmosphere. This research will be important for understanding the
              evolution of the insect tracheal system, and for developing a general
              understanding of the relationship between form and function in animal gas
              exchange systems.  Because oxygen availability influences growth and
              development, this research will be relevant to the understanding of insect
              development, and the use of controlled atmospheres to reduce insect
              infestations.  This research project will also contribute significantly to
              scientific training, as 2-3 Ph.D. students will be partially funded by this
              award.
