Title       : Physical Ecology of the Rocky Intertidal: Predicting Patterns in Invertebrate
               Body Temperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a9985878

Award Number: 9985878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Helmuth helmuth@biol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
     Intertidal animals (organisms such as barnacles, mussels and oysters)
              live between the regions of high and low tide along most of the world's
              coastlines, and must alternately contend with both the aquatic and terrestrial
              environments.  Unlike mammals, intertidal animals often have very little
              physiological control over their body temperatures.  As a result, their
              temperatures are driven by the characteristics of the surrounding environment,
              and can change very rapidly.  During high tide, when the animal is underwater,
              its body temperature very rapidly equilibrates to the temperature of the
              surrounding water.  In contrast, when the tide is low and the creature is
              exposed to air, its temperature is driven by a variety of climatic factors.
              Because of heating from the sun, these temperatures are often much higher than
              that of the air, making air temperature a poor predictor of body temperature. 
              Importantly, this means that in order to accurately predict body temperatures,
              a variety of climatic factors must be considered, including wind speed, air
              temperature, cloud cover and heating from the sun.
     Decades of laboratory
              studies have shown very strong effects of body temperature on the growth,
              reproduction, and survival of intertidal animals and plants, which can
              potentially have cascading effects on the productivity of the nearshore
              environment.  Surprisingly, while many studies have monitored water
              temperatures, only very recently have we begun to explore what animal
              temperatures are during low tide.  As a result, the PIs are severely limited in
              connecting studies examining organismal physiology with the ecology of
              intertidal populations and communities.  Perhaps more importantly, the PIs
              presently have no way of gauging the potential impact of forecasted climate
              changes on intertidal communities.
     Using a series of small weather
              stations and temperature recording devices, this study will test a mathematical
              model that uses climatic data to predict the temperatures, and thus the levels
              of thermal stress, of an ecologically important intertidal animal (the mussel)
              during low tide.  It will also explore geographic patterns in thermal stress
              from sites ranging from northern Washington to southern California. Because the
              timing of low tide varies with location and time of year, geographic patterns
              in body temperatures are likely to be complex.  For example, while summertime
              low tides in parts of Washington State often occur during the hottest parts of
              the day, those in Central California tend to occur earlier in the morning, when
              conditions are cooler.  Therefore animals in northern regions may actually
              experience hotter body temperatures than those in southern regions.  This study
              will provide an important step in predicting the effects of climate change on
              intertidal communities, and will attempt to provide a means of explicitly
              linking studies of animal physiology with those of population ecology.



