Title       : CAREER: An Education and Research Program to Support and Evaluate Watershed
               Restoration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9985194

Award Number: 9985194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Boll jboll@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9985194  Boll  Successful watershed restoration requires an understanding of the
              complex interaction between climate, land use, hydrology, water quality,
              ecology and the human behavioral and economic considerations of those living in
              and interacting with the environment.  In individual watersheds, landowners,
              municipalities, state and federal agencies are seeking information and tools to
              evaluate the effectiveness of efforts to improve water quality.  At the
              research level, tools and models are being developed to represent more
              accurately a region's water and pollutant transport processes, but applications
              to situations having a significant impact are limited.  The purpose of this
              grant is to  better educate future hydrology and water quality experts and
              those individuals needing to improve water quality, and to gain a better
              understanding of water and pollutant transport in the watersheds of the
              Northwest Wheat  and Range Region (NWRR) in the Pacific Northwest.  This grant
              has the following purposes:
1. To initiate and develop a process to develop a
              Discipline in Hydrology and Water Quality for studies at the undergraduate and
              graduate levels; 
2. To establish an Education and Research Watershed;
3.
              Research objectives: (a) To develop a field data collection program for model
              development and evaluation of watershed restoration activities; (b) to develop
              a family of GIS-based distributed water and contaminant transport models
              applicable to the NWRR; and (c) to determine the level of complexity required
              to evaluate watershed restoration activities using uncertainty analysis in
              model predictions; 
4. Education objectives: (a) To improve and expand courses
              in Hydrology and Water Quality through integration with data collection efforts
              in Paradise Creek Watershed; (b) To collaborate with local organizations, state
              and federal agencies and university extension agents to enhance education of
              land owners and local residents with respect to environmental aspects of
              Paradise Creek watershed; and (c) To involve land owners and local residents in
              the collection of climate data in Paradise Creek watershed.
The education and
              research objectives will be achieved in collaboration with the
              Palouse-Clearwater Environmental Institute, and assistance and support from the
              Latah Soil and Water Conservation District, the Natural Resources Conservation
              Service and the University of Idaho Extension System. ***

