Title       : Program Conference for the Mathematical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0317232

Award Number: 0317232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard Millman                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95362              (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Smith williambsmith@amstat.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Ewing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tina H. Straley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Crowley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Statistical Assoc
	      1429 Duke Street
	      Alexandria, VA  223143461    703/684-1221

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Several mathematical sciences associations represented (namely, American
              Mathematical Society, American Statistical Association, Society for Industrial
              and Applied Mathematics, and Mathematical Association of America) are devoted
              to the advancement of mathematical sciences.  The combined societies will
              promote the programs and goals of the NSF Division of Mathematical Sciences
              (DMS) programs by hosting a meeting of mathematical sciences department
              representatives.  The conference will have plenary sessions that provide
              overviews of DMS programs, expectation and directions, as well as concurrent
              sessions on various aspects of the DMS opportunities, such as VIGRE, FRG,
              individual subdisciplinary programs, and joint solicitations with other groups
              within the NSF and other federal agencies.

Specifically, the conference will
              be in Arlington, Virginia, near Reagan Washington National Airport beginning on
              May 9-10, 2003.  We anticipate that approximately 200 interested mathematical
              scientists will attend this meeting.  Faculty representatives from mathematical
              sciences research departments and from other institutions that will be seeking
              further NSF funding will be invited.  In addition, representatives from
              institutions of historically underrepresented groups and minorities will be
              invited.  The NSF/DMS e-mail list serves to mathematics and statistics
              department heads will be used to disseminate information concerning this
              conference.  In addition, various association publications (such as AMSTAT News
              and AMSTAT Online, AMS Notices, MAA Focus, etc.) will publish articles
              concerning the conference.  Local expense reimbursement from this project will
              be afforded to eligible faculty representatives.
