Title       : SGER: Judicial Pioneers: Litigants in the Moscow Theater Hostage Case
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0317122

Award Number: 0317122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40824              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vanessa Baird Vanessa.Baird@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Debra Javeline  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, submitted under the Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER)
              program, examines the willingness of citizens to sue.  How does the idea to
              redress grievances in courts first occur in developing democracies where people
              previously did not view the courts as the final arbiter of disputes nor imagine
              the possibility of taking their governments to court? Who are the pioneers in
              taking legal action against governments? The researchers hypothesize that
              wealthy or otherwise privileged individuals are the "judicial pioneers" in
              developing democracies, a finding that contrasts with expectations generated by
              those who study litigation patterns in established democracies. In developing
              democracies, it is suspected that the barriers to entry are too high for the
              disadvantaged and that only the relatively advantaged can break down these
              barriers and attempt to hold governments accountable. The hypothesized
              mechanisms connecting advantage to judicial pioneering include greater
              expectations of satisfactory outcomes, greater perceptions of judicial
              procedural fairness, greater experience with other democratic institutions or
              specifically with the judicial process, great support for democracy, and
              greater internal efficacy. By determining the importance for judicial pioneers
              of expectations of satisfactory outcomes relative to these other variables,
              major questions in the judicial politics and democratization literatures will
              be answered. This research study litigants in Russia's first major class action
              lawsuit - a case where 38 of the 600-800 victims in the Moscow theatre hostage
              crisis recently initiated claims against the city of Moscow for an
              unprecedented $40 million. They have been granted a hearing scheduled for
              January 16, 2003. Social scientists rarely if ever have the opportunity to
              study judicial pioneers who decide to take the risk of litigation in a vacuum
              of information and experience. It is essential therefore to document this first
              case as the building block for the literatures on litigation, judicial
              legitimacy, the "judicialization of politics," and democratic consolidation.
              This project advances knowledge about how underrepresented groups in new
              democracies access judiciaries by litigating and thus how their rights come to
              be protected by the legal system.  In addition, this project sheds light on
              public attitudes toward new government institutions in emerging democracies.
