Title       : Collaborative Research: Forest Dynamics in Heterogeneous Landscapes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1995      
File        : a9221097

Award Number: 9221097
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134057             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen W. Pacala steve@eno.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1302,1306,1577,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   Throughout much of the past three hundred years the                       
              settlement of New England has resulted in the destruction and                  
              fragmentation of native forest vegetation. Recently, there has                 
              been an increase in forest regeneration in this region. This                   
              study is designed to gather field data from a variety of sites                 
              that will be used to parameterize a model of forest development                
              based on actual starting conditions measured in the field. Forest              
              dynamics is a function of seed dispersal, seedling establishment,              
              and differential growth rates of component species. In this study              
              field experiments will be conducted in a range of forest habitats              
              to determine the role of seed dispersal and herbivory in                       
              effecting forest regeneration. The results from these experiments              
              will be used to adjust and improve the forest dynamics model                   
              called SORTIE.  Models such as SORTIE provide baseline data under              
              known conditions against which it will be possible to compare                  
              actual patterns of forest regeneration. The mechanisms associated              
              with the model will dramatically increase our ability to predict               
              changes in forest vegetation. The ability to predict changes will              
              have important implications for global climate change and its                  
              effects on future biodiversity.                                                
              %%%                                                                            
              Previous approaches to modelling forest dynamics have relied                   
              exclusively on average response variables and average                          
              environmental conditions. The SORTIE model represents a vast                   
              improvement over earlier models because it is truly spatially                  
              explicit. Initial conditions will be derived from positions of                 
              individual trees and saplings measured in the field. In addition,              
              the actual environmental conditions in different stands will be                
              measured and incorporated into the model. The role of herbivores               
              in forest regeneration is being measured and added to the model.               
              Finally, this model represents an advance because it incorporates              
              environmental heterogeneity.
