Title       : Neural Processing of Amino Acid Taste Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9221891

Award Number: 9221891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Avijit Chaudhuri                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $505464             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Caprio   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9114,9117,9169,BIOT,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The sense of taste involves chemosensory stimuli that usually             
              are complex mixtures rather than single pure substances.  It                   
              remains critical to know whether the taste system treats stimulus              
              mixtures differently from their individually presented components.             
              This work uses the relatively simple taste system of the catfish,              
              which is exquisitely sensitive to amino acid stimuli, to understand            
              how such neural information about mixtures is processed.                       
              Electrophysiology on single nerve cells in the peripheral taste                
              system will be used to see what types of mixture interactions                  
              (suppression or enhancement) are present, whether different nerves             
              process a mixture differently, and whether the mixture interactions            
              are predictable based on responses to the individual components of             
              the mixture.  Responses of nerve cells in the brain will reveal                
              how the inputs from different peripheral fiber types converge, and             
              whether mixture information is processed differently between                   
              periphery and brain.  Specific behaviors elicited by particular                
              amino acids, such as feeding, will be used to determine how well               
              discrimination can be done by taste alone, and how mixtures affect             
              behavior.  This study using this unique model system will have an              
              impact on neuroscience in general, by increasing our understanding             
              of how complex sensory information in general is processed, by                 
              providing useful comparisons with other model chemosensory systems             
              in insects and crustaceans, and by providing useful analogies to               
              current work in visual and auditory analysis of complex signals.               
              It also is likely to have an impact on biotechnology, by providing             
              useful information on how mixtures affect flavor, and by offering              
              the potential for chemosensory modulation of feeding behavior in               
              aquaculture.
