Title       : Ecological Determinants of Genetic Structure in a Plant Meta-population
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1997  
File        : a9221175

Award Number: 9221175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192750             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. McCauley david.e.mccauley@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,
Abstract    :
                   Meta-populations are populations which are subdivided into                
              many ephemeral, weakly interacting subcomponents.  The genetic                 
              properties of metapopulations are determined, in large part, by                
              genetic processes accompanying the extinction and recolonization               
              of the local subcomponents.  These processes have been the                     
              subject of recent theoretical analysis but are not well studied                
              in nature.  This study will investigate the population genetic                 
              properties of a meta-population of Silene alba, an herbaceous                  
              plant that has been the subject of the detailed, long-term                     
              demographic analysis required as background data for the study of              
              meta-populations.                                                              
                   The basic question to be asked in this project is whether                 
              the repeated extinction and recolonization of local demes acts to              
              increase or to diminish genetic differentiation, relative to a                 
              similarly subdivided population but without extinction and                     
              recolonization.  The work will include studies of the genetic                  
              properties of the meta-population, additional demographic studies              
              geared towards understanding mechanisms of gene flow, and                      
              extension of the theoretical models.  Experimental studies of                  
              pollen and seed flow, and recruitment from the seed bank, will                 
              evaluate sources of gene flow, both into established populations               
              and as part of the process by which new populations are                        
              established.  Extension of theory will be guided, in part, by the              
              results of the empirical work. //
