Title       : Developmental Regulation of Auxin Transport: Specific PM Auxin-binding Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1995      
File        : a9221659

Award Number: 9221659
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri L. Lomax lomaxt@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9109,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The active, polar transport of the plant growth hormone auxin is               
              essential to the control of plant development. Dr. Lomax has used              
              a simple but powerful approach to isolate the IAA uptake symport by            
              photoaffinity labelling of the protein in purified plant plasma                
              membranes with a tritiated azido-IAA analogue. She has found that              
              the azido-IAA specifically labels two polypeptides of 40 and 42kD              
              in plasma membranes isolated from Cucurbita pepo hypcotyls. Both               
              polypeptides are labeled by azido-IAA with high specific activity,             
              behave as intrinsic membrane proteins, and exhibit a competition               
              specificity for various auxin analogs very similar to that for in              
              vitro and in vivo auxin transport. These data suggest that the                 
              protein doublet may be an auxin transport carrier(s). The overall              
              goals of this project are the establishment of function for these              
              specific plasma membrane auxin-binding polypeptides and the                    
              investigation of their role in regulating plant development. Dr.               
              Lomax has completed the purification of these very low abundance               
              polypeptides. From the purified protein, she has obtained protein              
              microsequence which has allowed her to design specific                         
              oligonucleotide probes. These probes will be used to select the                
              corresponding cDNA clones encoding the 40 and 42kD auxin-binding               
              polypeptides. The specific cDNA clones will be used 1) to determine            
              the nucleic acid and amino acid sequence, 2) for functional                    
              expression studies, and 3) as probes for the study of                          
              transcriptional control and pattern of expression of the                       
              corresponding genes during development. The results of these                   
              studies should provide significant insight into both the structure             
              and function of the putative symport protein and the role of IAA               
              uptake in the regulation of growth and development in plants. The              
              proposed studies will also forge a much needed link between the                
              physiology and molecular biology of auxin action.
