Title       : Central Processing of Electrosensory Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1995        
File        : a9221978

Award Number: 9221978
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis C. Bell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Good Samaritan Hosp&Med C
	      
	      Portland, OR  97210    /   -

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              There are fish species known as "weakly electric" fish, because                
              they emit a small discharge from an electric organ.  They use                  
              electroreceptor organs in the skin to detect changes in the                    
              electric field that surrounds them, somewhat like echolocation                 
              behavior.  One whole part of their brain is called the                         
              electrosensory lobe (ELL), where the nerve signals from                        
              electroreceptors are integrated with nerve signals from other parts            
              of the brain, including information about body position, about the             
              commands for timing of the electric organ discharge, and about                 
              other stages of electrosensory processing.  Modulation of sensory              
              input has been demonstrated here in the changes in effectiveness of            
              the contacts between nerve cells, known as synaptic plasticity.                
              This work uses electrophysiology and anatomical tracing of the                 
              processes of single nerve cells to determine how cells within ELL              
              respond to electrosensory and central inputs, and to determine the             
              basic anatomical circuitry of ELL.  This model system is useful not            
              as a "simple" one, but as one which may help to understand the real            
              complexities of sensorimotor integration linking sensation to                  
              behavior in the vertebrate central nervous system.  Using this                 
              unusual non-human sense will provide insights about how central                
              brain structures modify the flow of sensory information, how                   
              sensory information is modulated by commanded motor activity, and              
              how synaptic plasticity affects functions of sensory processing and            
              network functions.
