Title       : Social Organization of Foraging by Honey Bees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1993     
File        : a9221150

Award Number: 9221150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George W. Uetz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113019             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Seeley tds5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this research project is to better understand how a                
              well-coordinated division of labor is accomplished in insect                   
              societies, by analyzing the mechanisms devised by natural                      
              selection for the coordination of labor groups (castes) within                 
              the honey bee society.  Dr. Seeley will examine three distinct                 
              operations in honey bee colonies that require the joint activity               
              of two castes, and will aim to determine for each operation how                
              information flows between the castes so that their rates of                    
              activity stay in proper balance.  The three operations are nectar              
              acquisition, nest thermoregulation by evaporative cooling, and                 
              comb construction.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This research addresses a fundamental problem faced by any                     
              organization in which there is division of labor, namely the                   
              coordination of interdependent labor groups within the                         
              organization.  This is a severe problem when one group must                    
              adjust to unpredictable changes in the activity level of a second              
              group.  For example, in the case of the bees, whenever the                     
              weather turns hot and the hive begins to overheat, bees working                
              inside the hive spread more water for cooling and bees working                 
              outside the hive must accordingly increase their water                         
              collection.  The solution is the creation of various lines of                  
              communication between the groups.  These communication links are               
              not well understood for animal societies, even those such as the               
              honey bee society where it has long been known that there is an                
              elaborate division of labor.  Hence this research will address an              
              important gap in our understanding of how intricate animal                     
              societies work, and it may well provide ideas on how to better                 
              coordinate labor in human organizations.
