Title       : Biogeochemical and Ecological Analysis of the Population Dynamics of the Spotted
               Ladybird Beetle Using Geographic Information Systems and Naturally Occurring
               Isotopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1993   
File        : a9221320

Award Number: 9221320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peggy H. Ostrom ostrom@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart H. Gage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510600   Integrated Pest Management              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
                   As early as 1962 Rachel Carson recognized the need for                    
              biological solutions to environmental problems.  She said: "A                  
              truly extraordinary variety of alternatives to the chemical                    
              control of insects is available.  Some are already in use...                   
              others are little more than ideas in the minds of imaginative                  
              scientists,... .  All have this in common: they are biological                 
              solutions, based on the living organism they wish to control, and              
              to the whole fabric of life to which these organisms belong.                   
              This research project will work within this context to develop                 
              natural alternatives to pesticide and herbicides as crop-land                  
              management tools.                                                              
                   The long-term goal of our research is to understand the                   
              behavior of insects that ate natural predators on pests that                   
              reduce the productivity of agricultural crops.  We will identify               
              attributes of the landscape that are favored by a predator on                  
              aphids, the ladybird beetles.  This knowledge could allow us to                
              naturally reduce the number of insect pests by designing an                    
              agricultural landscape that promotes a large population of                     
              predators.                                                                     
                   The first step in this research is to define the link                     
              between various crop types and the predatory insect.  This is                  
              done by determining if there is a match between the abundance of               
              naturally occurring stable isotopes of carbon and nitrogen in the              
              insect predators and the agricultural crop.  A future step will                
              be to link the spatial distribution of the predators with respect              
              to landscape elements.  These two steps are a unique approach to               
              studying the behavior of insects because they combine technology               
              from geology and chemistry (analysis of naturally occurring                    
              stable isotopes), entomology (insect population dynamics,                      
              biological control), and geography (landscape mapping using                    
              geographical information systems).
