Title       : Study of the Dynamics and Maintenance of the Intertropical Convergence Zones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1992  
File        : a9221895

Award Number: 9221895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sankar-Rao Mopidevi                     
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38100              (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Battisti david@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Intertropical Convergence Zones (ITCZs) are climatological            
              features in the earth's atmosphere that are intimately tied to both            
              the tropical large-scale meridional (Hadley) circulation and the               
              low-latitude surface circulation.  The ITCZ drives the meridional              
              circulation cells which transport momentum and excess heat from the            
              tropics to midlatitudes, thereby affecting the baroclinity of the              
              midlatitudes and hence climate. In addition, the eastern Pacific               
              ITCZ appears to play a role in the large El Nino/Southern                      
              Oscillation climate fluctuations.  Yet the dynamics and energetics             
              of the processes maintaining the Intertropical Convergence Zones               
              are poorly understood.  This study examines the maintenance of the             
              ITCZ phenomenon and the associated large-scale circulation, using              
              a General Circulation Model and a simplified 3-layer model of the              
              tropical atmosphere.  The PI is completing a series of carefully               
              designed GCM experiments with increasingly complicated forcing that            
              explores how the surface boundary heating (sea surface temperature)            
              and orography affect the location, strength, energetics and                    
              dynamics of the ITCZ.  A 3-layer model of the tropical atmosphere              
              has been constructed and employed to facilitate the interpretation             
              of the GCM experiments (this model explicitly resolves the boundary            
              layer and the free baroclinic tropical tropospheric circulations).             
                   These results are helping to better define the relationship               
              between the ITCZ and large-scale meridional and surface                        
              circulations, and hence are contributing to our knowledge of the               
              global climate.
