Title       : Studies of RNA and Protein Dynamics via NMR Relaxation Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1994   
File        : a9221280

Award Number: 9221280
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Rance   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The principal objective of this research is to study the                       
              intramolecular dynamics of some very important classes of                      
              ribonucleic acid (RNA) molecules and several members of a family               
              of calcium-binding proteins.  Experimental data on dynamical                   
              processes in these biomolecules will be obtained via the                       
              measurements of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) relaxation rate               
              constants; development of appropriate methodologies for measuring              
              heteronuclear relaxation rate constants will be necessary.  NMR                
              spectroscopy is a powerful method for obtaining detailed, site-                
              specific information on the structure and dynamics of small- to                
              medium-sized biomolecules in solution.  By measuring various NMR               
              relaxation rate constants for specific nuclei in molecule it is                
              possible in principle to characterize the types, amplitudes and                
              rates of various internal motions over a wide range of time                    
              scales.  The specific aim in the RNA studies is to determine the               
              general characteristics of dynamical processes in RNAs, such as                
              the relative mobilities of bases and sugars in loops and duplex                
              regions, the dynamics of nucleotides in loop regions or bugles                 
              compared to nucleotides in duplexes, and the relative mobilities               
              of mismatched basepairs compared to standard Watson-Crick                      
              basepairs.  The specific aim of the protein research is to study               
              the internal dynamics of several members of a calmodulin                       
              superfamily of calcium-binding proteins.                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              The internal mobility and flexibility of biomolecules play key                 
              roles in virtually all biological processes; for example,                      
              fundamental processes such as enzyme activity, molecular                       
              recognition and various molecular transport mechanisms depend                  
              heavily on the intramolecular dynamics of participating proteins,              
              nucleic acids and other biomolecules.  Thus, to obtain a better                
              understanding of the physical basis for the functional activity                
              of these biomolecules it is extremely important to probe their                 
              dynamical properties.  To date very few physical studies have                  
              been made of the structure and dynamics of RNAs, and thus the                  
              proposed NMR experiments should provide invaluable information                 
              regarding these molecules which have a central role in so many                 
              fundamental, cellular processes.  The dynamics studies of the                  
              calcium-binding proteins will be very important for understanding              
              their functional activity and for helping to establish the basic               
              principles underlying the inter-relationships of protein                       
              structure, function and dynamics.  The calcium ion functions as a              
              second messenger in a range of biological processes.  In these                 
              systems, transient variations in the concentration of calcium ion              
              are translated by regulatory calcium-binding proteins, which                   
              undergo conformational changes when they bind calcium ions.  The               
              structural aspects of calcium-binding proteins have been under                 
              investigation in many laboratories for some time, but only                     
              recently has it become feasible to study in detail their                       
              internal, dynamical properties.
