Title       : NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program: Advanced Composites for Concrete Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1993     
File        : a9221217

Award Number: 9221217
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58936              (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio Nanni   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 5983,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a six-month long-term visit to Japan by                
              Professor Antonio Nanni, Department of Architectural Engineering               
              at the Pennsylvania State University.  He will be undertaking a                
              cooperative research project with Dr. Kazuhisa Yahagi, Technical               
              Research Institute, Mitsui Construction Company in Tokyo and                   
              Professor Masanori Tsuji, Department of Civil Engineering,                     
              Science University of Tokyo in Noda.  They will be researching                 
              the area of fiber-reinforced-plastic (FPR) composites for use as               
              reinforcing elements in concrete structures.  This will involve                
              testing the fire-resistance of FRP reinforced concrete members to              
              be sure it holds up to currently established standards and does                
              not overheat or lose strengtrh in its rods when exposed to                     
              flaming fire.  In addition, they will be studying the release of               
              toxic products resulting from ignited FRP materials.  They will                
              further research the substitution of a thermoplastic resin to                  
              replace the more common thermoset resin.  This may offer improved              
              corrosion resistance and enhanced drainage tolerance.  It could                
              also reduce the processing time and may provide a cleaner working              
              environment and infinite shelf life.  This research will be                    
              followed by the preparation of educational materials,                          
              encompasssing the properties and design of this new construction               
              material, to be used for instructional purposes.                               
                                                                                             
              This research will likely result in the use of FRP in building                 
              construction which is currently being seriously considered by                  
              building designers because of the potential of improving                       
              manufacturing and lowering production costs.  Professor Yahagi is              
              a first-rate researcher and his Institute has recently acquired                
              new facilities including a fire hood and a braiding machine which              
              allows fire testing and manufacturing of the FRP composites.  The              
              Japanese construction industry is far more advanced in this                    
              technology than the U.S.  Professor Nanni, who is a U.S. expert                
              in this area, should obtain valuable information that he would be              
              unable to obtain in the U.S.  Professor Tsuji has visited                      
              Professor Nanni at his university for three months and this                    
              experience should assist them in the formulation of a curriculum               
              course incorporating the reserach findings and new technologies                
              for using FRP in building construction.  Since previous                        
              collaborations between these researchers have been successful, it              
              is anticipated that results from this project will be fruitful,                
              as well, and of possible use throughout the world
