Title       : Carbanions and Physical Organic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1995  
File        : a9221277

Award Number: 9221277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $467000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Streitwieser astreit@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Experimental and computational methods will be applied to determine            
              the kinetic acidities of a variety of hydrocarbons. Experimental               
              methods will include the determination of exchange rates from                  
              cyclohexylamine-N-t catalyzed by cesium and lithium                            
              cyclohexylamides by tritium NMR. Some rates will be determined for             
              deuterium exchange with cyclohexylamine-N-d2 using mass                        
              spectroscopy and deuterium NMR. Theoretical calculations will be               
              carried out for proton transfer reaction between various                       
              hydrocarbons and bases, and compared to experimental results.                  
              Calculations of ion-pair SN2 displacement reactions will be                    
              continued. These reactions show unusual highly bent transition                 
              states and may give relative reactivities different from the                   
              corresponding ionic reactions.                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              continuing work of Professor Andrew Streitwieser at the University             
              of California, Berkeley. The acidity of very weakly acidic                     
              hydrocarbons will be determined by recently developed sensitive                
              techniques. This will extend an important body of knowledge.                   
              Theoretical calculations will be made that relate to the acidity of            
              hydrocarbons and the results will be compared to the experimental              
              findings. This work will provide a fundamental understanding of                
              weakly acidic hydrocarbons and the consequences to chemical                    
              reactivity of the carbon-hydrogen bond in hydrocarbons. Additional             
              calculations will be carried out on a fundamental displacement                 
              reaction process in organic chemistry. Preliminary calculations                
              have shown an unusual geometry in the course of this reaction and              
              this work will be continued.
