Title       : Ultrafast Studies of Chemical Reactions in Polyatomic Molecules in Simple
               Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1995  
File        : a9221392

Award Number: 9221392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $684000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Harris harris@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Charles Harris is supported by a grant from the                      
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to conduct                     
              experimental and theoretical studies of the effects of                         
              solvation on the rates of chemical reactions in solution.                      
              He will measure unimolecular dissociation and bimolecular                      
              recombination rates on picosecond and femtosecond timescales                   
              using a variety of experimental methods such as transient                      
              pump-probe electronic absorption spectroscopy, transient                       
              Raman scattering, and transient IR spectroscopy.  The                          
              systems he will study include triatomics, pseudotriatomics,                    
              mono- and di- metal carbonyls, and substituted polyenes.                       
              The solvents used in these studies are primarily monatomic                     
              rare gas liquids.  He will also perform molecular                              
              simulations of the systems being studied using Generalized                     
              Langevin and Generalized Brownian dynamics.                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Theories dealing with chemical reactions in the gas phase                      
              are quite well developed.  Much less is known about the                        
              factors which influence chemical reactions occurring in                        
              solution, and this is where most important chemical                            
              reactions occur.  In these very fundamental studies, Harris                    
              will explore the effects which solvent molecules have on                       
              reactions in solution which are initiated by absorption of a                   
              photon of light.  The combination of experiment and theory                     
              will lead to a better understanding of the factors affecting                   
              chemical reactions in solution.
