Title       : Algorithmic Support for Parallel Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1995     
File        : a9221785

Award Number: 9221785
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold L. Rosenberg rsnbrg@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This research is based on the theme of using algorithmic  techniques to enhance
              the performance and flexibility of parallel  architectures.  Specific projects
              span a spectrum from  traditional topics, such as task scheduling and load 
              balancing, to less  familiar ones, such as using  emulations to achieve
              architectural flexibility  (e.g.,  reconfigurability);           from
              foundational questions concerning the  potential and  the limitations of
              various modalities of computation and  communication (e.g., the limitations of
              bufferless  communication), to more  immediately applicable studies of 
              algorithmic techniques that endow a parallel  architecture  with facilities
              that would be prohibitively expensive to  provide  in hardware (e.g., a
              multigauging capability).    The program is motivated by  three observations:
              (1) the speed of  processors in parallel architectures   increases faster than 
              the speed of the communication subsystem; (2) the  potential of  parallel
              computation is realized only when programmers are  liberated from having to
              manage the detailed physical resources  (number of  processors, interconnection
              topology, etc.)  of their  machines; (3)  technological developments are
              continually creating  new modalities of parallel  computation.  All three of
              these  phenomena increase the importance of  developing algorithms that 
              enhance the computing power of parallel  architectures.  Observation (1)
              suggests that we can now relegate to software  chores that previously demanded
              the speed  and concomitant cost  of hardware  implementation.  Observation (2)
              points out the  increasing need for algorithms  that enhance the portability of
               parallel programs.  Observation (3) suggests the  need to  understand emerging
              modalities of parallel computation, in order to  exploit them effectively.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
