Title       : Beam Transfer Functions and Nonlinear Dynamics at the IUCF Cooler
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1995       
File        : a9221402

Award Number: 9221402
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John W. Lightbody, Jr.                  
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shyh-Yuan Lee shylee@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1231      FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Beam dynamics problems relevant to the understanding of the                    
              coherent beam instabilities and the nonlinearity in the Cooler                 
              Ring will be investigated.  These research topics are                          
              indispensable to the effort of increasing luminosity at the IUCP               
              Cooler Ring and are also important to modern high brightness                   
              storage rings.  The proposed research is also important in                     
              training the accelerator physics graduate and undergraduate                    
              students.  The task A studies "Impedances and Instabilities                    
              measurement of the Cooler".  Topics of interest are coherent                   
              instabilities and preservation of small emittance beam in high                 
              energy (and high brightness) accelerators.  Using the measured                 
              beam transfer function, the impedance can be deduced.  Model                   
              simulation and analytic evaluation of the Vlasov equation will be              
              compared with experimental data.  These experiments will help to               
              understand better the current limitation of the Cooler Ring.  It               
              will also provide information for the design of damper system.                 
              Through this series of experiments, we will be able to understand              
              the dynamics of coherent instability and multidimensional Landau               
              damping on the coherent growth.  These experiment can also be                  
              important to Plasma physics.  The task B studies "Phase and                    
              Amplitude Modulations in Parametric Resonances".  The experiment               
              is to measure beam responses to the phase or amplitude                         
              modulations in the rf system.  These response functions are                    
              solutions of parametric resonant equations.  These experiments                 
              are important to understand the diffusion process in the                       
              longitudinal phase space.  Using the phase feedback loop, highly               
              damped parametric resonant system can be studied as well.                      
              Phenomena such as chaos, strange attractors, and bifurcations can              
              be measured.  With these experimental tools, we can set up an                  
              excellent laboratory for nonlinear dynamics.
