Title       : University/Industry Coop: Effect of Copolymer Structure on the Bulk and
               Microscopic Properties of Two-Phase Hydrogels (AMPP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1995      
File        : a9221798

Award Number: 9221798
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Steiner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9102,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Hydrophobically modified water-soluble polymers undergo a                      
              self-assembly process in aqueous solutions whereby the                         
              hydrophobic side chains cluster together into micelle-like                     
              aggregates, or microdomains, of characteristic size and                        
              hydrophobicity.  The resulting network, which are called two-                  
              phase hydrogels, have physical properties which are completely                 
                                                                                             
              different from those of  the initial solution and which may be                 
                                                                                             
              exploited to good effect in numerous applications.  In this                    
              AMPP investigation, two-phase hydrogels from alkyl-substituted                 
                                                                                             
              polyacrylamides are synthesized and the relationships between                  
              polymer structure and hydrogel properties are explored.  The                   
              focus is on three structural properties of the polymer,                        
              namely, the total hydrophobe content, the backbone                             
              conformation, and the length of the hydrophobic side chains.                   
              The effects of these properties on the structure and                           
              composition of the microdomains and on the rheological                         
              properties of the bulk material are investigated.                              
                                                                                             
              One of the most interesting features of these unique materials                 
                                                                                             
              is the demonstrated ability of the dispersed hydrophobic phase                 
                                                                                             
              to absorb and retain organic solutes within an aqueous gel,                    
              and to release the solutes to the surroundings at a constant                   
              rate (so-called "zero-order release").  This type of release                   
              profile is much sought after in controlled drug delivery, an                   
              emerging technology of great interest in the pharmaceutical                    
              field.  A controlled release dosage form is one which delivers                 
                                                                                             
              therapeutic levels of a drug at a steady rate over long times,                 
                                                                                             
              eliminating the need for repeated doses of a medication and                    
              avoiding the associated problems of oscillating blood levels                   
              of the drug.  The basic investigations on these novel                          
              materials will be used as the design basis for two-phase                       
              hydrogels for use in controlled drug release.                                  
                                                                                             
              This work will be conducted in collaboration with colleagues                   
              at Exxon Research and Engineering Company, who will also                       
              furnish the polymers to be used in the study.
