Title       : Collaborative Research: Linking Environmental Heterogeneityto Foraging Behavior:
               Plant Community Geometry and Herbivore Functional Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1994  
File        : a9221844

Award Number: 9221844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Spalinger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              0510302   Energetics & Thermodynamc               
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                   The ecological consequences of heterogeneity in resources                 
              depend                                                                         
              on the way resources are arranged in space and on the functional               
                                                                                             
              properties of organisms seeking them. The PI's derived a model of              
                                                                                             
              consumption by herbivores that incorporates variation in spatial               
                                                                                             
              arrangements of plants, and velocities and food processing                     
              abilities of                                                                   
              animals. The model generated the following hypotheses: 1)                      
              Increasing                                                                     
              patchiness in plant communities causes encounter rate with                     
              resources to                                                                   
              decline as foraging time increases. 2) The decline in encounter                
              rate is                                                                        
              opposed by increasing resource apparency and size. 3) Spatial                  
              pattern                                                                        
              fails to influence intake rate when resource encounter rate                    
              exceeds an                                                                     
              animals food processing rate. 4) At a given scale, the influence               
              of                                                                             
              spatial pattern on intake rate will be greatest for animals of                 
              intermediate body sizes. To test these hypotheses, the PI's will               
                                                                                             
              manipulate spatial patterns of resources, resource apparency, and              
                                                                                             
              resource size available to herbivores in laboratory and field                  
              experiments. Results from these experiments will provide an                    
              assessment                                                                     
              of the model's ability to predict intake rate of consumers in                  
              comparisons with predictions from more traditional predictive                  
              theory.                                                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              The PI's have developed one of the first models that relates                   
              resource                                                                       
              patchiness, resource abundance, foraging movements of herbivores,              
              and                                                                            
              body size to resource acquisition by herbivores. The model has                 
              generated a series of testable hypotheses, some of which are                   
              unique and                                                                     
              counter-intuitive. Tests of these hypotheses will provide an                   
              important                                                                      
              contribution toward a much needed general theory of herbivore                  
              foraging.                                                                      
              Results from this research have important implications for                     
              landscape                                                                      
              scale management of grazing systems, and for a general                         
              understanding of                                                               
              foraging behavior in light of the habitat fragmentation currently              
              occurring in many natural systems.
