Title       : Engineering Education Coalition for the Center of Advanced Technoligies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1995  
File        : a9221542

Award Number: 9221542
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5970000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo E. Hanifin hanifinl@udmercy.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Detroit
	      4001 West McNichols Road
	      Detroit, MI  482190900    313/927-1000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9270,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT      9221542  Hanifin    PI-NAME:  Leo E. Hanifin (U. of Detroit-Mercy)
               EEC-9221542  CO-PI NAME: Emory W. Zimmers, Jr. (Lehigh U.)       William A.
              Grissom (Central State U.)      Donald R. Falkenburg (Wayne State U.)     
              Khalil S. Taraman (Lawrence Tech. U.)      Walton M. Hancock (U. of Michigan)  
                  The Coalition for New Manufacturing Education will define a comprehensive
              paradigm for the education of advanced manufacturing engineering-technologists.
               The Coalition is comprised of Focus:HOPE and six universities; Detroit-Mercy,
              Central State, Lawrence Technological, Lehigh, Michigan and Wayne State.    The
              Coalition will design, deliver, test and evaluate, adopt, and disseminate new
              resources and methodologies usable in both industry and university settings. 
              In consultation with Coalition industry partners, essential course elements in
              manufacturing engineering and technology will be identified and modularized for
              presentation through a variety of innovative instructional processes.  Optimal
              use of electronic media and mentors will support an instructional sequence that
              is inquiry-driven and customized to the current manufacturing functions and
              experience of the engineer or technologist candidate.  To foster global
              technological access, two foreign languages will be required.    Coalition
              university partners will each develop modules for a knowledge area (course) in
              which that institution has outstanding expertise.  Upon satisfactory completion
              of all modules associated with a knowledge area, the university responsible for
              that content will award appropriate credit.  Partner institutions will mutually
              recognize all such course credits earned, consistent with procedures for course
              credit transfer.  Depending on the degree pathway chosen by each candidate, the
              appropriate accredited institution will confer an associate, bachelor or master
              level degree.    Focus:HOPE's Center for Advanced Technologies (CAT) in Detroit
              will be the primary development platform for a six-year curricul um integrating
              hands-on manufacturing skill mastery and interdisciplinary engineering
              knowledge within an applications context, i.e., the actual production of
              industry contracts requiring expert use of advanced technologies at competitive
              levels of quality, cost, and efficiency.  Other key features include futuristic
              220,000 SF CAT facility, it leading-edge manufacturing equipment and
              information systems, and its target enrollment of young black adults. 
              Teaching/learning methodologies and specific curricular modules successfully
              tested and evaluated at both the CAT and the participating universities will be
              codified and disseminated nationally.
