Title       : Evolution of Preferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1993     
File        : a9221703

Award Number: 9221703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Ryan mryan@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Most species in the genus Xiphophorus (swordtail fish) have males              
              that vary greatly in body size.  Females prefer the larger males               
              for mating.  One species, X. pygmaeus, was thought to lack large               
              males, but, surprisingly, female X. pygmaeus still prefer large                
              males:  they are more attracted to big males of other species                  
              than they are to their own small males.  Dr. Ryan recently                     
              discovered that large male X. pygmaeus exist at two sites,                     
              although all other sites lack large males.  At sites without                   
              large males, females are more attracted to the large conspecific               
              males from other sites than to the small males from their own                  
              sites.  However, females from sites with large males did not show              
              any discrimination based on male body size.                                    
                                                                                             
              Dr. Ryan and his colleagues will investigate the factors that                  
              cause large body size in this species; preliminary results                     
              suggest it does not stem from the same genetic mechanism that                  
              causes large size in other swordtails.  The researchers will also              
              attempt to determine why females at sites with large males do not              
              prefer large males, as do females from other sites.                            
                                                                                             
              The results will bear on several areas of animal behavior and                  
              evolution.  They will indicate alternative mechanisms for how                  
              species evolve large body size and the consequences for behaviors              
              correlated with body size.  They will indicate if female mating                
              preferences for traits absent in the species might exist, perhaps              
              because these preferences were inherited from ancestral species                
              in which males had the trait under question.  The results will                 
              also indicate if such inherited preferences could be lost if                   
              these preferences begin to entail costs of mating.  Finally, this              
              research will provide badly needed information about the natural               
              history and biogeography of a species that is a spectacular                    
              component of the Mexican fish fauna but whose range is restricted              
              to a few small tributaries.
