Title       : Evaluating Cognitive Abilities and Communicative Competence in an Exceptional
               Code
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1996     
File        : a9221941

Award Number: 9221941
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210037             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irene M. Pepperberg impepper@media.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Pepperberg studies interspecies communication and animal                   
              cognition.  Using a specific modeling technique, she and her                   
              students have trained an African Grey parrot to produce vocal                  
              (English) labels in response to questions about abstract                       
              categories of color, shape, material, similarity and difference,               
              absence of information, relative size, and quantity.  On these                 
              tasks, the bird's performance is comparable to that of great apes              
              and marine mammals.  Ongoing research, which includes two                      
              additional parrots, will continue to (1) study acquisition of a                
              human code by parrots and examine the effects of species identity              
              of the trainers; (2) examine the level of acquired                             
              competence--the extent to which this code can be used for                      
              comprehending questions, numerical concepts, object-object                     
              relations, equivalence relations, prepositions, displacement, use              
              of verbs, recognizing 2-dimensional forms, negation, and how                   
              labeling might affect object recall and form perception; and (3)               
              examine how social modeling may offer insights into other studies              
              of vocal learning.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The results of this work have wide-ranging implications for at                 
              least three areas.  (1) Studies of avian versus mammalian brain                
              function:  Given that the avian brain, although considerably                   
              different from that of mammals, can process information in                     
              similar ways, might Dr. Pepperberg's procedures assist clinicians              
              who are devising programs for brain-damaged humans?  (2) Programs              
              for teaching language to dysfunctional children:  Dr.                          
              Pepperberg's training techniques are being used, with some                     
              success, for developmentally-delayed children; might the                       
              procedures also work for children with other types of deficits?                
              (3) Targeting parrots for wildlife conservation initiatives:  If               
              parrots are as intelligent as chimpanzees and dolphins, shouldn't              
              we make the same attempts to save them and their habitat as we                 
              are making for these other species?
