Title       : Cyclic Changes in the Chemical Defense of the Eastern North American Population
               of the Monarch Butterfly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1993      
File        : a9221091

Award Number: 9221091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lincoln P. Brower lpb@zoo.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A dramatic seasonal increase in toxicity of monarch                       
              butterflies appears crucial to their spring and summer                         
              recolonization of North America.  Monarchs larvae feed on milkweed             
              plants and sequester poisonous cardenolides from them.  These                  
              chemicals protect the butterflies from predation because they are              
              bitter and cause birds to vomit.  Monarch butterflies migrate each             
              fall to Mexico, then reinvade eastern North America the following              
              spring.  Since cardenolides change during the annual migration                 
              cycle, monarchs feeding on different milkweed species lose their               
              deterrent qualities at different rates.  Fall migrants feed on a               
              weakly emetic milkweed; subsequent cardenolide loss leads to a                 
              partial breakdown of their chemical defense in Mexico, where                   
              orioles and grosbeaks eat millions of butterflies each winter.                 
              However, monarchs that survive and migrate back to the USA lay                 
              their eggs on extremely poisonous southern milkweeds, producing a              
              new generation of apparently toxic butterflies that complete the               
              spring migration northward to Canada.  Bioassays using birds and               
              chemical assays of the cardenolides will document the postulated               
              increase in toxicity of the spring generation.  The results should             
              provide definitive evidence that the milkweed-based chemical                   
              defense of the monarch is a predictably dynamic phenomenon                     
              inextricably entwined with its annual migration cycle.                         
              %%%                                                                            
              Logging of the fir forests in central Mexico is destroying the                 
              overwintering habitat of the monarch butterfly.  Because of this,              
              the monarch's migration in Eastern North America has been                      
              designated an endangered biological phenomenon, a new category of              
              biodiversity conservation.  This research program will document the            
              biology of the spring remigration before the predicted collapse of             
              the monarch population over the next 10-15 years.  It is also                  
              relevant to conservation of milkweed habitat in eastern North                  
              America for the maintence of monarch population in spring & summer.
