Title       : Diffusion-Limited Growth in the Presence of Active Membranes: A Theory of
               Neuronal Morphogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1995       
File        : a9221654

Award Number: 9221654
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Raymon Glantz                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258604             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. G. E. Hentschel phshgeh@physics.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Fine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,9162,9216,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this research is to develop and test a general class               
              of models for the generation of neuronal dendritic shapes; these               
              models are biologically constrained and based on diffusion-                    
              controlled growth.  It is evident that dendritic arbors gave self              
              -similar structures over a range of scales, consistent with the                
              concept that shape is controlled by the diffusion of chemical                  
              species.  These concentration fields result from the interaction               
              of dynamic influx, extrusion and sequestration of the growth-                  
              regulating factors.  In particular, it is hypothesized that                    
              calcium is such a factor, and that the local calcium ion                       
              concentration beneath the cell membrane is the specific immediate              
              determinant of neuronal growth.  The investigators will develop                
              biologically constrained physical models for the growth of curved              
              membrane surfaces in the presence of these diffusive fields, and               
              will use computational methods to explore the evolution of these               
              models under different biologically-plausible conditions.  Most                
              importantly, they will test these models by comparing the                      
              computed morphogenesis with the development of real neurons under              
              similar imposed conditions.  This research may yield an                        
              understanding of the mechanisms controlling the development of                 
              neuronal form, which influences the electrical properties and                  
              synaptic interconnections of neurons that are essential to normal              
              brain function.***//
