Title       : Archaeometric Study of Settlement Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1994       
File        : a9221938

Award Number: 9221938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19229              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Burton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Price and his colleages at the University of Wisconsin's                   
              Laboratory for Archaeological Chemistry will develop and test a                
              number of methods for reconstructing past human activities which               
              are reflected in living surfaces from excavated archaeological                 
              sites. They will apply a series of physical and chemical analyses              
              on materials collected from a present day settlement in Oaxaca                 
              Mexico. A large series of soil samples were excavated under                    
              controlled conditions in earthern floor houses where the actual                
              activities carried out were directly observed. The team will now               
              conduct physical analysis to determine micromorphology and particle            
              size. They will also search for phytoliths and other organic                   
              inclusions. On a chemical level they will determine element                    
              concentrations and and attempt to identify organic materials,                  
              especially fatty acids. They will use this situation to determine              
              the relationship between specific human behavior and the subtle                
              physical and chemical indications left on the ground. The results              
              will then be evaluated through application in a series of "true"               
              archaeological contexts.                                                       
                                                                                             
              Unfortunately many activities which take place at a simple                     
              technological level leave little if any evident archaeological                 
              debris. Many others leave traces which rapidly disintegrate and                
              thus escape archaeological attention. By studying archaeological               
              sites at a chemical and fine scale physical level, Dr. Price and               
              his colleagues hope to develop techniques which will help in the               
              reconstruction of prehistoric behavior. If successful these                    
              approaches can be employed by archaeologists in many parts of the              
              world and serve to increase our understanding of the past.
