Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Conference on Arithmetic Geometry with Emphasis in
               Iwasawa Theory; Tempe, Arizona; March 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1993        
File        : a9221957

Award Number: 9221957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Thiebaux                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy E. Childress nc@artin.la.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The conference, Arithmetic Geometry with an Emphasis in                   
              Iwasawa Theory, is to be held at Arizona State University, March               
              15-18, 1993.  This conference has several goals.                               
                                                                                             
                   .  Recently, there has been a great deal of activity                      
                      and many striking advances in arithmetic                               
                      geometry.  Due to the heavy backlog in journals,                       
                      work frequently does not appear in print for                           
                      several years after completion.  This conference                       
                      will provide a means for researchers outside of                        
                      select circles to learn what is currently the                          
                      state of the art.                                                      
                                                                                             
                   .  The problem of time lag alluded to above is more                       
                      acute for new conjectures and work in progress.                        
                      The overwhelming preponderance of journal                              
                      articles in number theory are for finished work.                       
                      The conference will provide an arena for                               
                      researchers to pose new questions to the number                        
                      theory community, offering interesting ideas for                       
                      new directions researchers may wish to take.                           
                                                                                             
                   .  By bringing people together from across the                            
                      country and around the world, the conference will                      
                      facilitate researchers discussing their work with                      
                      the world's experts, potentially leading to new                        
                      insights.                                                              
                                                                                             
                   .  Finally, talks which survey a sub specialty can                        
                      provide direction for researchers looking to                           
                      enter a new area (especially graduate students).                       
                                                                                             
                   The conference will include a combination of one hour and                 
              half hour talks, with no two given simultaneously (so that                     
              participants can attend them all).  All of the talks will be on                
              the conference theme of arithmetic geometry; some talks will                   
              focus on recent results, some on new conjectures, and others will              
              give overviews of sub-disciplines within arithmetic geometry.                  
              All lectures and informal discussion periods will take place in                
              space provided by the mathematics department on the Arizona State              
              University campus.
