Title       : U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research: Structural Studies of Chitin and
               Chitin-Protein Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1995    
File        : a9221356

Award Number: 9221356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14730              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rick P. Millane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510601   Biology of Pest Organisms               
              0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5941,9108,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides funding over a two year period to permit                   
              Dr. Rick Millane of Purdue University to travel to New Zealand                 
              once each year to conduct collaborative research on structural                 
              studies of chitin with Drs. Kenneth M. Rudall and George R. Clark              
              of the University of Auckland Department of Chemistry. The                     
              molecular and crystal structure of the gamma-allomorph of chitin               
              will be determined in atomic detail.  The overall structural                   
              features of a variety of chitin-protein complexes from different               
              sources will be determined. This information will be used to                   
              examine relationships between the structural features and the                  
              biological distribution and function of chitin. The results of                 
              this study will further extend the knowledge base on the                       
              structures and functionality of these polysaccharide systems that              
              are important components of the exoskeletons of insects,                       
              crustaceans and invertebrates. Structural details on chitin-                   
              protein complexes may also provide information relevant to                     
              cellulose composites in plant cell walls and collagen composites               
              in mammalian connective tissue.                                                
                                                                                             
              This cooperative research capitalizes on the unique and                        
              complementary skills of the investigators. For Dr. Millane this                
              project adds an international aspect to his on-going NSF                       
              funded research. The Auckland chemists have considerable                       
              experience in biophysical studies of chitin and chitin-protein                 
              complexes. Dr. Rudall is particularly skilled in the extraction                
              and preparation of chitin microfibrils suitable for x-ray                      
              diffraction analysis. Dr. Clark is an experienced x-ray                        
              crystallographer. Dr. Millane is an experienced x-ray fiber                    
              diffractionist who has determined the structures of a number of                
              polysaccharides and polynucleotides using this technique.
