Title       : Ectomycorrhizal Mat Communities: Evaluating the Direct Cycling Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1993  
File        : a9221222

Award Number: 9221222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23861              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Griffiths griffitr@ccmail.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Caldwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Castellano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,
Abstract    :
                   Specialized ectomycorrhizal (EcM) fungi produce extensive                 
              perennial hyphal and rhizomorph mats in the litter and soil of                 
              coniferous and deciduous forest ecosystems around the world.  Our              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              previous work has shown these complex microbial communities to be              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              sites of significantly elevated microbial activity, including                  
              nutrient decomposition and cycling.                                            
                   One of the most persistent problems in microbial ecology has              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              been the gap between physiological traits observed in pure                     
              cultures and  observed or hypothesized activities in nature.                   
              Using ectomycorrhizal mat communities as discrete experimental                 
              systems, this research will attempt to define the specific role                
                                                                                             
              of these ecologically important fungi in the EcM fungus-host tree              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              symbiosis through their capacity to exploit environmentally                    
              significant nitrogen and phosphorus resources in decaying soil                 
              organic matter.  The specific objectives of this research are to:              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              1) assess the ability of mat-forming EcM fungi to process soil                 
              organic matter by changes in substrate nitrogen and phosphorous                
                                                                                             
              chemistry and the production of extracellular enzymes,                         
              2) determine how EcM fungi dissociate reactive polyphenol-protein              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              complexes using extracellular enzymes, siderophores or                         
              biosurfactants as possible mechanisms, and                                     
              3) measure the ectomycorrhizal contribution to soil enzyme                     
              activities using polyclonal antibodies raised against enzymes                  
              from pure cultures.                                                            
                   This research will lead to the understanding of important                 
              soil processes associated with soil microbial systems.  In                     
              particular, this study will elucidate the ability of soil biota                
                                                                                             
              to release nutrients from decaying organic matter, and the                     
              proficiency of fungi to capture these resources and promote                    
              efficient nutrient cycling in ecosystems.
