Title       : Natural Sample Spaces and Judgment Under Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1994     
File        : a9221779

Award Number: 9221779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94590              (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor Gavanski GAVANSKI@IUBACS  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell H. Fazio  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                            
              Judging the probability of uncertain events is essential for                   
              effective decision making.  Yet people make many systemic errors               
              in their intuitive judgments.  These errors impede important                   
              decisions that people make on a daily basis, such as medical                   
              diagnosis, political and legal policy-making, and planning for                 
              the future.  The specific aims of the research are to evaluate                 
              and explore the implications of a conceptual framework developed               
              by Gavanski and Hui (1992) for understanding the mental processes              
              that underlie judgements of probability.  Gavanski and Hui have                
              argued that, contrary to previous theories, people are not                     
              necessarily bad statisticians, in that their judgment strategies               
              are not fundamentally incompatible with statistical principles.                
              However, they are sometimes bad samplers, in that they may access              
              inappropriate sets of information from memory for making their                 
              judgments.  Both accurate and inaccurate judgments can be                      
              understood according to what sets of information people access.                
              This research will (a) test some basic assumptions underlying the              
              framework, (b) apply the framework to understanding the processes              
              by which cognitive organization (i.e., the categorization of                   
              information in memory) influence people's ability to judge                     
              various probabilities, (c) evaluate novel predictions of the                   
              framework for conditions under which people will make either                   
              accurate or inaccurate judgments, and (d) use the framework to                 
              account for and clarify the processes underlying some established              
              judgment phenomena.  The long term objective of the research is                
              to provide an understanding of how people judge probability and                
              when and why they make judgment errors. In addition, the research              
              will lead to the identification of tasks particularly likely to                
              evoke judgment errors and to the development of techniques for                 
              improving people's judgments and decisions.
