Title       : The Effects of Soil Temperature and Nitrate on Fine Root Construction and
               Maintenance Costs in Northern Hardwood Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1994  
File        : a9221003

Award Number: 9221003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt S. Pregitzer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald L. Hendrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   More than half of all carbon fixed in the leaves of forest                
              trees during photosynthesis is allocated to the production of fine             
              roots, but the effects of pollution and climate change on the                  
              production and longevity of these roots is unknown.  We will study             
              the relationship between soil temperature and soil nitrate (a                  
              common pollutant in the Great Lakes region) and the production and             
              death of fine roots in sugar maple forests in order to better                  
              predict what might happen in pollution increases and/or the climate            
              warms.  Our study sites are separated by several hundred kilometers            
              from north to south, and there is a built-in temperature gradient              
              that spans the possible range of temperature increases that may                
              occur due to global warming.  In addition, we are going to apply               
              large amounts of nitrate to see what effect this particular                    
              pollutant has on the roots.                                                    
                   Using small cameras first developed for use during                        
              arthroscopic surgery, we will observe the birth, growth and death              
              of roots from small observation tubes permanently installed in the             
              soil.  Using this approach, we can compare root activity between               
              colder and warmer forests, and between forests subject to high and             
              low inputs of nitrate.  We will also measure rates of root                     
              respiration.  Because metabolic activity in living cells speeds up             
              as temperatures increase, root respiration rates should be higher              
              in warmer soils.  This means that the trees growing on warmer soils            
              must expend more energy to maintain enough living roots to take up             
              water and nutrients.  we think that nitrate will also increase root            
              respiration rates, because the nitrate must be converted to                    
              ammonium (requiring more energy) before plants can use it as a                 
              source of nitrogen for growth.  The results form this change and               
              increased pollutant deposition on forest ecosystems.
