Title       : A Modern Optics Laboratory at Gustavus Adolphus College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1994      
File        : a9451784

Award Number: 9451784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Saulnier psaul@nic.gac.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gustavus Adolphus College
	      
	      Saint Peter, MN  56082    507/931-8000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451784  Saulnier                             This project completes the final
              phase in a four step plan to  upgrade and enhance the laboratory component of
              the physics major  at Gustavus Adolphus College. The project addresses a
              serious  deficiency in the optics curriculum within the physics department. 
              This project will establish a modern optics laboratory course and  complete the
              equipping of a recently constructed teaching  laboratory. The aim of the
              project is to improve the physics  curriculum by initiating a laboratory-based
              course centered on  modern optical devices and techniques, with signal
              detection and  processing. The project is significant in that it provides an 
              important next step in an intentional plan to improve the physics  program and
              utilize the interests, commitment, and expertise of new  faculty in the
              department. The project also has the added benefit  of encouraging students to
              pursue graduate study by exposing them  to contemporary topics in physics. A
              variety of experiments will be  performed with equipment provided for this
              project, which include,  as major pieces, an optical table and breadboards, a
              photon-counter  and associated detector, an air-cooled Argon ion laser, diode
              laser  heads and controllers, an acousto-optic modulator, and a data 
              acquisition and analysis system. The experiments to be performed  include
              "single photon" diffraction, optical fiber communication,  heterodyne and
              Mach-Zender interferometry, coherent back  scattering, diode laser
              characterization, quasi-elastic light  scattering, and optogalvanic
              spectroscopy. The impact of the  project will also be felt in courses such as
              Life Science Physics,  Classical Physics II, and Experimental Modern
              Laboratory, as well  as in faculty-student research. The PI is committed to the
               successful completion of the project and the department has an  outstanding
              record on previous NSF ILI grants.
