Title       : Microprocessor Control of Process Parameters in Injection Molding of Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1994       
File        : a9451979

Award Number: 9451979
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49281              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura L. Sullivan lsulliva@kettering.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Winston F. Erevelles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kettering University
	      1700 West Third Avenue
	      Flint, MI  485044832    313/762-9790

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451979  Sullivan                             This proposal seeks to enrich the
              polymer processing experience of  students at GMI by providing modern control
              of process variables in  injection molding. Current injection molding
              investigations  conducted in the polymer processing laboratory implement the
              use of  electromechanical controls, which are satisfactory in illustrating 
              basic interactions between process variables and part quality. The  addition of
              injection molding experiments which allow for the  isolation of a wider
              selection of parameters using microprocessor  adaptive control will prepare
              students for typical polymer  processing situations seen in industry. Further,
              the proposed  equipment will be capable of interfacing with a computer
              integrated  manufacturing (CIM) environment, allowing for further enhancement 
              of both the polymer processing and the CIM programs at GMI.  Use of the
              proposed equipment will extend through all levels of  secondary and
              postsecondary education. Junior and senior level  Mechanical and Manufacturing
              Systems Engineering students will be  provided with injection molding
              experiences which will enhance  their understanding of theoretical
              relationships between processing  variables and part quality. They will also
              receive microprocessor  control experience appropriate to their work
              experience. All  freshman engineering students at GMI will benefit from
              experiences  on the proposed equipment during the course of Introduction to 
              Manufacturing Processes. Finally, high school women and minority  students
              working with the Principal Investigator will be exposed to  modern polymer
              processing equipment certain to inspire them in the  pursuit of further
              education in science, technology, and  engineering.
