Title       : Equipment for Investigative Laboratories and Scientific Communication in
               Physiology Courses at California State University, Fullerton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1994    
File        : a9451565

Award Number: 9451565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce K. Ono jono@fullerton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Gill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew T. Stull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Fromson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn A. Dickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton
	      800 N State College Blvd, MH-112
	      Fullerton, CA  928346850    714/773-3921

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451565  Ono  Macintosh computer workstations and analytical instruments are 
              requested to accommodate recent modifications of the curriculum in  the
              Department of Biological Science at California State University  Fullerton to
              include more investigative laboratories, encourage  cooperative interactions
              among students of diverse cultural  backgrounds, and improve scientific
              communication skills. The  equipment will be used in several upper division
              physiology  laboratories (Mammalian Physiology, Comparative Animal Physiology, 
              Plant Physiology, and Cellular Neurobiology) and in a required  Cellular and
              Molecular Biology Laboratory. Student Workstations  consisting of Apple
              PowerBook Duo Docks connected to a local  network controlled by a File Server
              will permit students to acquire  data from assorted physiological transducers
              when connected to  MacLab interfaces. The network will facilitate on-line
              analyses of  class data and foster discussions as the data are graphically 
              presented through a Presentation Workstation, consisting of an  Apple PowerBook
              with a color monitor and a color projection pad.  Student groups and
              instructors will develop multimedia  presentations on a Development Workstation
              that will permit  capturing video images from diverse sources. The portability
              of the  PowerBook and PowerBook Duo Dock System will maximize the use of  the
              computers since they can be used in the field or in other  laboratories for
              data entry and students may use them for  developing and giving their
              presentations in other locations. The  laboratories affected will be moving to
              a new building in Spring  1994 that will be configured for Ethernet connections
              to the campus  mainframe computer and will permit students to access external 
              databases. The equipment will greatly facilitate the goal of the  Department to
              continue to develop fundamental scientific skills,  including critical
              thinking, analytical reasoning, effective  communication, and the use of
              computers as tools of biological  investigation  in upper division classes.
