Title       : Opening Up the Physical World to Exploration: Probing Circuits and Transistors
               Inside an Integrated Circuit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1994    
File        : a9451146

Award Number: 9451146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Sturm sturm@ee.Princeton.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students today seem less skilled and have less interest in  interacting with the
              physical world than those of earlier  generations. It is the thesis of the
              author that this is not due to  the cultural and societal factors, (e.g. too
              much T.V.) but rather  due to the advanced state of integration and complexity
              in advanced  technological products, both in the everyday world as well as in 
              laboratories. This discourages tinkering and experimentation which  are crucial
              in attracting young people to engineering.  It is  proposed to address this
              issue by modifying a digital circuit  laboratory in electrical engineering so
              that students can look  inside of and tinker with integrated circuits.
              Conventionally,  students make digital logic gates in lab by wiring up
              invisible  transistors which are inside black-box I.C.'s. In the proposed 
              labs, the students will have access to the inside of a real I.C.  through the
              use of needle probes to physically contact and connect  to individual
              transistors and circuits on a specially designed I.C.  They will be able to
              directly relate transistor and circuit  performance to the physical parameters
              of the transistors and  circuits, which they can see by visual inspection and
              change by  physically contacting different circuits. This is analogous to 
              examining auto engines by attacking them with wrenches and playing  inside of
              them, rather than trying to learn about them with the  hood of the car closed
              and the engine inaccessible.
