Title       : A Project-Oriented Molecular Biology/Genetics Laboratory Incorporating New
               Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1994     
File        : a9451380

Award Number: 9451380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36192              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel F. Voytas voytas@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack R. Girton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard J. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Renee Kosslak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Undergraduate education in the biological sciences at Iowa  State University is
              undergoing a dramatic change.  Beginning in  the 1993-94 academic year, a new
              core curriculum in biology is  being implemented, consisting of two years of
              integrated  instruction for all life sciences majors at Iowa State. A key 
              component of the second year of the biology core will be a  genetics and
              molecular biology laboratory course, which will  provide an important
              opportunity to capture the interest of  undergraduates for research
              opportunities both during their  undergraduate careers and beyond.   We have
              designed for this laboratory, a series of challenging,  project-oriented
              exercises that encompass both genetic  approaches to mutant characterization
              and the most advanced  methods in molecular biology. The project begins with
              the  isolation of yeast mutants perturbed in pyrimidine metabolism,  focusing
              on the identification of mutants in the uracil  biosynthetic gene, URA3.
              Students will characterize URA3  mutants by complementation analyses, and use
              molecular methods  to clone a wild-type URA3 gene. A computer exercise will 
              initially be conducted to familiarize students with the  molecular
              manipulations carried out in the laboratory. Students  will then proceed to
              amplify a wild-type copy of the URA3 gene  from genomic DNA by the polymerase
              chain reaction, to clone  this gene in a plasmid vector that can function both
              in E. coli  and yeast, and to characterize putative recombinants by agarose 
              gel electrophoresis and Southern hybridization analysis. In the  final
              exercise, students will complement their URA3 mutants by  transforming them
              with the cloned, wild-type URA3 gene.   The equipment requested provides for
              growing and transforming  yeast, as well as DNA amplification, purification and
              analysis.  Iowa State University will provide an equal match for the  funding
              from the foundation.
