Title       : Development of a Teaching Laboratory for an Introductory Programming Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1994     
File        : a9451507

Award Number: 9451507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75007              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Gries gries@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine M. Wagner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451507  Gries  This instructional computer laboratory will be used for a novel 
              sequence of courses that starts with an introductory programming  course
              targeted at students having no previous experience in  programming. The
              laboratory will be used to teach this programming  course in an interactive
              environment.  Another point in the  sequence will be a Mechanical and Aerospace
              Engineering course in  system dynamics. This is an upper-level course for
              majors. New  equipment is needed that will enable these students to do 
              interesting work with dynamic simulation. The existence of a  teaching
              laboratory will be important when instructing the students  in the use of their
              software.  This sequence is the result of ideas  from the faculty in the two
              departments. They plan to exploit the  joint use of the facility to build
              bridges between the introductory  computer science courses and upper-level
              courses in engineering and  science. Using the systems dynamics course as a
              target, they will  try to facilitate a student's progress from this
              introductory  programming course, to our more challenging introductory course
              for  students with a knowledge of calculus, and finally to the systems 
              dynamics and other upper-level engineering courses. This joint  effort will be
              incorporated into the development of a text for the  programming course.  The
              laboratory will have a significant impact  locally at Cornell. The programming
              text produced should help other  colleges and universities to institute a
              similar approach. The  enrichments to the course and text achieved through work
              with  Mechanical Engineering will make the text quite different from  anything
              now available.
