Title       : Enhancing Earth Science Education Through an Improved Soils Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1996  
File        : a9451370

Award Number: 9451370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Ridky                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30355              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Francek Mark.Francek@cmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne E. Kiefer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project is strengthening the soils curriculum with a hands-on, 
              field-laboratory approach centered around the acquisition of  microwave ovens
              and tumblers for conducting weathering and erosion  experiments, soil field
              laboratories, moisture meters, laser  levelers, with an atomic absorption unit.
              The course most  benefiting from the project is Soils and Land use. Enrollments
               average between 2O and 25 per semester with approximately half of  these
              students enrolled in the teacher education program. Revised  units of the
              course feature: 1) weathering and erosion experiments  in the laboratory using
              the microwave oven and tumbler; 2) more  accurate soil nutrient inventories in
              various field settings using  portable soil testing laboratories that include
              spectrophotometers;  3) time efficient field mapping of erosive slopes using
              laser  leveling techniques; and 4) exposure to the sampling and  measurement of
              soil metal pollution through atomic absorption  spectroscopy. For each unit
              students form hypotheses, test their  validity, and describe the results of the
              soil processes being  investigated.  The equipment also benefits 2O-25
              pre-service  teachers per semester in the Earth Science for Teachers class. 
              These students need a better field and laboratory background  regarding soils
              and the opportunity to use such experiences in  building their own lesson
              plans. Pre-service teachers submit a  major soils lesson plan involving an
              equipment or a field  demonstration to the grade level they expect to teach.
              The project  also benefits other courses such as Landforms, Biogeography, 
              Independent Studies, in-service teacher workshops, and a team  taught
              interdisciplinary science course for middle school students.
