Title       : Large-Scale Software Systems Development Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1994    
File        : a9451775

Award Number: 9451775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Parks cparks@bobcat.ent.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Judd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451775  Parks  The objective of the proposed project is to construct a 
              state-of-the-art software development laboratory which will support  three
              courses in large scale software development with emphasis on  manufacturing
              applications. Learning software engineering concepts  is a vital educational
              experience for modern engineers and this  educational experience is largely
              being ignored in engineering  education. Further, engineering students cannot
              get the appropriate  experience by taking just a couple of computer science
              courses,  since most computer science departments (with a few exceptions) 
              focus primarily on algorithm development and database research.    In order to
              correct this deficiency, we are proposing to offer our  engineering students
              three courses in software development with an  appropriate laboratory
              experience. The students will be required to  design large software systems
              illustrating team programming  concepts, software maintenance issues, and
              systems integration  principles.    This proposal is a joint effort of the
              Industrial and Systems  Engineering (ISE) and the Electrical and Computer
              Engineering (ECE)  Departments. The courses will be taught and maintained by
              faculty  from both departments. The planned laboratory will give engineering 
              students experience in the three major software paradigms used in  today's
              manufacturing software development: functional and data  modeling, object
              oriented analysis and design, and real time  programming. We plan to expand
              this experience to all engineering  disciplines.
