Title       : Intelligent Machines Laboratory for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1994      
File        : a9451995

Award Number: 9451995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70042              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith L. Doty doty@mil.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio A. Arroyo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451995  Doty  An undergraduate Intelligent Machines Laboratory (IML)  course 
              includes one hour lecture, two hours of tutorial and three hours of  laboratory
              per week. The lectures include topics on machine  intelligence related to the
              laboratory work. The tutorial sessions  provide guided instruction in
              computer-aided engineering software,  electronic circuit design, fabrication
              and assembly, trouble-  shooting techniques and documentation development. The
              IML project  addresses the need for practical electrical engineering training
              at  a broader level than normally possible in a single undergraduate  course.
              Students are required to define, analyze, synthesize and  construct solutions
              to a variety of interacting requirements and  integrate them into a functioning
              system--a simple, microcomputer  controlled, autonomous robot with electronic
              sensors; a robot that  can exhibit "interesting", intentional behavior.
              Effectively, the  IML serves as a capstone laboratory that provides
              undergraduates  realistic engineering experience in design, simulation, 
              fabrication, assembly, integration, testing, and operations of a  relatively
              complex system that requires the integration of various  subdisciplines in
              electrical engineering.  The Intelligent Machines  Laboratory (IML) enables
              Seniors or second semester Juniors to  integrate most of their undergraduate EE
              knowledge base into a  practical computer engineering experience. Miniature,
              autonomous  mobile robots have been chosen as the vehicle for conveying that 
              experience. It is expected the student response to the broad  spectrum demands
              placed on them in the IML will partially  back-drive the entire EE curriculum
              in a meaningful and substantive  manner.
