Title       : Establishment of a Cellular and Molecular Biochemistry Laboratory for
               Undergradute Teaching and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1994  
File        : a9451580

Award Number: 9451580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Danowski danowskb@union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jill L. Salvo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Stephen Horton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451580  Danowski  Over the past four years, the Union College Biology
              department has  hired three junior faculty members with expertise in modern 
              cellular, molecular and biochemical techniques. As part of our  efforts to
              incorporate methodologies and techniques not previously  available to our
              students into our laboratory curriculum, we  propose to establish a dedicated
              Cellular and Molecular  Biochemistry Laboratory, which will be used for four
              upper level  undergraduate courses as well as for independent student projects.
               Specifically, we want to (1) familiarize our students with modern  techniques
              used in research and medical laboratories, (2) extend  their understanding of
              cellular and molecular structure, function  and engineering through the use of
              computer-aided imaging,  visualization and design programs, (3) Develop an
              integrated  laboratory experience demonstrating the interdisciplinary nature of
               biochemistry, cell, and molecular biology, and (4) allow students  to develop
              an independence and competence in the laboratory that  can in turn be applied
              to the pursuit of independent research  projects.  To accomplish these goals,
              we have begun by establishing  three new and one redesigned laboratory/lecture
              courses, which  incorporate basic molecular techniques and limited computer 
              analysis. However, to achieve our goals, we need additional  laboratory and
              imaging equipment, microscopes, computers and  software. By designing a single
              laboratory facility for these  courses and for student research, we eliminate
              the need for  duplicated equipment and provide a dedicated workspace for our 
              students to work outside of class. Laboratory sections will be kept  small
              (8-10 students), making it-possible to undertake more complex  experiments,
              provide more extensive supervision, and a more  realistic research lab
              environment.
