Title       : Simulating Construction Operations Using Virtual Reality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1994  
File        : a9451074

Award Number: 9451074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fabian C. Hadipriono hadipriono.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Larew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451074  Hadipriono  Studies have shown that rapid technological advances in the
               construction industry have left construction education obsolete.  New
              construction graduates are expected to perform well on often  unprecedented and
              complex construction projects. Inadequacies in  their construction education
              have had grave consequences, including  building and bridge failures. To
              prevent and remedy this situation,  the investigators propose to incorporate
              simulation models for  Construction Operations using Virtual Reality (COVR) in
              the  Construction Program at The Ohio State University. Using COVR  models
              students will immerse in a deep simulation process, allowing  them to
              "participate" and "be in charge" in virtual construction  operations.
              Initially, COVR will include the development of two  models commonly
              encountered in state-of-the-art construction  practice as well as in academic
              context: deep foundation  construction and bridge erection. Since in the
              future, COVR can be  expanded to accommodate numerous models its potential
              contribution  to the curriculum is tremendous. In addition, COVR may become a 
              model for other disciplines and institutions to enhance their  undergraduate
              curriculum. In order for COVR to be technically  sound, creative, well
              developed, worthwhile, and realistic, the  acquisition of virtual reality
              instruments is essential. With the  NSF support and OSU commitment to furnish
              additional/matching  support, the acquisition of the following three
              instruments are  planned: desk-top Binocular Omni-Orientation Monitors
              (BOOM2C-DT),  SGI graphic workstations (WB-TWO50EX), Beachtron 3-D sound
              systems,  and World Tool Kit software. COVR models will be completed in 2.5 
              years. COVR is expected to greatly enhance students' construction  education by
              encouraging creative thinking and problem solving  skills and by providing more
              practical training, and a greater feel  for construction, as well as a greater
              understanding of overall  structural behavior, and of understanding the un
              derlying causes of  construction failures.
