Title       : A Project to Improve Thinking Skills Instruction in Undergraduate Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1994      
File        : a9451554

Award Number: 9451554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20743              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Stroup   (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry J. McCumber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Francis Marion University
	      P. O. Box 100547
	      Florence, SC  295010547    843/661-1165

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451554  Stroup  This project will improve the ability of Francis Marion
              University  science and nonscience majors to analyze and solve new problems by 
              developing their higher order thinking skills. The major components  of the
              proposal include laboratory exercises organized around  hands-on
              experimentation, a series of interactive introductory  videotapes,
              Computer-Augmented Teaching (C.A.T.) techniques, and a  program of recently
              published analysis problems and case studies to  improve student oral and
              written communication. We propose to  enhance the development of thinking
              skills by a combination of  microvideo-instructional techniques and C.A.T.
              exercises. In two  pilot research projects these multimedia presentations have
              been  shown to significantly improve identified thinking skills when used  in
              combination with the requested equipment. New laboratory  exercises, and
              simulations will improve the content mastery and the  process skills of our
              students and promote an increased interest in  the biological sciences. The
              proposed project will impact directly  on approximately one thousand students
              annually enrolled in  Biology, will provide models for other FMU Departments,
              and will be  extended nationally through the authors' NSF sponsored Chautauqua 
              Short Course, the National Association of Biology Teachers (NABT)  monograph
              series and an NABT sponsored videotape.  The South  Carolina Commission on
              Higher Education competitively funded our  pilot research project, which
              partially equipped two of our four  introductory Biology laboratories. The
              purpose of this NSF proposal  is to request funds to purchase microvideo and
              microcomputer  instructional systems to fully equip all four freshman 
              laboratories. Successful implementation of our instructional  strategy in all
              of our introductory biology laboratories will not  be possible without the
              requested instructional equipment.
