Title       : A Macintosh-Based Analog/Digital Data Acquisition System for a Four-Station
               Biology Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1994      
File        : a9451037

Award Number: 9451037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11724              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent A. Ybarrondo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adams State College
	      
	      Alamosa, CO  81102    303/589-7121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451037  Ybarrondo                                                         
              Adams State College is located in the San Luis Valley of southern  Colorado and
              serves a primarily rural area with a high minority  (i.e., Hispanic)
              population. Because of the isolated location of  ASC, the educational
              opportunities offered by the Department of  Biology are primarily restricted to
              those which can be accommodated  with limited on-campus facilities and
              equipment. While a program in  field and environmental biology has
              traditionally been strong at  ASC, undergraduate experiences in modern "bench"
              biology have been  constrained by a lack of essential instrumentation. This is 
              particularly true in upper division laboratory courses to be  impacted by the
              equipment proposed herein, including: Comparative  Animal Physiology, Cell
              Biology/Genetics Laboratory, Immunology,  and Molecular Biology where currently
              many procedures/experimental  approaches can only be described and "hands-on"
              experience is  inadequate or lacking altogether.  The instrumentation requested
              in  this proposal will be enormously productive in terms of enhancing  the
              ability of the Department of Biology to provide a wide range of  sophisticated,
              contemporary laboratory experiences to ASC Biology  majors in our advanced
              laboratory courses. As a result, the  educational experience of ca. 125
              students per year for a projected  period of ten years will be impacted
              directly (with many other  students being impacted indirectly), allowing them
              to compete  successfully for positions in graduate and professional schools and
               for professional biotechnical careers following graduation from  Adams State
              College, as well as enhancing science education in area  public schools.
              Specifically, the Macintosh/MacLabTM-based  analog/digital data acquisition
              system is a state-of-the-art  apparatus that permits complex analyses of data
              collected from an  extremely wide range of modern input devices to be easily 
              accomplished. The ease with which complex analyses o f real data  acquired by
              this system may be undertaken will allow an inquiry  approach in the teaching
              laboratory as well as enabling  undergraduate student research.
