Title       : An Integrated, Comprehensive Design Project for Rehabilitation Engineering
               Technology Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1994  
File        : a9451447

Award Number: 9451447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30747              (Estimated)
Investigator: Darlene Miller DMiller@night.vtc.vsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vermont Technical College
	      
	      Randolph Center, VT  05061    802/728-3391

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451447  Miller                                                    This project
              proposes developing an integrated, comprehensive  design program for the
              laboratory curriculum in the Rehabilitation  Engineering Technology (RET)
              program at Vermont Technical College  (VTC). This new program prepares skilled
              technicians to provide  rehabilitation engineering services to persons with
              disabilities --  from the design and manufacturing of assistive devices to
              working  with people with disabilities in adapting their devices to the home 
              and workplace. The objective of this design project will be to  require
              students to utilize and/or modify available technology to  design an
              environment which will improve the vocational  opportunities and augment the
              daily living capabilities of a person  with a disability. Thus, the goal of
              this proposal is to purchase  a wide array of assistive devices in
              environmental control and  computer access for students to use in an
              integrated,  comprehensive, design experience. Working with vocational 
              rehabilitation and users of assistive technology, the project  director will
              develop a design problem for the students to solve.  Student design projects
              will be evaluated and critiqued by persons  with disabilities and
              rehabilitation professionals. The importance  of such a project to the users of
              assistive technology is that by  making assistive technology accessible and by
              integrating it into  the user's environment, it expands the vocational
              potential of the  user while improving the quality of life. The importance of
              such a  project to the student is it expands their knowledge about all  types
              of assistive devices, increases their problem solving skills,  provides them
              with a comprehensive design experience, and provides  them with the ability and
              knowledge to train users of assistive  technology in the use of such equipment.
