Title       : Development of Environmental Geosciences Computer Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1994    
File        : a9451421

Award Number: 9451421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26686              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven P. Esling esling@qm.c-geo.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Sexton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Blum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret E. Berry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dhananjay Ravat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Fifarek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              During the past decade the majority of employment opportunities for  geology
              graduates has shifted from the extractive component of  petroleum and mining
              industries to companies and government  agencies specializing in environmental
              concerns.  This represents  a fundamental, long term trend that will continue
              through the  remainder of this century.  Geologists employed in environmental 
              fields need a broad background in the geological sciences with  emphases in
              hydrogeology, surficial geology, natural resources,  geochemistry, and
              geophysics, and they should be familiar with  computer applications that focus
              on environmental analysis.  In keeping with our broad curriculum that allows us
              to focus on  training undergraduates in the environmental aspects of geology,
              we  are developing a computer laboratory consisting of advanced but  user
              friendly personal computers and software for the purpose of  enhancing courses
              in hydrogeology, surficial geology, geology of  natural resources, and
              geophysics. The facility is allowing us to  develop innovative laboratory
              exercises that use image processing,  geographic information systems,
              computer-aided drafting, modeling  techniques, and a variety of digital data
              sets, including satellite  images and a unique CUSMAP data set for the region
              where SIUC is  located.  Exercises are being designed to enhance scientific 
              understanding of geologic processes and relationships between  different
              elements of the earth system, as well as to emphasize  realistic
              problem-solving applications such as landfill siting,  ground water
              contamination, assessment of geological hazards, and  assessment of problems
              associated with resource exploitation.  Because of the visual and interactive
              nature of these exercises,  they enhance the communication of basic and
              advanced concepts,  stimulate critical thinking, and generate enthusiasm for 
              independent study. These attributes and the computer skills  acquired are
              making our undergraduates more competent and  competitive in the growin g
              environmental work force as well as  better prepared for graduate study.
