Title       : Revolutionizing Geological Mapping Through the Introduction of Electronic Total
               Stations (Laser Surveying) to the Undergraduate Geology Field Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1994      
File        : a9451368

Award Number: 9451368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony R. Philpotts philpotts@geol.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman H. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randolph P. Steinen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451368  Philpotts  Electronic total stations are now used almost exclusively
              for  routine engineering surveys, but they have not yet been used widely  in
              geology, despite their obvious potential.  Many geological  features, such as
              outcrops, geological contacts, etc., are  irregular and require large numbers
              of surveyed points for accurate  definition.  This type of detail can now be
              collected rapidly and  stored directly into portable computers with electronic
              total  stations.  The data, which can be output as x, y, z coordinates,  can be
              used not only to construct geological maps directly in the  field, but also to
              determine the attitude of layering and the  orientation of structures.  The
              data can also be transferred  rapidly to geographic information systems (GIS)
              for computer  assisted cartography.  These instruments are also easily
              operated,  and require less skill and practice than did their predecessors- - 
              the chain and transit.  The significant increase in accuracy and  amount of
              data on geological maps made with a total station is  likely to open up
              entirely new ways of analyzing geological  structures.  The Department of
              Geology and Geophysics is using four  total stations which, with the one that
              it already owns, allow  total-station-mapping to become an integral part of its
              Geology  Field Course.  This four-week total immersion field school, the  only
              one offered by a public university in New England, typically  enrolls about
              twenty undergraduates, including all geology majors,  some civil engineers and
              natural resource majors, and some students  from other universities.  This
              project resulted from a feasibility  study in which two undergraduates
              undertook an independent mapping  project using the Department's total station.
              The resulting map was  so outstanding that the Department was convinced that
              all geology  field courses should teach the use of total stations.  To this
              end,  the Department is planning a technical session and a short course  on the
              total station in geological  mapping for the 1995  Northeastern Geological
              Society of America meeting, which it is  hosting.
