Title       : Interactive Discovery Experiments in Introductory Physics Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1994    
File        : a9451743

Award Number: 9451743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16924              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Hones mhones@email.vill.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald E. Shaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip A. Maurone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451743  Hones                                                     The project
              is to establish an introductory physics laboratory that  will emphasize
              discovery through interactive data analysis, rather  than use the more
              traditional demonstration and verification  approach.  To effectively implement
              such a program we need  computers directly interfaced to the experiments.  We
              presently  have nine Zenith 486 work stations for data analysis, but we need 
              the interfacing equipment.  The heart of the project will be the  development
              of new experiments or the modification of existing  experiments for the
              explicit purpose of creating a true laboratory  environment in which the
              students can participate in the discovery  and rapid analysis of physical
              phenomena.  The significance of the  project is the introduction of computers
              so that the students will  be able to collect the data, analyze it immediately,
              and then  proceed further with additional measurements and analysis, while 
              they are still in the lab and not at home.  This approach is  further enhanced
              by interfacing some of the experiments each  semester.  It makes it possible to
              perform more experiments in the  allowed time frame and to perform experiments
              in real time not  possible at all at this level before.  This principal users
              of this  laboratory will be biology majors, and as such several integrated 
              biology/physics experiments will be implemented, the physics being  motivated
              by the biological application.  This course is considered  intermediate in
              level among the introductory laboratory courses  offered in the physics
              department, therefore making it easier to  implement the methods in the other
              courses.
