Title       : Enrichment of Quantitative and Technological Skills in Introductory Anatomy and
               Physiology Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1994  
File        : a9451796

Award Number: 9451796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65062              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay A. Nelson jnelson@towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Smoes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald D. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451796  Nelson  The Department of Biological Sciences proposes to improve the 
              quality of its heavily utilized 200-level Human Anatomy and  Physiology course
              sequence. This two-semester program is taken by  as many as 600 students per
              annum, most of whom are destined for  positions in education, science, and the
              allied health fields. For  many of these students, this will be their only
              training in the  structure and function of the human body. In its current 
              configuration, the laboratory segment of this program is largely  anatomical
              with instructional aids consisting of charts, models,  and preserved dissection
              specimens; teaching of physiological  principles in the laboratory is
              restricted to "demonstration level"  activity. We suspect that this emphasis on
              anatomical study, as  opposed to "hands on" experimental exercises, dominates
              the  laboratory components of similar courses at other institutions.  Thus,
              many students are missing a valuable opportunity to enhance  their analytical
              and technological skills while learning  physiology.     Our proposal seeks to
              redress a perceived decline in the  quantitative abilities and instrumentation
              literacy of our  graduates by providing the means for outfitting the 200-level 
              Anatomy and Physiology laboratories at Towson State University with  low-cost,
              durable physiological monitoring equipment. We also  propose to use this
              instrumentation in novel laboratory exercises  in which the students themselves
              serve as subject and experimentor.  Emphasis will be placed on "hands-on"
              learning of physiology and  requiring the students to master quantitative
              skills in order to  analyze the data they collect. Exposure to instrumented
              physiology  at this level will also provide the students with a foundation in 
              the analytical and evaluative techniques focal to their fields of  inquiry and
              will accelerate their transition to professionals.  Additionally, by
              instrumenting our 200-level laboratories, we will  expose prospective students
              of our advanced physiology   laboratories, slated for a transition to
              computerized data  acquisition, to conventional instrumentation technology at
              the  sophomore level.
