Title       : Acquisition of Hydrogeologic and Environmental Laboratory Equipment for
               Incorporation into the Undergraduate Geology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1994  
File        : a9451165

Award Number: 9451165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24257              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry A. Bart bart@aca.lasalle.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Lee Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La Salle University
	      1900 West Olney Avenue
	      Philadelphia, PA  19141    215/951-1831

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451165  Bart  The field of geological education has changed dramatically in the
              past 2O years. Part of this progress is  reflected in the incorporation of
              environmental and hydrogeologic courses in the curriculum.  Undergraduates
              engaged in geologic study throughout our nation are moving into these endeavors
              because  of the strong employment possibilities created by a growing industry.
              Until recently, environmental and  hydrologic study were not part of the
              curriculum at La Salle University. The Department of Geology is  hoping to
              correct this deficiency in our program by purchasing the necessary equipment to
              add hands-on  environmental and hydrogeologic experiences to our curriculum.
              This equipment will be used by  freshmen, sophomore, junior, and senior majors,
              in earth science teacher preparation, and freshmen  introductory classes, and
              will serve as an important part of our curriculum in: Introductory Geology, 
              Environmental Geology, Hydrogeology, Sedimentology, Environmental Geology, and
              Student Research.  With this laboratory equipment our students will be
              complementing their intensive use of standard  geologic investigation equipment
              and will be capable of investigating the earth in ways never before  possible
              in our program. Subsurface interface radar will be used for conducting studies
              such as bedrock  depths, soil profiles, water table information, fracture and
              fault mapping. Water studies will include water  analysis for characterization
              of surface and subsurface quality. The gas vapor soil probe and organic  vapor
              meter will be used for investigations of possible hydrocarbon contamination of
              soils. The radon  detector will give students the chance to evaluate radon
              levels of soils throughout our region. If  supported, this project will create
              a new and exciting dimension in geologic investigation at La Salle; and  the
              students we serve will be better prepared for the challenges of graduate
              studies, teaching, employment  in environmental sciences, and research.
