Title       : Textile Structural Composites Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1994     
File        : a9451100

Award Number: 9451100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36875              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sabit Adanur sadanur@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bor Z. Jang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William K. Walsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The aim of the project is to establish an introductory  undergraduate laboratory
              with a modern three-dimensional fiber  braiding machine for manufacturing,
              testing and applications of  high performance textile materials and structures
              for composites.  This project will foster a proposed cooperative educational 
              experience between Textile Engineering and Materials Engineering at  Auburn
              University.  The specific educational objective is an  introductory knowledge
              of composites for the manufacturing and  application of various flexible
              structures in composites. Besides  its regular use as an undergraduate teaching
              laboratory, the  proposed equipment will provide excellent opportunity for 
              undergraduate students in their senior design projects and  independent
              studies. This project will help to produce graduates  with knowledge of the
              latest thrust in fibrous materials for  industrial applications.  This project
              will integrate textile  engineering, textile chemistry and materials/mechanical
               engineering. It will expand the range of textile applications in  high
              performance materials mark will take the students beyond the  borders of
              traditional textiles and introduce them to new  manufacturing methods and
              applications of textiles where high  performance is a requirement. It will
              introduce students to new,  innovative textile structures for composites.  The
              proposed  braiding machine will be used to manufacture advanced textile 
              structures for composites. The purpose is to produce a range of  high quality
              braided textile structures to be used as composites in  high performance
              applications for the automotive, aerospace and  construction industries. This
              project will strengthen the  University's interaction with industry.
