Title       : Astronomy Laboratory Course Reform at Arizona State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1994    
File        : a9451484

Award Number: 9451484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Wehinger peter@quasar.la.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Wyckoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project will reform the two-semester introductory Laboratory  Astronomy
              course sequence at Arizona State University by  dramatically upgrading the
              instrumentation and by employing  improved pedagogical methods. The laboratory
              course is offered for  general studies credit in conjunction with the
              Introductory  Astronomy lecture course, and the two course sequences together 
              fulfill the laboratory science requirements for undergraduate  students (4
              credit hours each semester). The enrollment, over 600  students in Laboratory
              Astronomy each year, is presently capped by  limited instrumentation and TA
              resources. Arizona State University,  located in the Phoenix metropolitan area
              with 300 clear nights a  year, is an ideal setting for developing a model
              laboratory  astronomy course based on charge coupled device (CCD) technology.  
              The equipment consists of two PC-controlled 10-inch telescopes and  CCD systems
              plus a grating spectrograph, and ten PC's for  image/spectral processing and
              analysis. The CCD instrumentation on  student telescopes will greatly increase
              the scope of projects due  to the increased detection limits over current
              visual or  photographic techniques. Thus lab projects encompassing all aspects 
              of astronomy from planets to stars to galaxies and quasars can be  developed in
              a teaching environment where students learn to do  science the way it is
              actually done.  The two-semester course  sequence will be taught in
              student-centered, hands-on,  critical-inquiry environments.  The course
              instructor will assume  the role of coach, facilitating students' exploration
              and discovery  of scientific principles and laws themselves. The laboratory 
              courses will be coordinated with the lecture courses, so that  concepts are
              introduced in the laboratory before students encounter  the concepts in
              lecture. the reformed lab course will be piloted  while the CCD-based labs are
              being developed, and then the reforms  in the general studies astronomy
              curriculum will be implemented,  thereby institution alizing the course reform.
               The project will  produce a laboratory manual containing exercises based
              entirely on  CCD observations using small telescopes will be produced, and will
               create a computer data base which will become a laboratory  astronomy archive
              containing CCD data (images and spectra) actually  collected by students for
              the projects that are developed. The  manual and the CCD data archive will be
              available for distribution  over the Internet, and in hard-copy form, as well
              as in digital  form on a CD-ROM disk for wide dissemination. The project will 
              design an evaluation instrument to test the effectiveness of the  course
              reforms.
