Title       : Instrumentation for Automotive and Environmental EngineeringLabs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1996   
File        : a9451214

Award Number: 9451214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36497              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shoeleh DiJulio   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stewart P. Prince  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  91330    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451214  DiJulio  The Mechanical Engineering Department at California State 
              University, Northridge has developed new courses in automotive and 
              environmental engineering. For the past nine years our students  have
              distinguished themselves in national automotive engineering  design
              competitions and as a result the ME Department has developed  expertise in the
              area of alternative fuels.  Last year as part of  curriculum development in
              environmental engineering a new senior  design course was developed which
              provides an opportunity for  students to solve local industry's environmentally
              related  problems.  High student demand for these automotive and  environmental
              engineering laboratories and a lack of new equipment  threatens the quality of
              these programs. The State of California  has provided limited, one-time funding
              for the 94-95 academic year  for an engineering and computer science building
              expansion and  laboratory improvement. This proposal requests matching funds
              for  automotive and environmental engineering laboratory improvement. 
              Specifically, the engine dynamometers and instruments requested  will provide
              additional measurement, diagnostic and development  capabilities in projects
              related to the use of alternative fuels in  engines. Engine performance
              characteristics will be integrated with  emissions measurements via the
              Department's existing exhaust gas  analyzer. The gas chromatograph requested
              for the environmental  engineering lab will be used to evaluate soil
              remediation projects  and automotive emission of methane and non-methane gas 
              concentrations. The requested equipment will support instruction  and provide
              research opportunities for undergraduates in the  future.
