Title       : Self-Paced Individual Physiology Laboratories for Allied Health Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1994    
File        : a9451265

Award Number: 9451265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35975              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Saltarelli   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeff Betts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger L. Hammer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Milostan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herman Triezenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9451265  Saltarelli  The purpose of the current project is to expand the breadth
              and  diversity of the laboratory component in the human physiology  offerings
              at Central Michigan University to meet the specific  needs of students in
              undergraduate and pre-professional health  science curricula. The program
              specific needs and individual  student needs for laboratory instruction in
              human physiology  require a versatile laboratory system that can serve a
              diverse  population of students with individualized laboratory  experiences.
              The proposed equipment will upgrade the laboratory  learning experience of
              students in health fitness, health  education, sports medicine, pre-physical
              therapy, pre-medicine,  nursing, and pre-dental students by offering a wider
              variety of  laboratory experiences which could then be tailored and chosen to 
              meet individual and program needs. The equipment will also  greatly expand the
              capacity of the university to meet the  specific laboratory needs of the
              non-traditional student who  requires greater flexibility and self-direction in
              obtaining  laboratory instruction.     The laboratory system which is being
              proposed is the Thorton  Modular Physiograph System. This system was chosen
              because of its  versatility and user friendly components. It enables the
              student  to directly observe a wide variety of physiological phenomena in 
              discrete laboratory experiences which can be specifically applied  to the
              various clinically oriented programs. The Thorton system  is a computer based
              system which allows for diversity in its  applications to specific programs
              (specifics are discussed in  narrative). The versatility of this system would
              also enable the  instructor to develop individualized and self-directed
              laboratory  experiences to meet the needs of the expanding population of 
              non-traditional students requiring instruction in the health  related
              professions.
