Title       : CAREER: Repair and Retrofit Systems for Civil Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0330592

Award Number: 0330592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $363963             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria D. Lopez mmlopez@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              To successfully meet the challenges of the 21st century, engineers must be
              creative and be able to adapt themselves to new ideas. Technology is changing
              at a rapid pace. The increasing number of new materials and new systems
              available for structural engineering applications offers a large number of
              possibilities for the engineer with the knowledge and creative skills to
              understand them. 

The goal of this CAREER proposal is to promote innovative
              teaching and research in civil engineering. The integrated teaching and
              research plans will provide a fundamental contribution to the use of
              non-traditional materials for new structures as well as for state-of-the-art
              repair and retrofit systems.

The outlined teaching plan will improve the
              curriculum in the areas of infrastructure and structural engineering both at
              the undergraduate and graduate levels. This long-term educational plan
              coordinates directly with the PI's research interest in the area of laminates
              for repair and retrofit of civil structures. Two innovative courses, one in
              materials for structural design, the second on repair and retrofit systems for
              civil infrastructure; a set of redesigned laboratory experiences for design
              oriented courses; and a new professional concentration in structural
              engineering will invigorate the profession of civil engineering. Diversity in
              engineering will be achieved through undergraduate summer research linked to
              Clarkson's Ronald E. McNair Program. Low-income and first-generation college
              students, as well as underrepresented minority students will benefit from this
              activity. 

The proposed fundamental research will advance the knowledge of
              interfacial bond behavior between epoxy bonded FRP laminates and concrete. By
              characterizing the interfacial bond failure, a reliable design procedure can be
              developed for structural elements strengthened by externally bonded FRP
              laminates. Valuable information in the area of fracture mechanics will be
              gained by evaluating the energy dissipated during the interfacial crack growth.
              In particular, a new test set-up will be designed to obtain a fracture
              parameter. Results from this research will directly impact the use of laminates
              for repair and retrofit of civil structures. This research will help to move
              laminates and other new materials into the mainstream of engineering practice
              by contributing to the development of standard design equations and procedures.
                   

As a central outcome of this project the PI expects to become an
              academic leader committed to enhance the engineering community through her
              contributions in education and research. By providing teaching and research of
              the highest quality, the PI will fulfill the mission of the Department of Civil
              and Environmental Engineering at Clarkson University to "educate talented and
              motivated men and women to become successful professionals through quality
              undergraduate and graduated programs that place high priority on student access
              and interaction with faculty."


