Title       : Technical Assistance to the Statewide Systemic Initiatives Projects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1995 
File        : a9255377

Award Number: 9255377
Award Instr.: Contract                                     
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6376815            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara S. Nelson bnelson@edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Lord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel St
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/969-7100

NSF Program : 7360      STATEWIDE SYSTEMIC INITIATIVES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Education Development Corporation will provide technical                   
              assistance to the Statewide Systemic Initiatives Program by:                   
                                                                                             
              1.   Providing technical assistance to active SSI projects;                    
              2.   Assisting SSI states through various networking                           
                   activities;                                                               
              3.   Developing a leadership process for SSI states; and                       
              4.   Assisting other states to develop SSI projects.                           
                                                                                             
              EDC will (1) assist each participating state in effectively                    
              implementing and institutionalizing its program for                            
              mathematics and science reform, and (2) establish a self-                      
              sustaining and permanent national network that will serve as                   
              a forum for supporting the science and mathematics education                   
              reform efforts underway.                                                       
                                                                                             
              Each SSI state will be supported by an EDC-based state liaison                 
              technical assistance team that will develop a thorough                         
              understanding of each state's infrastructure, resources,                       
              problems, and constraints.  Based on this understanding the                    
              team will design appropriate technical assistance strategies                   
              to support each state in carrying out its project goals.  In                   
              addition, Action Groups composed of participants from each                     
              state will be established to address issues common to all                      
              states that can be best addressed through collective effort.                   
              The action groups will be supported by the EDC team and its                    
              consultants.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The activities that will support this effort will include                      
              providing ongoing targeted consultation; establishing and                      
              operating a communications network; organizing and conducting                  
              meetings, forums and conferences; developing a clearinghouse                   
              for state-of-the-art resources; and documenting and distilling                 
              new knowledge in systemic reform in mathematics and science                    
              education.
