Title       : Partnerships for Minority Student Achievement in Science, Mathematics and
               Technology in Prince George's County Public Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1996      
File        : a9255364

Award Number: 9255364
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1492727            (Estimated)
Investigator: Louise Waynant   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hays B. Lantz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joe A. Hairston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brd of Edu of P G County
	      14201 School Lane
	      Upper Marlboro, MD  20772    301/559-7181

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9248,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Partnerships for Minority Student Achievement in the                           
              Prince George's County Maryland, Public School System                          
              will coordinate and expand the links between those                             
              efforts whose goal it is to increase the number of                             
              minorities in mathematics, scicence and technology-                            
              related careers.                                                               
                                                                                             
              Curriculum refork efforts will yield an integrated                             
              curricular framework in mathematics and science which                          
              includes instructional resource support materials.                             
                                                                                             
              Teacher enhancement and staff development efforts will                         
              build upon the "lead teacher" concept already                                  
              established in the district's schools to create School                         
              Science and Mathematics Leadership Teams.  Within each                         
              of the district's five administrative areas, cluster or                        
              feeder schools will come together as School Partnership                        
              Teams, thereby constituting Kindergarten through grade                         
              12 field study laboratories.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Oversite and coordination for all existing and proposed                        
              initiatives and resources for staff and students will be                       
              the primary responsibility of the Project Director and                         
              designated school system staff, working with an advisory                       
              committee representing a broad spectrum of agencies,                           
              organizations, consultant "experts" and other school                           
              communities.  The PMSA Advisory Board will review and                          
              advise staff regarding such issues as priority areas of                        
              focus; teacher, student and parent activities; outreach                        
              initiatives; and process and product evaluations for the                       
              efforts undertaken through the grant.                                          
                                                                                             
              Student enrichment activities will include mentoring,                          
              tutoring and role model programs, Saturday and summer                          
              enrichment programs involving such groups as the                               
              National Society for Black Engineers, Black Men United,                        
              and a variety of religious and community groups.
