Title       : PMSA: Partnership for Reform in Science and Mathematics (PRISM) Previous Title
               K.I.D.S.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1995  
File        : a9255365

Award Number: 9255365
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1425188            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph D. Tafoya   (Principal Investigator current)
              George E. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Despenas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eloy Rodriguez  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Rudy M. Castruita  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Santa Ana Unified School D
	      1405 French Street
	      Santa Ana, CA  927012414    /   -

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9248,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              PRISM(Partnership for Reform in Science and Math) is an                        
              innovative science and model designed to increase                              
              participation and achievement of minorities, 94% of                            
              which compose the Santa Ana Unified School District's                          
              (SAUSD) student population.  Key elements of this                              
              project include cooperation and collaboration between                          
              the school district, local postsecondary institutions,                         
              industry, community groups and parents.  The district-                         
              postsecondary institution partnership known as Project                         
              STEP has had a successful relationship since 1982.  This                       
              partnership will forge a new initiative for science and                        
              math curriculum reform, based on the new California                            
              Frameworks; staff development and leadership; student                          
              enrichment and support and community involvement.  PRISM                       
              features kindergarten through university "pipeline"                            
              strategies; career-oriented family math/science                                
              activities; creative bilingual solutions such as the                           
              "Padres Y Maestros Unidos" support organization;                               
              effective role modeling; secondary student independent                         
              research with undergraduate student mentors; structured,                       
              product-oriented dialogues for members of the                                  
              partnership;  and a high profile awards program, all of                        
              which are woven into an experience of high quality                             
              science and math education for the Santa Ana student.                          
              The impact of PRISM will be felt not only school wide                          
              but district and community wide and will increase the                          
              number of SAUSD students in math and science career                            
              pathway courses, who in the future will reflect the full                       
              spectrum of American society in SEM professions.
