Title       : RCMS: Tuskegee University Enhancement Program for ChemistryMajors.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1994    
File        : a9255197

Award Number: 9255197
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Courtney J. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tuskegee University
	      
	      Tuskegee Institute, AL  36088    334/727-8501

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9130,9132,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Tuskegee University Department of                                          
              Chemistry proposes to establish a Research                                     
              Careers for Minority Scholars (RCMS) Program.                                  
              Designed to enhance and strengthen the                                         
              chemistry program while facilitating the                                       
              recruitment and retention of students, the                                     
              proposed three-year program includes many                                      
              facets, the goal of which is to increase the                                   
              number of minority students who complete B. S.                                 
              degrees in chemistry and choose chemistry                                      
              careers.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Program participants will represent various                                    
              sectors of the campus and community which play                                 
              major roles in the development of chemistry                                    
              careers.  All faculty members of the Chemistry                                 
              Department will be involved in the program.                                    
              Chemistry majors at the graduate and                                           
              undergraduate levels will participate as "Big                                  
              Sisters and Big Brothers" and as tutors for                                    
              students chose to be RCMS participants.                                        
              However, some tutors will be from other                                        
              scientific disciplines.  Faculty members in                                    
              the Counseling Program will provide counseling                                 
              services to the students.  Parents and                                         
              guardians will participate through their                                       
              involvement in selected workshops,                                             
              conferences, and interactions with students                                    
              and faculty members.  Chemistry Department                                     
              alumni will provide input through serving as                                   
              lecturers at selected seminars and as resource                                 
              persons.  High school personnel and persons                                    
              from other colleges and universities will                                      
              provide valuable information through their                                     
              recommendations and suggestions about                                          
              students.  Partners (e.g., national research                                   
              centers, private sector firms, universities)                                   
              will facilitate the completion of objectives                                   
              through their services as sites for research                                   
              experiences for students, sources of lecturers                                 
              and other experts who will provide needed                                      
              information, resources, and services in                                        
              enhancing and strengthening the chemistry                                      
              program.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              As a result of this program, a stronger                                        
              program of academic advising and support                                       
              services will be provided along with career                                    
              motivation and enrichment.  A more concerted                                   
              effort will be made to provide students with                                   
              the tools and encouragement needed to succeed                                  
              in chemistry careers.  Students will develop                                   
              their research skills through the faculty                                      
              mentoring relationship.  The results of their                                  
              work will be presented at national conferences                                 
              and published, when appropriate, in                                            
              scientific journals.  Junior and senior                                        
              students will be provided opportunities to                                     
              conduct research at non-campus research                                        
              centers.  Ultimately, the entire Chemistry                                     
              Department will be strengthened and                                            
              revitalized.  Tuskegee University's position                                   
              will be fortified in terms of recruiting and                                   
              retaining students in chemistry.  This                                         
              program, although small, will aid in the                                       
              provision of adequate numbers of well                                          
              qualified students to help offset the Nation's                                 
              shortage of scientists.
