Title       : Special Teachers for Elementary and Middle School Science & Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 2,  1997    
File        : a9255745

Award Number: 9255745
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6649243            (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Fey jf7@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9103,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Special Teachers for Elementary and Middle School Science and                  
              Mathematics                                                                    
              The University of Maryland System, in collaboration with Morgan                
              State University, Baltimore City, Baltimore County, and Prince                 
              George's County is designing, implementing, and evaluating an                  
              innovative interdisciplinary program to prepare teachers who                   
              can provide exemplary mathematics and science instruction in                   
              elementary and middle schools.  Design and development of the                  
              project's course and field experience components are being                     
              guided by the following basic principles.  1) Teachers should                  
              learn science and mathematics through instruction that models                  
              the practices they are being expected to employ during their                   
              teaching careers.  2) Courses and field experiences should                     
              integrate science and mathematics so that teachers will know                   
              and can take advantage of the connections between individual                   
              disciplines.  3) Teacher training programs should include                      
              substantial field experiences that engage the prospective                      
              teachers in the genuine research activities of business,                       
              industrial or scientific institutions and the science and                      
              mathematics education activities conducted by science centers,                 
              zoos or museums.  4) Teachers should develop their ability to                  
              use modern technologies as standard tools for research and                     
              problem solving as well as for imaginative classroom                           
              instruction.  5) Field experiences should be provided in school                
              settings that enroll children of below average and average                     
              ability, as well as those in gifted and talented programs.  6)                 
              Teachers should receive sustained support during the critical                  
              first years of their induction to the teaching profession.                     
              Throughout the five year development period, continual                         
              formative evaluation, research on the process of teacher                       
              education, and a variety of dissemination activities are being                 
              conducted to inform others of the outcomes of this emerging                    
              model of teacher preparation.***//
