Title       : AMP: SOUTH CAROLINA ALLIANCE FOR MINORITY PARTICIPATION
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1997       
File        : a9255165

Award Number: 9255165
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4999229            (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra S. Stakes  (Principal Investigator former)
              Michael W. Howell howell@geol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Earline M. Simms  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9133,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The South Carolina Alliance for Minority Participation (SCAMP) is              
              comprised of two major research universities (the University of                
              South Carolina and Clemson University), four historically Black                
              colleges (Benedict College, South Carolina State College, Voorhees             
              College and Claflin College), one large community college (midlands            
              Technical College), and an array of industrial partners.  SCAMP                
              will put in place programs at the undergraduate and graduate level             
              to substantially increase the number of Blacks entering research               
              careers in science, engineering, and mathematics.  Minority                    
              undergraduates at the allied institutions will have available to               
              them full and partial scholarships, intensive transitional                     
              mathematics worships prior to college, innovative and intensive                
              educational programs, and interconnected mentoring network,                    
              opportunities for summer and academic year research, and                       
              possibilities for experience in local industry.  Minority graduate             
              students at the allied institutions will work in highly competitive            
              research programs, develop industry mentors and associated, and                
              have the opportunity to be role models and mentors for                         
              undergraduates.  The progress and impact of these programs will be             
              systematically and professionally evaluated on a statistical basis             
              throughout the course of the project.  The evaluations will be used            
              to assess and improve the effectiveness of the various project                 
              components.  The findings of the evaluation process and                        
              descriptions of innovative programs developed by the project will              
              be published in appropriate journals for national and international            
              dissemination and will comprise a Special Monograph Series                     
              published by the National Center for the Freshman Year Experience.
