Title       : Alaska Native Science Education Colloquium: April 1992 Chena Hot Springs, Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1992     
File        : a9255248

Award Number: 9255248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57406              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond J. Barnhardt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Neal Boyd Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                      Dr. Raymond Barnhardt is a professor of                                
              Anthropology and Educational Administration at the                             
              University of Alaska, Fairbanks. Dr. Barnhardt has organized                   
              a three-day conference on science education for Alaskan                        
              Native peoples. This conference will bring together science                    
              educators, scientists, and representatives of Alaskan Native                   
              organizations, especially the Alaska Federation of Natives.                    
              The conference participants will formulate a long-term                         
              agenda for improving science instruction for native                            
              children. One special focus of the conference will be the                      
              integration of Native tradition with the practice of western                   
              scientific traditions, in the setting of small rural fishing                   
              villages. This conference will produce a report outlining an                   
              agenda and priorities for future action.                                       
                      Alaskan Native people have been underrepresented in                    
              the scientific and engineering disciplines. Science                            
              education programs for native children have been designed by                   
              non-natives, commonly resulting in a failure to integrate                      
              native traditions and culture with instructional content and                   
              delivery. The proposed conference will be the first meeting                    
              that brings together representatives of the Alaskan Native                     
              people and representatives of the non-native scientific and                    
              educational communities. The action plan and agenda produced                   
              by this conference will have the potential to catalyze                         
              significant improvements in science education.
