Title       : Retention and Performance of Female and Male Undergraduates in Freshman
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1992 
File        : a9255871

Award Number: 9255871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Dietz                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah J. Goodings goodings@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Byrnes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 7260      DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Although women now enter undergraduate engineering programs                    
              with higher math SAT scores than men, many of them fail to                     
              process beyond the first year.  There is considerable evidence                 
              in the literature that there may be a threshold or critical-                   
              mass effect: if a sufficient proportion of students in a class                 
              are women, attitudes toward the subject, performance, and                      
              retention are improved.  Why such an effect may operate is not                 
              understood.  This research study proposes to vary gender                       
              balance across different sections of the first course in                       
              engineering, statics, in the undergraduate engineering                         
              programs of 30 large universities, over a period of two                        
              semesters.  In each institution, the instructors, syllabus,                    
              teaching style, overall class size, and other aspects of                       
              instruction will be held constant.  Without doing harm to                      
              individual students, different proportions of women in the                     
              various sections will be achieved.  Persistence beyond the                     
              first course will be tracked, and grades and other aspects of                  
              performance will be measured or obtained by structured                         
              interviews, in both men and women.  The hope is that a                         
              critical zone for gender balance may be established, either                    
              for all institutions or for subtypes of institutions.  If so,                  
              universities with multiple sections of beginning engineering                   
              courses ought to be able to improve retention of women in a                    
              fairly straightforward and administratively easy way.
