Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Evolution of Ecological
               Specialization in Freshwater Sticklebacks that are Morphologically Polymorphic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1995     
File        : a9424150

Award Number: 9424150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39255              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beren W. Robinson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9424150  Robinson      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twenty-four months of research abroad. The  program's awards provide
              opportunities for joint research,  and the use of unique or complementary
              facilities, expertise  and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will
              support a twelve-month postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Beren W. Robinson of
              Binghamton University to  work with Professor Dolph Schluter at the University
              of  British Columbia on the evolution of ecological  specialization in
              freshwater sticklebacks that are  morphologically polymorphic.    Phenotypic
              differentiation in lake fishes frequently falls  along an ecological gradient
              that is defined at one end by  the shallow littoral habitat along the lake
              margin  ("Benthic"), and at the other end by the deep open waters  found at the
              center of lakes ("limnetic").  These habitats  are believed to exert strong and
              alternative selective  pressures on the species that specialize in each habitat
               because of functional constraints on fish morphology and  behavior.  A
              reciprocal transplant growth experiment in the  field will be performed and a
              correlation analysis between  phenotype and various components of fitness using
              limnetic  and benthic morphs of freshwater sticklebacks.  This  research will
              demonstrate trade-offs among morphs drawn from  a single population of fish and
              will shed new light on how  specialist phenotypes evolve within fishes and
              other taxa.  ***
