Title       : Conductance Fluctuations in Amorphous Silicon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9424277

Award Number: 9424277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Kakalios kakalios@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9424277  Kakalios    The  principal aim of this research project is to elucidate
              and  study  the   physical  mechanisms  underlying  conductance  fluctuations  
              in  hydrogenated  amorphous  silicon (a-Si:H).  Previous  studies  of  1/f 
              noise and random telegraph switching noise in a-Si:H in our laboratory  suggest
               that  the  noise arises from inhomogeneous current  filaments  whose 
              resistance varies in time, possibly due to the motion of bonded  hydrogen 
              inducing  bonding  rearrangements  which  alter  the  defect  structure   of 
              the  material.   Amorphous  silicon  films   will   be  synthesized in an rf
              plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition  system  at  the  University  of 
              Minnesota, for which  the  doping  level  and  deposition conditions are
              systematically varied.  The temperature  and  bias  dependence of the random
              telegraph noise of these films will  be  investigated  to determine if the
              switching noise arises from  current  microchannels.   The  non-Gaussian
              statistics which  characterize  1/f  noise  will be investigated as the
              properties of the a-Si:H films  are  varied.  Finally, the long-range disorder
              at the mobility edge will be  characterized by comparing the difference between
              the thermopower  and  conductivity  activation energies,  and will be 
              correlated  with  the  noise  behavior as well as with the optical and
              structural  properties  of   these  films.   These  efforts  will 
              significantly  improve  our  understanding  of the fluctuation phenomena in
              a-Si, a technologically  important material.  %%%  Hydrogenated  amorphous 
              silicon  (a-Si:H)  is  increasingly  used  in  photovoltaic devices, input
              scanners, fax machines, photocopiers,  and  thin-film  transistors for
              flat-panel displays.  All of these  require  the  large  surface  area
              advantages of amorphous semiconductors.   As  these  electronic  devices  are
              made smaller,  fundamental  electrical  noise  in  the amorphous silicon
              ultimately limits device performance.  An  understanding  of the microscopic m
              echanisms responsible  for  the  noise  phenomena is therefore crucial if
              amorphous semiconductors  are  to  achive their technological potential.  The
              principal aim  of  this  research  project  is to elucidate and study these
              mechanisms  as  the  properties  of the thin-film semiconductor are
              systematically  varied.  Previous  studies  of  the electronic noise in
              hydrogenated  amorphous  silicon  in  our laboratory discovered that the noise
              itself  exhibits  time-dependent fluctuations, that is, the noise has noise! 
              Studies of  the  noise  of the noise provide important information concerning 
              the  degree  of  electronic  disorder and long-range  correlations  in  the 
              material.   This research will significantly advance our knowledge  of 
              fluctuation phenomena in amorphous silicon in particular, as  well  as  improve
               our  understanding of the physics  of  non-linear  relaxation  processes in
              disordered solids, in general.  ***
