Title       : REU-Site in Biology, Biological Chemistry and Psychobiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1997     
File        : a9424179

Award Number: 9424179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162192             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary M. Allen mallen@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis M. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Summer undergraduate research opportunities in the  Department of Biological
              Sciences at Wellesley College, an  undergraduate college for women, will be
              offered for three  summers.  Participants will be selected from Biology, 
              Biological Chemistry or Psychobiology majors who have  serious purpose and
              definite interest in independent work,  have sufficient course preparation and
              have shown ability to  think imaginatively and independently.  Participants
              will be  selected by the project director and faculty committee after 
              evaluation of application forms designed to recruit the most  qualified
              student.  The student will participate in all  aspects of the investigation,
              from pursuing a literature  review to carrying out experimental procedures and 
              observations, continuing to analysis of data and  determination of conclusions.
               The student will formally and  informally discuss the work with her advisor,
              and also will  prepare discussions with all participants, both student and 
              faculty, for weekly group seminars.  This will encourage  both experience with
              oral presentations and exposure to  suggestions and criticism of other
              researchers.  A poster  session will end the summer's work.  Throughout the
              summer,  seminars and workshops will be presented by women scientists  in
              graduate school and in research careers; field trips to  biotechnology and
              chemical companies will be taken.  An  ethics component will be shared with REU
              students from  Boston University, and joint seminars and field trips have  been
              planned with this regional institution and with the  University of
              Massachusetts Boston campus.
