Title       : CRB: The Functional Significance of Biodiversity in Changing Environments: An
               Experimental Approach Using Microcosms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1995    
File        : a9424494

Award Number: 9424494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Morin pjmorin@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy M. Casey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1097,9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9424494  MORIN   This research focuses on several issues linked by the need
              to understand the functional significance of biodiversity to effectively
              conserve and restore populations, communities, and functioning ecosystems.  A
              series of experimental studies of protists in aquatic microcosms are designed
              to test predictions about how diversity within populations, communities and
              ecosystems affects responses to changing physical environments.  First,
              experimental manipulations of both species richness and temperature will test
              whether changing physical conditions affect community structure and ecosystem
              processes, and whether initial biodiversity affects the responses seen. 
              Second, manipulations of the presence of density-dependent competition and
              predation will whether recent models of interspecific interactions in changing
              environments accurately predict different responses of species to gradual
              increases in temperature.  Third, manipulations of the presence or absence of
              population growth and rates of temperature change will test whether the ability
              to adapt in response to rapidly changing environments depends on rates of
              environmental change, and whether rates of adaptation differ between
              populations.  This problem addresses the interplay between population
              components of biodiversity and population processes in changing environment.  
              The conservation and restoration of communities and ecosystems re quires basic
              information about functional links between populations, communities and
              ecosystems.  An important parallel thrust is the rigorous identification of
              linkages between population dynamics, community structure, and ecosystem
              function.  Such linkages can only be made in systems where these processes can
              be measured and explored.  Rather than focus on a single level of ecological
              organization, novel insights will be gained from these studies that will
              integrate across the hierarchical levels of population, community and ecosystem
              ecology.  This level of integration is particularly tract able in microbial
              communities established in experimental microcosms, where various aspects of
              biodiversity and changing environments can be readily controlled and
              manipulated.
