Title       : Molecular Techniques to Define Relationships and Dispersal Patterns of a Species
               in an Unpredictable Environment: the Muskox, an Arctic Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1995       
File        : a9424544

Award Number: 9424544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela Groves fnpg1@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5211      POLAR BIO & MEDIC ARCTIC RES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9424544  Groves  This project will investigate genetic factors associated with
              the   potential of a species to adapt and survive while inhabiting an 
              unpredictable environment that may be altered by climatic change  or human
              activity.  The project will address the following  questions: (1) is there
              detectable genetic diversity between  populations affected by known bottlenecks
              and barriers to  dispersal? (2) is genetic diversity sufficient to establish 
              relationships between populations and explain historic patterns of  dispersal
              across their range? (3) can genetic variability be used  to establish
              relationships of individuals within populations and  to assess the differential
              roles of the sexes in pioneering new  ranges or recolonizing old ones? (4) what
              are the predicted  patterns of gene flow between populations that have
              fluctuated as   a result of climatic change or human intervention and may be 
              isolated by geographic barriers? Using the muskox as a model, the   answers to
              these questions should increase understanding of the  population dynamics of a
              species that is sometimes constrained  from dispersal by climate, human
              activity and geographic barriers   and has apparently adapted to survive
              genetic bottlenecks caused  by these constraints and population fluctuations. 
              As disturbances  to the environment are likely to become more significant with 
              predicted global climate change and increasing human presence on  the earth,
              the ability to predict species' responses to change is  becoming more important
              if efforts are to be made to ensure their  survival.  The known history of
              fluctuations of indigenous  populations as well as documented increases of
              introduced  populations make the muskox an appropriate subject for an 
              investigation of the influence of genetic, climatic, geographic,  and human
              factors on the population dynamics of a widely  distributed arctic mammal. 
              Ecological and evolutionary principles  described in this study should be
              applicable to other arctic  species.  Analysis of  mitochondrial DNA has been
              unsatisfactory in  detecting enough genetic diversity to establish
              relationships  within and between muskox populations (Groves, in prep).  Three 
              regions of nuclear DNA will be analyzed for their potential to  address the
              project goals.  These areas include:  hypervariable  microsatellites,
              exonintron regions and Y chromosome linked  regions. Results from the planning
              grant research using archived  muskox tissue samples will be used to plan a
              larger study of  muskox population dynamics, biogeography and evolution
              throughout  their range.  The number and type of samples required from 
              different populations will be established so that the most  economical and
              efficient approach to collecting samples can be  arranged.
