Title       : CRB: Optimization Strategies for Reef Restoration Using Cultured Hermatypic
               Corals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1995      
File        : a9424568

Award Number: 9424568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Erich M. Mueller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    205/460-6101

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0521800   Shelf & Esturine Ecosystem              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9189,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Mueller  Coral reefs are important reservoirs of biodiversity and serve as
              centers of biological production in low productivity seas.  They provide
              subsistence and commercial fishing and contribute to third world economies by
              attracting tourism.  It has become increasing apparent that reefs are being
              adversely affected by human activities.  The impact of anthropogenic
              activities, both historical and modern, is damaging reefs to the point whether
              ecosystem functioning has been compromised.    Restoration of reef fisheries
              and habitats is in its embryonic stages.  Lessons learned from terrestrial and
              near-shore restoration programs are being examined to avoid costly or damaging
              errors. However, the logistics of working on reefs and their complex nature
              require new approaches.  There is a good foundation of coral physiology and
              reef ecology research on which to base restoration efforts.  This project
              includes two closely coupled components: 1) examination of coral growth and
              physiology under laboratory culture conditions and 2) assessment of coral
              contribution to habitat structural a biological complexity and survival rates
              of laboratory -raised corals in field test plots.  This project will examine
              the effect of photoperiod and substrates on coral growth rates and metabolic
              performance (photosynthesis, respiration and calcification).  These data will
              be used to modify culture techniques which have significant advantages over
              simple transplantation strategies.   Corals are generally slow-growing species
              and optimizing growth rates to attain coral of critical size will be
              fundamental to the success of a culture approach.  The critical size will be
              assessed in field pilot studies.  Test plots will be established in a vessel
              grounding site.  Plots will include corals grown under various culture
              conditions (explants) and to varying sizes.  Their effect on habitat structural
              complexity and the resulting biodiversity will be compared to corals
              transplanted from healthy reef areas and to natural control s ites. 
              Survivorship and growth rates of cultured explants and transplanted corals will
              also be compared.  Results obtained from this project should provide both
              physiological and ecological information for the formulation of viable
              restoration programs.  In addition, the further development of coral culture
              will assist reef conservation efforts by reducing the increasing wild harvest
              of corals for commercial trade.
