Title       : Quantitative Assessment of Transfer of Training in the CAVE Virtual Environment
               and its Relevance to the National Information Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9424272

Award Number: 9424272
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. DeFanti tom@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Sandin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert V. Kenyon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              If one is to posit that virtual reality will be used to train humans in critical
              performance tasks,  the key becomes finding what sort of training is
              transferable between the virtual and physical worlds.  Experiments performed
              thus far in the CAVE Virtual Environment  showed significant performance 
              improvement in virtual reality-trained subjects compared to the untrained
              population for the same  task.  Further experiments will quantitatively assess
              what may be perhaps the most important aspect of  virtual reality research--the
              relationship between the technology and the training task which would  result
              in a maximum transfer of training.  Early results  indicate that latency is a
              severe problem  and that restricting virtual reality solely to the visual
              domain limits its training application.  This work will extend the study of
              latency measurement to wide area networks using CAVE-to-CAVE  experiments over
              the vBNS national network as the model.  The results are expected to have broad
               applicability in the National Challenge areas, particularly in manufacturing
              and education  If one is to posit that virtual reality will be used to train
              humans in critical performance tasks,  the key becomes finding what sort of
              training is transferable between the virtual and physical worlds.  Experiments
              performed thus far in the CAVE Virtual Environment  showed significant
              performance  improvement in virtual reality-trained subjects compared to the
              untrained population for the same  task.  Further experiments will
              quantitatively assess what may be perhaps the most important aspect of  virtual
              reality research--the relationship between the technology and the training task
              which would  result in a maximum transfer of training.  Early results  indicate
              that latency is a severe problem  and that restricting virtual reality solely
              to the visual domain limits its training application.  This work will extend
              the study of latency measurement to wide area networks using CAVE-to-CAVE 
              experiments over the vBNS national network as the model.  The results are
              expected to have broad  applicability in the National Challenge areas,
              particularly in manufacturing and education.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
