Title       : Integrated Prognostics, Maintenance and Life Extending Control of Mechanical and
               Production Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1995       
File        : a9424587

Award Number: 9424587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Asok Ray axr2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc Carpino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shashi Phoha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9424587   This proposal supports research in integrated prognostics,
              maintenance, and life-extending control of continuous time production
              processes.  The research includes three tasks.  The first task involves the
              development of stochastic fatigue damage dynamics models with data determined
              by experiment and obtained from published literature.  A specific fossil fuel
              power plant model will be used as an example case.  The second task focuses on
              the synthesis of decision and control policies based on both continuously
              varying and discrete-event models.  This formulation will include a
              feed-forward policy over a finite time horizon using nonlinear programming, a
              constrained parameter optimization for nonlinear decision and control in a
              feedback loop, and interactive discrete event strategies for maintenance
              decisions and life-extending control at the coordination and supervisory levels
              using the concept of finite-state automata.  The third task is the simulation
              of the decision and control system on a simulation testbed.   If successful,
              this research will lead to enhanced plant safety, operational reliability, and
              availability of continuous-time production processes such as chemical and
              processing plants, pulp and paper mills, and large rolling mills.  The results
              should also be extendable to discrete production processes such as the
              manufacture of glass containers and light bulbs, semi-conductors,
              ceramic-enamel coatings on appliances, and food products.  This research
              comprises a step toward the notion that control and diagnostic systems based on
              sensory and operational information can be used to improve plant operational
              characteristics.
