Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: The Cost of Acclimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1995      
File        : a9424091

Award Number: 9424091
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47400              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Berrigan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9424091  Berrigan    The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twenty-four months of research abroad. The  program's awards provide
              opportunities for joint research,  and the use of unique or complementary
              facilities, expertise  and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will
              support a twelve-month postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. David A. Berrigan to
              work with Dr. Ary A.  Hoffmann at La Trobe University in Australia.   
              Acclimation is an important physiological adaptation to  environmental
              variability, which occurs in response to a  variety of environmental stresses
              such as temperature,  desiccation and salinity.  Dr. Berrigan proposes three 
              approaches to assess the distribution of acclimation  responses and to measure
              their costs and benefits.  First,  he will survey a number of Australian fruit
              flies, (species  Drosophila) for acclimation responses to heat and cold. 
              Second, he plans to estimate the cost of acclimation to heat  or cold using a
              combination of life history and  physiological assays.  Third, he will
              experimentally  distinguish between injury from exposure to temperature 
              extremes and the costs of acclimation using comparative  studies of species
              with and without acclimation responses.  The goal is to use these measurements
              to develop models for  the evolution of acclimation responses to temperature.
              ***
