Title       : Polyherdral Methods in Integer and Combinatorial Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9424348

Award Number: 9424348
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396103             (Estimated)
Investigator: Egon Balas eb17@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerard Cornuejols  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              20        Mathematics                             
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1038,9147,CVIS,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9424348  Balas   This objective of this research is to extend some earlier work
              undertaken by the investigators in integer and combinatorial optimization
              problems.  The research on which the current work is built was supported also
              by the National Science Foundation.  In earlier research, the investigators
              developed a new approach to solving mixed integer programming problems based on
              a framework described as 'lift-and-project cuts' within the context of the
              branch and bound technique.  The procedure has been founded to be robust and
              more efficient than any of the approaches currently used in solving mixed
              integer programs.  The current research is aimed at investigating some other
              unresolved questions associated with the improved technique.  Included in the
              questions to be resolved are matters related to the characterization of the
              computational behavior of the algorithm, development of some other new
              algorithms, and the design and implementation these algorithms to solve a
              broader class of problems.   The lift-and-project cut approach to mixed integer
              programming has applications to several areas of design, manufacturing,
              distribution, facility location, and civil infrastructure development.  One
              such application is the optimal design of multi-product batch plants in
              chemical engineering, where the optimization is concerned with the choice of
              unit plants sizes for various stages of the process and the batch sizes for the
              products.  Another example is the design of a cost-effective fiber optics
              network that protects services against the consequences of equipment failure. 
              In the area of civil infrastructure development, one example is the design of a
              minimum weight truss consisting of a number of specified bars with fixed modal
              locations, under specified conditions on stresses, bar elongations, and nodal
              displacement.  Another class of problems studied in this research is the
              generalized traveling salesman problem where the development technique can be
              used to construct optimal rolling cycles i n a hot strip mill.  This research
              has the potential to significantly enhance the advancement and the
              understanding of integer and combinatorial optimization problems.  Furthermore,
              several sectors of the economy stand to benefit from the results.
