Title       : Support for the International Secretariat of the Global Change System for
               Analysis, Research, and Training (START)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1998  
File        : a9424301

Award Number: 9424301
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1707187            (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Frederick Spilhaus fspilhaus@agu.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roland J. Fuchs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Geophysical Union
	      2000 Florida Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200091231    202/462-6900

NSF Program : 5419      INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9424301  SPILHAUS         In order to facilitate regional examinations of the
              causes  and consequences of global change around the world, many nations  have
              worked together to identify scientific issues and to develop  plans for
              collaborative efforts to study and address problems.  To facilitate these
              efforts, the International Geosphere-  Biosphere Programme (IGBP), the World
              Climate Research Programme  (WCRP), and the Human Dimensions of Global
              Environmental Change  Programme (HDP) have established a Global Change System
              for  Analysis, Research, and Training (START).  START is an evolving  system of
              regional research networks, each of which will consist  of at least one
              regional research center and a number of regional  research sites.  Among the
              most developed of these networks is  the Inter-American Institute for Global
              Change (IAI).  Also under  development are the European Network for Research In
              Global  Change (ENRICH) and the Asian-Pacific Network for Glmbal Change 
              Research (APN).  In addition to encouraging and supporting the  involvement of
              leading U.S. scientists in the IAI and other  regional research networks, the
              federal agencies participating in  the U.S. Global Change Research Program
              (US/GCRP) have sought to  facilitate these valuable international
              collaborations by  sponsoring the international START secretariat.  For the
              past few  years, operations of this activity have been supported by the 
              Consortium for Interdisciplinary Earth Science Information  Network (CIESIN). 
              Changes in CIESIN's budget have forced it to  focus on other activities,
              however, and as a result, the American  Geophysical Union (AGU) will provide
              core support for START  secretariat operations.  Funding for these activities
              is provided  by the National Science Foundation, the National Aeronautics and 
              Space Administration, and the U.S. Department of Energy on behalf  of all
              participating agencies in the US/GCRP.       During its initial years of
              operation, the START secretariat  has played an important rol e in building the
              international  linkages necessary to increase the involvement in global change 
              studies of researchers from around the world, and especially from  developing
              nations.  The regional research networks are at  critical stages of
              development, and a strong START secretariat is  essential to continue this
              essential work.  AGU's sponsorship of  the START secretariat should strengthen
              START's foundation and  enable it to effectively attain its goals of promoting
              research  on the regional origins and implications of global environmental 
              changes and of enhancing indigenous scientific capacities for  global change
              research.
