Title       : Learning in Games and in Market
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9424013

Award Number: 9424013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231135             (Estimated)
Investigator: Drew Fudenberg dfudenberg@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9424013  Drew Fudenberg    One of the things that separates human beings
              from other animals is their great capacity to learn about their environment
              through observation and experience.  Yet, surprisingly, learning is often
              ignored in economic modeling and analysis.  This research consists of four
              interrelated projects about the way "rational" people learn.  The ultimate goal
              of this research is to introduce a new interpretation of "out-of-equilibrium"
              actions by a player in the course of a game: namely, that such puzzling actions
              are "experiments" designed to help the player learn the strategies being used
              by its opponents.  By rigorously inferring the implications of the assumption
              that economic agents are constantly learning about their opponents and their
              environment this research has the potential to greatly extend the range of
              application of economic theory as well as increase its predictive ability.   
              The first project looks at the choices made by consumers who try to use the
              experiences of friends and neighbors to choose among goods of differing
              quality.  The second project analyzes models in which players try to learn of
              their opponents' strategies through repeated observation without the benefit of
              any other communication with them. The goal is to find learning rules that will
              perform well in a wide variety of strategic environments. The third project
              concerns the effect of learning in so-called "signaling games".  These games
              consist of situations in which players have private information about the
              environment that cannot be independently verified.  As a result, "talk is
              cheap."  The only way players can communicate their information to other
              players is by taking costly actions that will "reveal" the information they
              possess.  In signaling games, there are many equilibria, some of which seem
              implausible.  The research examines which equilibria are likely to arise if
              players conduct "experiments" during the course of play to learn about their
              opponent's strategies.  The last projec t examines the pricing of by a durable
              good monopolist when the good changes over time.  Examples are computer
              hardware and software and automobiles.
