Title       : Productive Intensification in an Urban Landscape: Survey, Excavation, and
               Palaeoenvironmental Analysis in the Vijayanagara Metropolitan Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1995       
File        : a9424151

Award Number: 9424151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182084             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen D. Morrison   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Morrison    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Kathleen Morrison  and
              her collaborators will conduct archaeological research at the  site of
              Vijayanagara, located in Southern India. The city of  Vijayanagara was the
              capital of an empire that claimed control  over much of peninsular India
              between the 14th and 16th centuries  A.D. It was established in an area that
              had never been  politically central or densely occupied and the rapid expansion
               of the city in the early years of the 14th century prompted  dramatic changes
              in the organization and scale of production of  agriculture and craft goods. In
              the early 16th century  Vijayanagara again underwent a period of expansion in
              miliary  conquest, construction of monumental architecture and also 
              population. This situation provides Dr. Morrison with an  excellent opportunity
              to investigate processes of economic  change. Building on five previous seasons
              of research, her  project will examine the structure of production, settlement,
               transportation and fortification in the region immediately  surrounding the
              city. Three independent lines of evidence,  archaeological, historical and
              botanical will be combined in the  analysis of this region. The team will
              continue their program of  systematic intensive surface survey. They will also
              collect cores  for both plant macrofosil and microfossil analysis. Finally 
              historical research based on inscriptions will provide important  economic and
              chronological information.    Archaeologists wish to understand how complex
              societies manage  economies with allow large number of people to sustain
              themselves  with relatively simple production techniques. In particular Dr. 
              Morrison is focussing on economic aspects of production and  consumption and
              wishes to understand in detail human environment  interactions. She will
              examine the effect over time of  agriculture, craft production and domestic
              activities. The cores  and selected excavations will yield charcoal and plant
              remains  which, through careful analy sis, will provide insight into 
              environmental changes.    This research is important for several reasons. It
              will provide  data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our 
              understanding of how complex societies develop and are maintained  and will
              provide a wealth of information on human - environmental  interactions.
