Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: The Expression of Information
               Structure Through Prosody and Word Order
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1995    
File        : a9424023

Award Number: 9424023
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beryl A. Hoffman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9424023  Hoffman      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twenty-four months of research abroad. The  program's awards provide
              opportunities for joint research,  and the use of unique or complementary
              facilities, expertise  and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will
              support a twelve-month postdoctoral research  tisit by Dr. Beryl A. Hoffman to
              work with Dr. Elisabet  Engdahl at the Centre for Cognitive Science in
              Edinburgh,  Scotland.    This project will involve the investigation of the use
              of  prosody and word order variation as strategies to express  the information
              structure of a sentence that describes how a  sentence relates to its context. 
              The PI will concentrate on  modelling the data in Turkish and investigate the
              cross-  linguistic generalizations that can be made in other  relatively free
              word order languages such as German and in  fixed word order languages such as
              English.  She will  include implementations that can be integrated into a 
              Turkish/English machine translation system.  The proper use  of prosody and
              word order variation is of considerable  importance in developing practical
              applications in machine  translation and speech generation.  Machine
              translation  systems, especially those including spoken language  generation
              are a very active area of research in Europe,  such as the recent ESPRIT
              POLYGLOT project. ***
