Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Classical and Quantum Fluid Transport Models for
               Semiconductor Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1995 
File        : a9424464

Award Number: 9424464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Jerome jwj@math.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jerome       The investigator studies semiconductor devices, focusing on  the
              simulation and mathematical analysis of the hydrodynamic and  quantum
              hydrodynamic models for such devices.  Microwave and  multi-species models, and
              the decisive role of friction, are  emphasized in the classical studies, and
              hysteresis,  bistable-state analysis, are emphasized in the quantum studies. 
              The rationale is to establish a way of dealing with various  aspects of hot
              electron effects in classical structures, and the  effects of tunneling and
              repulsion in heterogeneous structures, or  compound semiconductors.  The
              algorithms to be employed for the  simulations are shock capturing algorithms
              of finite difference  and finite element type.  The multi-species models permit
               simulation of the circuit involving the Gunn diode, and its three  valley
              electron carriers, by new hydrodynamic models.  These are  compared with the
              computationally intensive results obtained by  the Urbana group, via Monte
              Carlo simulation of the Boltzmann  equation.       Mathematical and computer
              models of semiconductor devices  have increasingly necessitated the
              incorporation of two types of  effects: (1) energetics, often called the hot
              electron effect, and  (2) small scale, or quantum mechanical, effects.  This
              proposal  describes two important models, the first based upon classical,  and
              the second upon quantum, physics.  Although the basic physical  laws have been
              understood for at least seventy-five years, the  efforts to apply these laws to
              semiconductor devices in a way that  allows for reasonably efficient modeling
              and simulation represents  an enormous challenge to scientists, engineers, and 
              mathematicians.  An example of classical modeling is the Gunn  diode, which is
              acknowledged to be of critical importance in  microwave manufacturing
              applications; such devices appear in the  circuitry of the automobile, for
              example.  Its function depends  upon delicate oscillations of current and
              voltage, which must be  captured by computer  models if they are to be of any
              usefulness.  The principal investigator is open to any collaboration in the 
              manufacturing sector which might result from this work.  A possible 
              application of the quantum studies is the development (by others)  of logic
              gates in circuits that do not operate according to binary  "off-on" laws, but
              allow for multiple states of occupancy.  The  work described is highly
              collaborative and interdisciplinary,  including electrical engineers from the
              University of Illinois at  Urbana.  Computational mathematicians from Arizona
              State and Brown  Universities, and the University of Minnesota, and
              mathematical  analysts from the Courant Institute and from Stanford University,
               are involved.  The results of past work have been regularly  presented at
              workshops on computational electronics, and published  in journals of
              electrical engineering and computational physics.  This practice is continued.
