Title       : Late Quaternary Environmental History of the Noatak Basin, Northwestern Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1995     
File        : a9424279

Award Number: 9424279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99782              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Elias saelias@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This award supports a project to investigate the late  Quaternary
              paleoenvironmental conditions of the Noatak basin in  northwestern Alaska.  The
              Noatak basin is a broad lowland in the  western Brooks Range of Alaska, drained
              by the west-flowing  Noatak River. During the late Pleistocene, large glaciers 
              extended down the Noatak River valley and terminated within the  basin. Other
              glaciers that originated farther west in the DeLong  Mountains flowed eastward
              into the basin, damming the Noatak  River and forming a succession of lakes
              with surface areas as  large as 4400 square kilometers. This project will bring
              together  a combination of approaches, including paleoecological analyses 
              (pollen, plant macrofossils, and insects), stratigraphy, and  geomorphology, to
              understand the paleoenvironmental records  preserved in deposits in the
              numerous large bluffs along the  Noatak and Cutler Rivers. The research focuses
              on organic-rich  sediments exposed in the bluffs. Basic stratigraphic and 
              geomorphologic mapping of these bluffs has already been  accomplished and test
              samples taken for paleoecological study in  1993 and 1994 have yielded
              abundant, well-preserved macrofossils  (plants and insects) and pollen
              assemblages. This project will  yield significant paleoenvironmental data that
              will be placed in  well-constrained chronological and stratigraphic contexts.  
                    The Noatak basin contains an excellent record of the last 
              glacial/interglacial cycle, preserved in a series of organic  deposits exposed
              in river bluffs. Poorly drained lake beds cover  the floor of the Noatak basin,
              and associated end moraines  reflect glacial advances from mountains to the
              north, east, and  west. During interglacial and interstadial intervals, the
              Noatak  River and its tributaries incised these glacial deposits and 
              glaciolacustrine complexes. They formed gravel-filled channels  capped by
              organic-rich bog, marsh, and floodplain deposits. Sixty-  two measured sections
              of river-bluff exposures provide a record  o f depositional facies across the
              lake floor. The sedimentary  sequences exposed in the bluffs define multiple
              glacial advances  and corresponding lake stages separated by fluvial sediments
              of  both interstadial and interglacial character. Peat beds and  organic-rich
              silt horizons from floodplain deposits have yielded  identifiable wood, plant
              macrofossils, pollen, and insect  remains, and other fossils that serve as
              biostratigraphic markers  and provide paleoecological information.  Peats and
              organic-rich  silts and sands were deposited during several key intervals 
              throughout the last 135,000 years. The nine study sites that are  part of this
              project include organic deposits that most likely  date to the last
              interglacial period, the Boutellier (mid-  Wisconsin) interstadial, the late
              Wisconsin maximum, (27,000-  17,000 years ago), the late glacial interval
              (13,500-10,000 years  ago), and the Holocene.         The study region lies
              within the Noatak National Preserve,  one of the proposed component parks of
              the U.S./Russian Beringia  International Park. Its position near the eastern
              margin of the  Bering Land Bridge places it within a region where organic-rich 
              riparian habitats prevailed during even the last glacial maximum. 
              Paleoecological studies in the Noatak basin are essential to help  decipher an
              unusually long and complex record of Pleistocene  glaciation, modern landscape
              formation, and biotic response to  climate change. These studies will also
              provide the environmental  underpinning of the rich archaeological record that
              is presently  being reconstructed in the Noatak region.
