Title       : Undergraduate Research Experiences in Membrane Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9424228

Award Number: 9424228
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139664             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonidas G. Bachas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric A. Grulke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D A. Butterfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberly W. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dibakar Bhattacharyya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1773,9161,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9424228  Bachas    This REU Site Award will introduce twenty-seven talented 
              undergraduates to research in the field of membrane science.  Nine students per
              year will be selected primarily form nominees  provided by nine Kentucky
              colleges and universities that serve  the economically underprivileged
              Appalachian regions of Kentucky,  and will be matched with the eight faculty
              advisors.  Special  efforts will be made to recruit minority students by using
              our  established contacts with faculty at U. S. institutions that have  high
              minority enrollments.  The individual projects are designed  along the lines of
              the research program of the supervising  advisor to ensure direct scientific
              interaction with the graduate  and postdoctoral students of each research
              group.  Weekly  seminars during the summer, and evening seminars in the fall
              will  be conducted to stimulate discussion and provide information on  career
              possibilities, on current major research issues, and on  the development of
              effective scientific communication skills.  Further, in-house
              "mini-conferences" will be organized during  which the students will present
              their project results in the form  of a scientific presentation.  The students
              will also have the  opportunity to attend a professional conference and get
              exposed  to the most recent advances in their field.  Finally, the  students
              will be encouraged to participate at the annual Regional  Undergraduate
              Chemistry Research Poster Competition organized by  the Department of Chemistry
              and sponsored by the University of  Kentucky Graduate School.  %%%  This wide
              spectrum of research-related activities is expected to  contribute toward the
              scientific maturation of the individual  students and possibly encourage them
              to pursue a research career
