Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1995      
File        : a9424382

Award Number: 9424382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Morris W. Hirsch hirsch@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hirsch       The investigator studies several areas of dynamical systems  and
              its applications:  (1) Certain stochastic processes such as  generalized Polya
              Urns are now known to have sample paths whose  limit sets are almost surely
              Chain Recurrent sets for an  associated differential equation.  This allows the
              use of dynamical  systems theory in a variety of fields.  Applications are made
              to  Stochastic Approximations, Game Theory, Mathematical Economics of 
              sustainable resources, Numerical Algorithms, and Neural Learning  Algorithms. 
              (2) New methods for proving existence of Horseshoe  Chaos are applied to
              generalized Henon maps.  The Smale-Birkhoff  existence theorem is extended to
              replace the assumption of  transverse intersections between stable and unstable
              manifolds by  a much more general topological condition of nonzero intersection
               number.  (3) New models of neural computation are constructed,  based on
              varying competition between oscillatory or chaotic  attractors, with
              competition controlled by an adaptive clocking  system.       Mathematical
              dynamical systems theory studies the long-term  behavior of complex systems. 
              This project develops rigorous  mathematics that can aid in the analysis of
              systems in several  applications.  (1) In Economic Theory, markets are often
              modeled as  a game played repeatedly between competitors who continually adapt 
              their strategies (e.g., prices, production) in the light of  experience.  It is
              of great importance to determine whether this  leads to a stable, predictable
              situation.  This project studies how  questions of this kind can be solved by
              translating them into  mathematical problems in the seemingly different but
              well  understood field of dynamical systems theory.  This application  builds
              directly on work by the recent Nobel Laureates in  Economics, Nash and
              Harsanyi.  The investigator is also  collaborating with economists on
              applications of the same  mathematical results to models of sustainable
              resources.  (2) In  many areas of science en gineering it is important to
              whether  particular systems are "chaotic," i.e. inherently unpredictable in 
              the long run.  This project provides new means for determining  chaotic
              dynamics.  (3) The newly emerging field of Neural  Computation involves
              dynamics in many ways.  Some of the same  mathematical ideas used in the other
              parts of this project are  directly relevant.  In collaboration with
              biophysicists, the  investigator applies dynamical systems theory to new neural
               network systems that can efficiently "learn" to do a variety of  useful tasks,
              such as robot control.
