Title       : Mathematical/Computational Tools for Mapping Brain Data Bases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1998   
File        : a9424264

Award Number: 9424264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael I. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ulf Grenander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              21        Mathematics                             
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9216,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                                                   Modern  whole brain cryosection and
              digitization techniques coupled  to  modern  tissue section and staining
              methods allow anatomists to provide  exquisitely  detailed  in  vivo
              information  regarding  the  anatomical  structure  and function of individual
              brains.  The difficulty  lies  in  two  areas:  images  and  sections within 
              the  same  anatomy  must  be  registered.  But  more  fundamentally,  even 
              when  registered,  normal  variation  across disparate anatomes makes pooling
              of inter  anatomical  data  difficult, if not impossible. In this proposal, we
              strive towards  the  development of algorithmic tools for the fusion of
              anatomical  and  functional   data  as  measured  via  gross  whole  brain 
              cryosections  (0.05-0.1  mm  resolution) and stained tissue sections in  the 
              macaque  monkey brain.    The major focus of this proposal is on the
              development of _ as manifest  in  the  adult macaque, allowing for the mapping
              of a single  atlas  to  multiple  individual  targets. The atlas  contains  all
               subvolumes  of  biological  significance to the investigator in our  work 
              these  would  include  the  sulci  and  gyri, deep thalamic  nuclei, 
              ventricles  and  various  sub  areas  in  the occipital lobe, including 
              primary  visual  cortex (area V1) and other visual areas. Our representations
              provide  a  tool  for  the  algorithmic generation of smooth maps (maps 
              preserving  differential   geometric  lengths,  areas,  volumes)  from   an  
              atlas  (template)  and  its subvolumes to a family of target anatomies.  These 
              maps  allow  for  the fusion and pooling of geometric  and  physiologic 
              information  from  varied  experimental preparations  into  one  common 
              coordinate system or data base.    As   part  of  such  a  representation  of 
              normal  macaque  anatomical  variability, a probabilistic measure will be
              constructed from a  family  of  representative  macaque  whole  brain 
              anatomies.  The  probability  measures normal anatomical variation in act ual
              brain anatomy. This will  provide  neuroanatomists with a direct tool for
              placing  their  samples  into  a common coordinate system with a precise degree
              of certainty  or  confidence. Such a measure of anatomical variability reflects
              both  the  underlying stability of pre-defined anatomically labeled regions, 
              i.e.  subareas  and  volumes such as sulci, eyri, and different visual  areas 
              and  their  covariation  relative to a single  biologically  meaningful 
              coordinate system.
