Title       : Development of an Innovative cDNA Cloning System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9424202

Award Number: 9424202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ichiro Maruyama   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9424202  Maruyama  Isolation of cDNA clones of interest is a crucial step toward
              understanding biological phenomena at the molecular level. cDNA clones are
              isolated from libraries by the technique of colony or plaque hybridization with
              labeled probes such as oligonucleoodes or antibodies, using membrane filters
              onto which proteins or DNAs of bacterial colonies or phage plaques have been
              transfered.  However, screening of cDNA libraries using membrane filters is a
              laborious, time-consuming process, and is limited to the number of clones being
              searched. We have developed novel cloning vehicles, (foo, that are derived from
              bacteriophage ( and is capable of expressing foreign gene products as a fusion
              protein on the surface of the phage particle. The (foo vectors have multiple
              cloning sites for the insertion of a foreign DNA fragment and color selection
              for the recombinants.  Foreign proteins are fused to the C-terminus of a
              truncated phage tail protein, pV, by a peptide linker. Conditional chain
              termination allows the assembly and fusion of a multisubunit protein. The (foo
              clones express functionally active proteins on the phage particle surface and
              can be purified by affinity chromatography with various probes immobilized on
              solid supports. The objective of this  project is to determine experimental
              conditions for the general use of the (foo vector for construction of cDNA
              libraries and screening of cDNA clones with in vitro affinity selection
              techniques.  (a) We will make the cDNA libraries with the (foo vectors from
              mRNA of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans as a model organism. The following
              two approaches will be undertaken for the construction of the libraries: (1)
              The full-length cDNA libraries will be made from C. elegans mRNA with oligo(dt)
              as a primer for cDNA synthesis. and (2) the "domain library" will be made from
              cDNAs synthesized with random hexanucleotides. The two libraries will
              compensate each other for covering the entire mRNA population.  (b) Using the
              (foo libraries, the follo wing affinity selection schemes will be examined for
              the isolation of cDNA clones: (1) antigen-antibody interactions, and (2)
              protein-protein interactions. In the first scheme, the proteins such as
              caltractin, centromere proteins, and/or neurofilament proteins, will be the
              targets to which we will use specific antibodies as probes immobilized on a
              microtiter plate. The second scheme aims to isolate cDNA clones encoding
              proteins that bind to the C2 domains of protein kinase C and Unc-13 proteins as
              well as to the SH3 domain of dynamin. During the selection process, we will
              determine optimum conditions for the amplification of the libraries by changing
              E. coli host strains and inoculum size of the library phages. After
              purification of the cDNA clones, the products will be expressed in bacteria,
              and specific binding will be confirmed by in vitro binding assay.  (c) Toward
              understanding biological function of the clones, the isolated cDNA will be
              further analyzed by DNA sequencing, Northern and Southern blot hybridization.
              Full-length cDNA will be isolated by screening other cDNA libraries and PCR
              amplification of the cDNA ends. A genomic map position of the clones will also
              be determined by DNA hybridization to membrane filters blotted with the
              isolated genomic DNA in the genomic mapping project.   The establishment of
              experimental conditions for the construction and screening of the (foo
              libraries shall dramatically improve technology of cDNA library screening. The
              system will allow one lo search 1013 phages or more by simple affinity
              selection using probes immobilized on solid supports such as a microtiter
              plate, paramagnetic beads, or agarose beads. Therefore, one can expect to
              isolate rare clones that have previously been diffficult or impossible to
              isolate by the conventional methods. One can also search the (foo libraries
              with many different probes including antibodies, DNA, inhibitors, ligands, and
              protein domains. The selection scheme is a simple and economical alternative to
              the convention al filter screening.  Application of the (foo system is not
              limited to screening of cDNA libraries.  It can be useful for the selection of
              a particular mutant gene by affinity chromatography after random mutagenesis of
              the gene. In the genome mapping projects, many genes encoding DNA-binding
              proteins may be efficiently identified by screening (foo libraries with
              isolated genomic DNAs as probes.  %%%  The development of an improved way of
              selecting for rare cloned genes will be of great use to researchers trying to
              identify and isolate important genes and to industrial scientists who are
              trying to isolate genes from any organism for biotechnology applications.  ***
