Title       : Synthesis and Magnetism of Rare Earth Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1998     
File        : a9424339

Award Number: 9424339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin P. Flynn flynn@uimr17.mrl.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Myron B. Salamon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9424339  Flynn  We   explore   and  control  the  magnetic  behavior   of  
              rare-earth  nanostructures.   These  are  synthesized from  rare-earth  metals 
              as  stacks of sheets, tailored in thickness and content by molecular  beam 
              epitaxy.   Bulk rare earths exhibit a rich variety of unusal  magnetic 
              behavior,  including unique helimagnetism and large  magnetostriction.  The 
              proposed  research  includes  studies  of  structure,  magnetism,  magnetic
              microstructure, and magnetotransport in these novel materials  configurations. 
               Use is made of neutron scattering, x-ray  scattering  with   synchrotron 
              radiation,  SQUID  magnetometry,   and   transport  measurements  on 
              lithographically processed structures.   Of  special  interest  are:  control 
              of  magnetic phase stability  and  thin  film  microstructure;  chemical 
              synthesis of new  magnetic  nanostructures;  prediction  of  magnetic couplings
              near interfaces; and transformation  dynamics including fluctuation and
              inelastic processes.  %%%  We  focus  on  the synthesis and properties of
              magnetic nanostructures  made   from   rare-earth  metals  by  molecular  beam 
              surface   layer  deposition.   This controlled process assembles thin  films 
              layer  by  layer on a crystalline substrate, from selected element metals, in
              the  form  of  high  quality  single crystals,  with  a  designed  chemical 
              sequence  of  successive layers.  The focus on  rare-earth  metals  is  driven 
               by  technical  and  scientific  interest  in  their  magnetic  behavior.   Our
              abiliity to tailor selected structures  allows  us  to  explore the
              interactions among the atomic magnetic moments that  cause  a  rich  variety of
              magnetic structures.  The surface layer deposition  process  has a controlling
              influence on magnetism through the clamping  of  the  film to the substrate,
              and through the resulting  strain  and  thin film geometry.  The ability to
              control magnetic behavior of these  materials  is  of  interest  in connection
              with  applications  to  the  storage,   switching, and manipulation of
              information using  thin  film  magnetic devices.  ***
