Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Investigations in Number Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1995       
File        : a9424642

Award Number: 9424642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew G. Earnest                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph H. Silverman jhs@math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports research in three areas of number theory. The first involves
              the relationship between numbers of small height and the arithmetic properties
              of the fields that they generate. This may yield some insight into Lehmer's
              conjecture, as well as into the phenomenon that powers of small Salem numbers
              frequently turn out to be exceptional units. The second project is to study the
              variation of the multiplicative order of an integer modulo m for varying m, and
              to investigate generalizations of these results to number fields, function
              fields, and abelian varieties. The third project concerns the arithmetic theory
              of dynamical systems. Problems being studied  in this area include bounds for
              periods of rational periodic points, finiteness of integral points in orbits,
              fields of moduli for rational maps, and analytic continuation of canonical
              height zeta functions.     This research is in the general area of number
              theory. Number theory has its historical roots in the study of the whole
              numbers, addressing such questions as those dealing with the divisibility of
              one whole number by another. It is among the oldest branches of mathematics and
              was pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons. However, within
              the last half century it has become an indispensable tool in diverse
              applications in areas such as data transmission and processing, and
              communication systems.
