Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Control Systems Involving C-O-R Generalized Inputs with
               Applications to Splines and Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1995     
File        : a9424353

Award Number: 9424353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Hermann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assn Physical&Systms Math
	      
	      Brookline, MA  02146    /   -

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1039,9146,CVIS,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9424353  Hermann  Often in technology it is necessary to construct a control
              system/automata/computer program to track exactly or approximately a trajectory
              which has some lack of smoothness, for example, discontinuities in the
              derivative of acceleration, and which takes values on a nonlinear manifold.  In
              such a context, generating such a trajectory via a smooth control system
              requires a control system which accepts inputs which are generalized functions
              in the sense of Colombeau, Oberguggenberger and Rosinger. Alternately, such
              trajectories may be constructed using a nonlinear spline algorithm.  This
              research will pursue three directions: (i) the development of the underlying
              Colombeau generalized function theory in the context of nonlinear control
              systems; (ii) extension of the spline algorithms of Bezier and deCasteljau
              developed in the context of flat affine geometry to more general Lie-theoretic
              and path geometry-theoretic situations; and (iii) application the theories
              developed in (i) and (ii) to air traffic control technology.    Development of
              air traffic control algorithms involves dealing exactly or approximately with
              piecewise smooth trajectories of nonlinear mechanical systems.  This research
              will pursue two directions of mathematical analysis of such trajectories, one
              via feedback control theory, the other a nonlinear generalization of the spline
              algorithms developed in a computer graphics context by Bezier and deCasteljau. 
              Generating such trajectories via control methodology requires dealing with
              forces and feedback laws for nonlinear control systems which are generalized
              functions in the sense of Colombeau, Oberguggenberger and Rosinger.  The
              underlying mathematical theory will be initiated in this research.  Extending
              the Bezier-deCasteljau spline approach to the mathematical situations required
              for aircraft control will also be studied and developed.  This project is
              jointly supported by the Applied Mathematics Program and the Geometric Analysis
              Program.  ***
