Title       : REU Site for Engineering Mechanis and Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1997  
File        : a9424205

Award Number: 9424205
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122590             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Rencis jjrencis@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9424205  Rencis   The REU Site focuses on engineering mechanics and materials in
              mechanical engineering.  The Site is for 3 years and each year a different
              group of eight talented senior undergraduate students will carry out research
              on the Worcester Polytechnic Institute campus for a ten week summer internship
              period.  The faculty and graduate mentorship teams assembled for each intern
              topic is carrying out ongoing research in the focus area.  Each research topic
              is short, self-contained and considers cutting-edge problems that will
              challenge each intern.  Each topic has been carefully selected so that a
              positive, successful experience will encourage a student in selecting a career
              in engineering mechanics and materials.  The common theme of engineering
              mechanics and materials provides considerable interaction between the intern
              and faculty/graduate student mentorship team.  All interns will have access to
              several well equipped mechanical engineering laboratories and state-of-the-art
              computational facilities.  Recruitment of summer interns will be from the
              following four groups: 1) WPI programs; 2) minority institutions; 3) women and
              handicapped students, and; 4) undergraduates from four year schools that have a
              small or nonexistent research base.  Selection of the interns will be based
              upon their career objectives, academic qualifications and past work
              experiences.  Each student will be contacted by the faculty mentor prior to the
              summer internship so that they have a clear understanding of the project and
              what role they will play.  The program will be carefully planned so that all
              materials and equipment will be in working order before the students arrive to
              the campus.  Each intern will meet regularly, usually daily with the faculty
              mentor.  The principal investigator also will meet with each student on a
              weekly basis to be sure that student/faculty concerns and placement
              difficulties are addressed.  Social and extracurricular activities will be
              scheduled throughout the ten week internship p eriod.  Each student will
              present their findings at the interim and the internship will conclude with a
              formal presentation session.  A final report will be required at the end of the
              internship.  Students will be encouraged to present their findings at a
              conference and possibly publish a paper.  ***
