Title       : CRB: Collaborative Research: Comparing Genetic and Demographic Models of
               Population Viability for a Neotropical Parrot
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1996     
File        : a9424625

Award Number: 9424625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96167              (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin R. Hughes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9198,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9424625  Hughes  One of the central problems in conservation biology is
              determining the viability of small populations. Population viability is
              dependent on complex interactions of demographic and genetic factors. Over the
              short term demographic variation induced by the environment seems to be the
              most important of these factors. Over the long term the genetic consequences of
              small population size become increasingly important. Both genetic and
              demographic methods are used to assess population viability. Genetic
              assessments of population viability focus on effective population size. The
              effective size is the size of an idealized population in which the random
              processes of inbreeding and drift act at the same rate as they do in the study
              population. Many guidelines for conservation state the number of individuals
              that should be saved in terms of effective size. Yet, in almost every wild
              population, effective size is much smaller than actual population size.
              Demographic assessments result from population viability assessment (PVA)
              models of persistence. In PVA models, populations are projected into the future
              using means and variances of demographic parameters: annual reproductive
              success and survivorship for different age or stage classes. This conservation
              and restoration biology project will compare genetic and demographic approaches
              to viability assessment based on studies of a Neotropical parrot, the
              Green-rumped Parrotlet in Venezuela. In addition, this research will develop a
              demographic model of population persistence for this species of parrot. The use
              of PVA and other demographic models is a cornerstone in conservation biology,
              yet the methods have rarely been tested and verified on small populations of
              neotropical birds.
