Title       : Human Resources for the Future: Women and Young Scientists in Asian and Pacific
               Science: Symposium/Beijing, China/ June 1995
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1995  
File        : a9424373

Award Number: 9424373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69780              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy Davis Lewis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              92        Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 0000,5964,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9424373  Lewis      This award will support the participation of ten American
              and  fifteen foreign scientists and engineers at a symposium on the 
              involvement of women and young scientists and engineers to be  held in Beijing,
              China in June 1995 in conjunction with the  XVIII Pacific Science Congress,
              which is held every four years.  Dr. Nancy Davis Lewis, the Associate Dean of
              the College of  Social Sciences at the University of Hawaii, is the American  
              co-organizer.  The Co-Convener is Dong Guilan, Director for  Science and
              Technology Policy at the National Research Center  for Sciences and Technology
              Development in Beijing. The   Secretary General for the XVIII Pacific Science
              Congress is  Congbin Fu of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. The organizers  are
              also working in cooperation with Wu Ganmei, Secretary General  of the China
              Women's Association for Science and Technology.    The Pacific Science Congress
              will have as its theme "Population,  Resources and Environment: Prospects and
              Initiatives".  This  symposium will focus on establishing a dialogue and
              initiating  programs that encourage the participation of women and young 
              investigators in science in Asia and the Pacific.  Sessions   to be held during
              the meeting will be devoted to taking stock  on available human resources,
              science and the role of culture,  and women and the nature of the scientific
              enterprise.  Shorter  discussion periods will be devoted to initiatives that
              are  showing a positive influence on encouraging scientific careers,  the role
              of national and international organizations, and   regional cooperation.   
              Funds from this grant also will be used to support participants  from the
              southeast Asian region with particular attention  to the participation of
              individuals from the Pacific Islands  who are often overlooked in regional
              activities.  Dr. Lewis  has extensive contacts in the region and its
              educational and  scientific organizations and is well placed to assure Pacific 
              Island participation. This is particularl y timely because the  next
              Inter-Congress meeting of the Pacific Science Association,  "The Islands in the
              Pacific Century", will be held in Suva, Fiji  in mid-1997.  The discussions on
              women and young people in Asia  and Pacific Science initiated at the Beijing
              meeting can  continue, with even wider Pacific Island participation, in Suva  
              in 1997.
