Title       : Gravitational Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9424337

Award Number: 9424337
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $686029             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kip S. Thorne kip@tapir.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1252      SUPPORT OF LIGO RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical and computational research will be carried out  in support of the
              LIGO Project--an NSF-funded effort to  construct by 1999 a two-site
              gravitational wave detection  system based on laser interferometry, and soon
              thereafter to  detect gravitational waves and begin using them for physics  and
              astronomy research.    Thorne will continue his longtime role as the liaison 
              between LIGO and the theoretical astrophysics and relativity  communities.  In
              this role, he has the responsibility to  ensure that theoretical issues which
              need to be worked for  LIGO get dealt with by his own research group or by
              other  members of the relativity or astrophysical theory  communities, and that
              the insights and contributions of  those communities are translated into forms
              usable by the  LIGO Project.  Thorne's group will contribute, via  theoretical
              analyses, to LIGO design issues, most especially  the final design of the
              baffles that suppress noise from  scattered laser light in the LIGO vacuum
              tubes.  They will  also devote effort to the design and theoretical analysis of
               advanced interferometers that could operate in LIGO in the  mid 2000s or
              later.    Among the issues that Thorne and his group will deal with  during the
              four years of this award are these:    They will develop and implement
              numerical algorithms for  searching for gravitational-wave signals in the LIGO
              data,  and for extracting information from detected signals.  The  greatest
              effort will go into search and analysis algorithms  for inspiraling and
              coalescing compact binaries (binary  systems made from neutron stars and/or
              black holes).  These  algorithms will be based on:  (i)  theoretical inspiral 
              waveforms, (ii) theoretical black-hole coalescence  waveforms, and (iii)
              theoretical neutron-star coalescence  waveforms.  Search and analysis
              algorithms will also be  developed for supernovae, periodic gravitational-wave 
              sources (e.g., pulsars), stochastic gravitational-wave  background (e.g., from
              the big bang), and unexpected types  of s ources (e.g., massive, compact
              objects that are not  black holes or neutron stars).
