Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Interacting Particle Systems and Hydrodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9424270

Award Number: 9424270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fraydoun Rezakhanlou rezakhan@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9424270 Rezakhanlou  Abstract    An outstanding and long studied problem in
              statistical mechanics is to establish the connection between the microscopic
              structure of a fluid (or a gas) and its macroscopic behavior. Perhaps the most
              celebrated problem in this context is the derivation of the Hydrodynamic and
              kinetic equations from small scale dynamics governed by the Newton's second
              law. This problem is still wide open but some variants have been reaently
              treated. The investigator's research concerns the analysis of particle systems
              simulating a fluid or a dilute gas. Recently the investigator has derived the
              Boltzmann equation for the macroscopic particle densities for a class of one
              dimensional lattice gas models. Roughly speaking one shows that after a
              suitable scaling the microscopic particle density converges to a solution of
              the Boltzmann equation. The convergence is expected to be exponentially fast
              and the exponential rate can be expressed by a variational formula.      Our
              world appears differently at different scales! For example a fluid or a gas is
              a collection of an enormous number of molecules that collide incessantly and
              move erratically without any particular aim. How do these molecules then manage
              to organize themselves in such a way as to form a flow pattern on a large
              scale? Roughly the reason is that the local conservation laws of mass, momentum
              and energy impose constraints not immediately visible on the microscopic scale.
              The investigator's research concerns the relationship between the microscopic
              structure and the macroscopic behavior of fluids and gases. The analysis of the
              mathematical models consisting of a large number of interacting particles is
              proved to be useful in understanding the intricate behavior of fluids and
              gases. Moreover, interacting particle systems turn out to be the most efficient
              way of simulating the flow patterns of dilute gases.
