Title       : Aerodynamic and Thermal Design Optimization Tool for Turbine Airfoil Cascades:
               GOALI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9424512

Award Number: 9424512
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John F. Foss                            
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154549             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Huddleston hudd@erc.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9424512  HUDDLESTON  MISSISSIPPI STATE UNIVERSITY    Mississippi
              State University and Allison Engine Company propose to develop a collaborative
              research project between personnel at the NSF Engineering Research Center for
              Computational Field Simulation at MSU and the Computational Fluid Mechanics
              Branch at Allison. The research topic will be the development of aerodynamic
              design optimization/improvement capability. This will be accomplished by
              coupling the versatile aerodynamic analysis capability afforded by modern
              Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) codes with nonlinear optimization
              techniques. It is anticipated that developed technology could be applied to a
              wide range of aerodynamic design problems and ultimately integrated into a
              multidisciplinary analysis and optimization framework.    Turbine airfoil shape
              design optimization will be investigated and and novel techniques will be
              implemented to aid the design of turbine airfoil shapes subject to a prescribed
              flow path size, velocity diagram and specific design objective. Design
              objectives to be investigated include cooling air minimization, minimal gross
              weight and maximization of efficiency. This design topic will be used to
              stimulate research and focus technolo gy development aimed at producing a
              general aerodynamic design improvement/optimization strategy. Developed
              capability will help turbine engine manufacturers achieve the Integrated High
              Performance Turbine Engine Technologies (IHPTET) goals of increased turbine
              engine thrust-to-weight ratio for future flight systems.     Research funded by
              this project is expected to produce significant contributions to current
              state-of- the-art capability in aerodynamic design optimization. Anticipated
              advances include (1) more efficient solution of the aerodynamic sensitivity
              equations, (2) improved geometric parameterization and (3) integration of
              design optimization capability with state-of-the-art grid generation and CFD
              simulation codes. Successful application of this technology  to a complex
              aerodynamic device, such as turbine cascade design, will provide a tangible
              demonstration of the utility of advanced simulation methods to augment
              conventional aerodynamic design methods. Technology developed within this
              project will help provide the necessary foundation for future extension to
              multi-disciplinary design optimization.
