Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis in Spaces of Analytic and Harmonic Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9424417

Award Number: 9424417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon Axler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dechao Zheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joel H. Shapiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Axler   9424417    The investigators will conduct research on problems arising
              from the interaction between complex function theory and functional analysis.
              Primary emphasis will rest on the study of certain important spaces of analytic
              and harmonic functions and operators on these spaces. The topics to be
              considered include approximation by harmonic functions, iterations of the
              Berezin transform, hypercyclicity, Koenigs functions, composition operators,
              Toeplitz operators, Hankel operators and Bergman spaces. The project will also
              include the development of software for the symbolic manipulation of harmonic
              functions, appropriate for use by pure and applied mathematicians and
              scientists/engineers who utilize harmonic functions in their research. 
              Operator theory has its origins in mathematical physics, in particular, in the
              study of quantum mechanics. The modeling of the atom required the development
              of non-commutative analysis. The commutator of operators is the measure of
              non-commutativity. Harmonic functions are encountered in the study of potential
              functions whose origins can be traced to electrostatics. Analytic functions are
              complex analogues of  harmonic functions. A good portion of this project deals
              with operators and the analysis of their commutators that acting on spaces of
              analytic functions. The research on this project should be of benefit to the
              mathematical analysis community and to other scientists whose work involves
              non-commutative models and potential theory.  ***
