Title       : CRB: Measuring Genetic Variation in Natural Populations: Does it Correlate with
               Fitness?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1995    
File        : a9424571

Award Number: 9424571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104192             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Soule soule@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              !p(F                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                      n(F    
              n(F                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                               1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8 
               9   :   ;                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9424571  It
              has long been known that inbreeding, the mating of closely related individuals,
              is unhealthy to both individual offspring and the population as a whole. 
              Theoretical studies show this conclusively, as do domestic animal matings,
              where inbred cows or dogs or horses are much less healthy, or much less fit,
              than outbred animals.  Further, inbreeding causes a population to lose genetic
              variation, which means its ability to adapt genetically to a changing
              environment may be impaired.  Today, conservation biologists are often
              responsible for managing small, threatened populations of native species, which
              may be susceptible to inbreeding and resultant loss of genetic variation. 
              Unfortunately, little is known about the relationship of genetic variation and
              fitness (longevity, disease resistance, reproductive success) in the wild.  To
              analyze this problem Dr. Soule, will study naturally occurring populations of
              an animal that is particularly well suited for this research - pocket gophers -
              small, burrowing rodents that are common throughout California.  Earlier
              studies of different gopher popula tions showed that some have unusually high
              levels of genetic variation, while some have extremely low levels.  But do
              these genetic differences affect fitness?  The physiological vigor of animals
              will be measured in two ways - metabolic rate during normal activity
              (burrowing) and by determining which animals assimilate and use food most
              efficiently.  Dr. Soule will also determine which animals survive and reproduce
              best in nature.  He will then determine if the animals which are the most fit
              are the ones which have the most genetic variation within their population, or
              if animals from genetically variable populations are generally most fit that
              animals from less variable populations.  Finally, he will assess which
              measurements of genetic variation are most informative in these comparisons. 
              In the long run this type of study will help to determine how best to measure
              genetic variation in threatened species and whether genetic variation is a
              significant factor in survival or overall health.                          ;   
                                         S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                 
                       (                                                   0                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        Oh     +'  0                                       $       H       l 
                                                           D       h                         
                                       R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                         
                           9424571                             ebehrens                      
                   ebehrens                    @    9JX(F                          @         
                                       @    9JX(F                                            
                                                                    @                        
                                Microsoft Word 6.0                                           
                        1                                                                    
                                ;                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          e =       e               J        
                            J                                       j       j   j       j    
                j       j       j                                                            
                        +   1                                                                
                                            #           }               \   T       +   +    
                                j                                                            
                          +               j       j                                          
                                          j               j                                  
                  ~               j       j       j       j                                  
                                                                                             
                        9424571  It has long been known that inbreeding, the mating of
              closely related individuals, is unhealthy to both individual offspring and the
              population as a whole.  Theoretical studies show this conclusively, as do
              domestic animal matings, where inbred cows or dogs or horses are much less
              healthy, or much less fit, than outbred animals.  Further, inbreeding causes a
              population to lose genetic variation, which means its ability to adapt
              genetically to a changing environment may be impaired.  Today, conservation
              biologists are often responsible for managing small, thr
