Title       : CRB: Research Toward Sustainable Land Use and Biodiversity in Mosaic of
               Agriculture and Tropical Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1998        
File        : a9424606

Award Number: 9424606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204571             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce L. Haines   (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Hamrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chris J. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9424606  Haines  This research will be conducted in three phases. The long-term
              goal for the three phases is to determine the sustainability of various natural
              or semi-natural land uses on tropical sites of differing soil quality and
              topography. Sustainability is defined as land use in which rates of nutrient
              and soil mass loss are less than rates of nutrient input and soil formation.
              This is important because of increasing conversion of species rich forests to
              agricultural land throughout the tpopics. in many tropical areas, agriculture
              is typically short-lived, and fields are then abandoned. Abandoned fields and
              tropical moist forest tend to have negative and positive net soil mass and
              nutrient balances, respectively. Thus, at the landscape scale, forests can
              offset losses from adjacent fields. Therefore, landscape scale sustainability
              requires restoration and regeneration of natural forest vegetation. The
              near-term goal of this project is to document patterns of abandoned pasture
              succession, and identify factors potentially limiting the rate of forest
              regeneration. To do so, rates of succession on different soil types and
              conditions will be quantified, and seed rain, seed bank, seed germination,
              seedling establishment and sapling growth will be measured. These factors will
              be combined to understand limitations to colonization and growth of species for
              the restoration of tropical forest communities.    Given the rapidly increasing
              rates of deforestation and population growth in many tropical areas, the
              ability to rapidly restore vegetation to abandoned cropland becomes
              increasingly important. This study will provide valuable population-level data
              at the landscape scale to guide experimental approaches to large-scale
              restoration of abandoned agricultural land in the tropics.
