Title       : U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Recovery of Borax from Saturated Salt
               Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1998      
File        : a9731594

Award Number: 9731594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan D. Miller jdmiller@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for the support of cooperative research by Dr. Jan
              Miller, Department of Metallurgical Engineering at the University of Utah, Salt
              lake City, and Drs. Guven Onal and Mehmet Sabri Celik, of the Mining Faculty,
              Istanbul Technical University in Turkey.  The research aims at improving the
              understanding of the floating chemistry of boron minerals, to make more
              efficient use of boron resources, and to minimize the environmental impact of
              the process operations.   Specifically, the investigators plan to use Atomic
              Force Microscopy (AFM) as a powerful tool for examination of the interaction
              forces in boron flotation.  They will measure the interaction forces in borate
              ore in water under different conditions of concentration, when mixing with
              clays, and under different pH levels.  They plan to use Fourier Transform
              infrared (FTIR) spectrometers to examine the adsorption of anionic and cationic
              collectors in various ore and ore-mixes.  Also planned is the use of Raman
              Spectroscopy to detect and describe flotation conditions and results.  Scope: 
              This award allows cooperation of two research teams with complementary
              capabilities, to do important scientific work that has applications in
              industry, in the US and in Turkey.  The teams will include graduate students
              from the US and from Turkey.  The studies will contribute to the development of
              a flotation separation strategy for more effective recovery of boron minerals
              from saturated solutions.  The US is the largest producer of boron compounds,
              and Turkey has the largest boron reserves in the world.  The project fits well
              within the objectives of the Division of International Programs.  This award
              includes funding from the Division of International Programs, and from the
              Division of Chemical and Transport Systems.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
