Title       : Two-Dimensional Hydrodynamics in Freely Suspended Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a9731701

Award Number: 9731701
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiao-Lun Wu xlwu@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  9731701  Wu    The  proposed research is aimed at understanding fluid  flow 
              and  instabilities in freely suspended liquid films that behave like a 
              two-dimensional  (2D) fluid. Historically, 2D  hydrodynamics  has  been  a 
              subject of extensive theoretical investigation. However,  controlled laboratory
              experiments have been rare. This project is  an  effort  to narrow this gap.
              The research will probe different  aspects  of 2D flows, ranging from studies
              of individual vortices  to  an array of vortices that are strongly interacting.
              Universal  decay  laws  of  freely evolving turbulence as  well  as  inverse 
              energy  cascades  in force turbulence will be  investigated.  The  experiments 
              will  be carried out using laser  light  scattering,  laser  Doppler
              velocimetry, and real-space imaging. To complement  the  hydrodynamic  studies,
              new efforts  will  also  be  made  to  characterize  physical properties of the
              freely suspended  films.  This  includes the study of the film viscosity, its 
              relationship  to  the  structure of the films, and the dynamic coupling between
               film  thickness and the flow field. The project involves training  of 
              graduate  and undergraduate students in novel  projects  with  state-of-the-art
               research facilities. The project  director  has  also  been  active in
              outreach activities such a  development  of  large scale soap film
              demonstrations for science museums.  %%%  A freely suspended liquid film has
              many unique and fascinating  properties. With the film thickness being only
              1/10,000 of its  other dimensions, the film behaves like a two-dimensional (2D0
               fluid. For example, if a flow is created in the film, the  velocity is
              confined to the film plane with negligible velocity  variations perpendicular
              to it. The proposed research is aimed at  understanding fluid flow and
              turbulence in 2D. Historically, 2D  hydrodynamics has been dominated by theory
              and computer  simulations. However, the subject is relevant to many naturally 
              occurring phenomena such as ocean and  atmospheric turbulence,  formation of
              cyclones and anticyclones. This project involves the  development of novel
              techniques that allow preparation of robust  films and which allow turbulence
              in them to be monitored via  state-of-the art laser light scattering and video
              imaging. These  methods will reveal interactions between vortices and the 
              emergence of large coherent eddies in the sea of background  turbulence.
              Results from this research will be beneficial to  theoretical modeling of
              turbulence and in furthering  understanding of strongly non-linear dynamic
              systems. The project  involves training of graduate and undergraduate students
              in novel  projects with state-of-the-art research facilities. The project 
              director has also been active in outreach activities such a  development of
              large scale soap film demonstrations for science  museums.  ***
