Title       : RUI: Deduction in Classical and Multiple-Valued Logics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9731893

Award Number: 9731893
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95445              (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Lu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project examines several areas of research related to  theorem proving
              techniques for multiple-valued logics (MVL's) and  for proving completeness:   
              - The most important work may be a new rule of inference, a  resolution-like
              rule tentatively named Modification, for regular  MVL's.  It appears likely
              that Modification is more effective  than existing methods of inference for
              MVL's; it is also likely  that the insights provided by Modification can be
              adapted to  improve the search behavior of other MVL inference rules.    -
              Signed logic is an adaptation of classical logic for reasoning  about MVL's. 
              Several modest implementations have been developed  recently for signed logic.
              The current project will broaden the  focus to implementations in the general
              theorem proving setting.  Experiments with logic programming and constraint
              solving will  also be undertaken.    - Annotated logic corresponds to a
              naturally arising class of  signed logic and has been applied to reasoning with
               inconsistency.  Current systems of annotated logic are  paraconsistent, that
              is, inconsistency tolerant, with respect to  epistemic inconsistency, but they
              behave classically with respect  to ontological inconsistency. A mapping from
              signed logic to  annotated logic has been defined which has the effect of
              mapping  ontological inconsistency to epistemic inconsistency.  Further 
              investigation into properties of this mapping in the proposed  project is
              expected to lead to fruitful insights on the  relationships between the two
              notions of inconsistencies.    - The Anderson-Bledsoe excess literal proof of
              the completeness  of resolution was recently generalized to provide simplified 
              proofs of known results as well as to prove completeness of  connected tableaux
              and of connected regular tableaux for NNF  formulas and the completeness of
              linear non-clausal resolution.    The project will examine the application of
              the technique to  still other methods of proof procedures.
