Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: Non Adiabatic Processes and Electron Correlation in Low
               Dimensional Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9731220

Award Number: 9731220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry A. Friedman PHY_BAF@SHSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sam Houston St University
	      P O Box 2026
	      Huntsville, TX  773412026    713/294-1111

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9731220  Friedman    This award provides funds to support a twelve-month
              research  visit by Dr. Barry Friedman, Department of Physics, Sam  Houston
              State University, for collaboration with Dr. Shuji  Abe, Fundamental Physics
              Section, Electrotechnical  Laboratory (ETL), Tsukuba, Japan.  The collaborators
              will  conduct research to better understand non adiabatic  processes in low
              dimensional systems.  Surface hopping  methods have been developed which allow
              one to incorporate  the effects of non adiabatic processes in molecular
              dynamics  simulations.  The collaborators will use these non adiabatic 
              molecular dynamics techniques to study pi electron systems.  The particular
              systems include photo induced charge transfer  in conducting polymer C60
              composites and the photo induced  conformation change of the visual pigment
              rhodopsin.  Both  of these systems are important due to their intrinsic 
              physical and biophysical interest and from the standpoint of  possible
              technological application.    Dr. Shuji Abe and his team at ETL are experts on
              the photo  physical processes in conducting polymers and fullerenes,  while Dr.
              Friedman has gained expertise in the use of non  adiabatic molecular dynamics. 
              Although adiabatic molecular  dynamics has been widely applied to pi electron
              systems, the  simulation of non adiabatic processes is relatively  unexplored. 
              Non adiabatic processes are important in these  systems, but they have been
              neglected due to the former lack  of computational tools.  The collaborators
              expect the  research to be very fruitful because it will combine the ETL 
              team's knowledge with Dr. Friedman's experience with non  adiabatic molecular
              dynamics.  This project is supported  under the Science Fellowship Program
              between the National  Science Foundation and the Japan Foundation Center for 
              Global Partnership.  ***
