Title       : Educational Technology and Lessons Learned from the National Science Foundation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1998   
File        : a9731955

Award Number: 9731955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie Graitcer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tides Center
	      Presideo Bldg. 1014
	      San Francisco, CA  94129    /   -

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9731955  Graitcer    Grantmakers for Education (GFE) and the National Science
              Foundation (NSF) will conduct a workshop and pre and post workshop activities
              for education grantmakers, NSF program officers and selected NSF project
              Principal Investigators. The purpose of these activities is to share the
              knowledge and experiences of NSF programs about the role of technology in
              student learning and school reform with education grantmakers of private,
              corporate, and family foundations. It is anticipated that the sharing of
              information between NSF program officers and foundation grantmakers will inform
              grantmaking through increasing GFE members knowledge about the use of
              technology in education.    The primary activity would be a two day workshop
              for grantmakers from private, corporate, and family foundations to meet with
              and learn from experienced NSF grantmakers and the principal investigators
              (PIs) of successful NSF funded programs.    The workshop would include
              opportunities for GFE members and NSF program officers to learn from each other
              and to explore ways to work together to enhance the impact of their grantmaking
              in support of effective and appropriate uses of educational technology. The
              workshop will be designed for presentations by PIs and NSF Program Officers to
              GFE members and importantly for in-depth discussions, questions and answers,
              and sharing. There will also be opportunities for break out sessions for
              grantmakers to explore what the presentations and discussions mean to GFE
              members in their grantmaking agendas.    Prior to the workshop a series of
              preparatory activities would occur that would provide background information
              and basic hands-on experiences for GFE members to assure maximum opportunities
              for learning at the workshop, including readings, site visits, preconference
              issue dialogue using technology.    After the workshop the follow-up and
              continuing dialogue among the funders, including: second site visit, newsletter
              articles sharing learnings from the workshop, GFE sponsor ed educational
              technology meeting(s), technology interface for grantmakers to continue
              discussion of topics raised by the workshop and visits, and integration of
              learning from this project into overall GFE planning and programming.  ***
