Title       : Mechanistic Studies of Free Radical Additions and Rearrangements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1998     
File        : a9731755

Award Number: 9731755
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ned A. Porter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on the free radical oxidation of organic compounds.    
              Isotopically-labelled hydroperoxides will be used to detail the   mechanism of
              the radical oxidations of biologically relevant media such   as micelles, lipid
              bilayers and lipoproteins.   Chiral metal complexes   capable of acting as
              Lewis acids will be bound to appropriately   functionalized alkenes and used in
              a novel manner to impose   enantioselectivity on the radical reactions.  
              Lastly, new free radical   copolymerization procedures will be examined as a
              route to   stoichiometrically well-defined alternating copolymers.   Graduate
              and   postdoctoral students will be introduced to the synthesis and  
              characterization of isotopically-labelled compounds, and the use of these   and
              other specifically designed reagents as mechanistic probes of the   reactions. 
              With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program   supports
              the research and educational activities of  Dr. Ned Porter of   Duke
              University.  Professor Porter will focus his research on garnering  
              fundamental information on free-radical oxidations.  Although known for   some
              time, recognition of the role of organic free radicals in different  
              biochemical processes, as well as their increasing applications in   organic
              and material syntheses creates the need to elucidate the   chemistry of these
              reactive intermediates.  This research utilizes unique   isotopically-labelled
              molecules to probe the mechanisms of free radical   oxidations of organic
              substrates, and novel organometallic adducts to   examine an innovative
              approach to imposing stereochemical control on the   reactions.   Professor
              Porter's educational activities involve the   training of graduate and
              postdoctoral students.                                                    u¬   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
