Title       : U.S.-Ethiopia Dissertation Enhancement: Investigation of Faunal Remains from Two
               Middle Stone Age Sites of Ethiopia: Garba III (Melka Konture) and Porc-epic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9731228

Award Number: 9731228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis W. Marean   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5928,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9731228  Marean & Assefa    This dissertation enhancement grants supports a
              graduate  student, Mr. Zelalem Assefa, working under the guidance of  Dr.
              Curtis Marean, Associate Professor of Anthropology at the  State University of
              New York at Stony Brook, to do field  research in Ethiopia.  East Africa is a
              region that contains  significant information about the evolutionary history of
              the  origin of modern humans.  Biological and cultural evidence  has shown that
              the Middle Stone Age (MSA) or Middle  Paleolithic was an important period in
              the formative phase of  modern behavior of early modern peoples.  But
              examination of  the subsistence models used by early modern humans in these 
              periods has provided contradictory explanations about their  resource
              exploitation behaviors.  Mr. Assefa hypothesizes  that the early appearance of
              the MSA in Africa is related to  adaptive adjustments early modern humans made
              during the arid  and cold phases of the Late Middle and Upper Pleistocene, and 
              that they developed their seasonal exploitation of resources  (vegetation and
              prey animals) into a  subsistence strategy  during the late MSA in East Africa.
               The role of hunting may  have been one of the factors responsible for the
              observed  technological shift in the MSA, and if so Mr. Assefa also 
              hypothesizes that it will predict major changes in the  taphonomic features of
              faunal remains between late Acheulean  and early MSA assemblages.  The results
              of this project will  determine if the trajectory for behavioral evolution was
              the  same in both Africa and Europe. This project will test  subsistence models
              that are developed from analyses of faunal  specimens from different parts of
              the Old World and Ethiopia  with the MSA record, for the purpose of identifying
              and  analyzing any contradictions among the models.  The  methodological
              approaches of GIS-based ecological analysis  and taphonomic investigation will
              be used to collect data  from fauna and ecological specimens from the Garba III
              and  Porc-epic sites.   Staff members at The National Museum of  Ethiopia will
              collaborate with Mr. Assefa on this project.    These results will provide
              important new information on the  behavioral history of the early modern humans
              in East Africa.  The new set of data will also provide a valuable reference 
              resource for other archeological projects in East Africa.  Additionally, the
              grant will provide support to enable a  promising student to establish a
              strong, independent research  career.    The Division of International Programs
              and the Division of  Social, Behavioral and Economic Research are jointly 
              providing funding for this project.
