Title       : Race Differences in Attitudes toward Voluntary Euthanasia: A Pilot Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9731160

Award Number: 9731160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52915              (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. MacDonald macdonald.24@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This is a study of race-based differentials in attitudes toward voluntary
              euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide. Previous studies find that Blacks
              are much more likely than Whites to oppose legalizing euthanasia. This study
              will examine the extent to which cultural factors (such as religious beliefs
              and fears about abuses of euthanasia) and structural factors (such as education
              and income) account for the dramatic difference. The analysis will control for
              the effects of variables suggested by other theories that also may account for
              the race difference. It also will assess race differences in attitudes toward
              two different forms of voluntary euthanasia: active euthanasia (i.e., a lethal
              injection provided by a physician); and physician-assisted suicide (i.e., a
              physician-prescribed dose of lethal drugs). One focus group of Blacks and one
              focus group of Whites will be employed to generate and to refine survey items
              that will be administered to a random sample of 500 adult Ohioans, including an
              oversample of Blacks. Selected respondents then will participate in two
              post-survey focus groups, one consisting of all Blacks, the other consisting of
              all Whites. The qualitative data gathered from these two focus groups will be
              used to corroborate and to explore findings from analyses of the quantitative
              survey data. The survey also will serve as a way of pre-testing items for
              further survey research at the national level. This project will broaden our
              understanding of the genesis of race differences in attitudes toward moral
              issues that involve decisions regarding life and death by adding an assessment
              of the roles of culture and social structure. In addition, the project will
              advance sociological theory on social movements by providing insight into the
              relationship between public opinion and the process through which leaders of
              social movement organizations frame issues.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
