Title       : Dissertation Research: An Archaeological Study of the Aztec-Tarascan Frontier
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1998   
File        : a9731980

Award Number: 9731980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Hirth Kgh2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Kenneth Hirth, Mr. Jay Silverstein will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his archaeological project is to
              understand the organization of a border area, located in the Guerrero region of
              Mexico, which separated the Tarascan and Aztec empires. In late prehistoric
              times two great empires - the better known Aztec and the less studied Tarascan
              arose in central Mexico. Both extended their ranges through conquest and the
              incorporation of subject peoples and Guerrero, where their borders met, was the
              scene of extensive and prolonged conflict. Ethnohistoric sources record major
              battles in the region. Archaeologists rarely have the opportunity to study such
              a well defined and demarcated frontier and, in part, Mr. Silverstein wishes to
              define the material correlates of such a situation. Although the border was
              defended, it also remained inhabited by local peoples who were present before
              the establishment of either empire. Preliminary data indicates that exchange
              took place across the boundary and people continued to live in this region. Mr.
              Silverstein wishes to understand the nature of the trade and interaction
              involved. Researchers interested in the rise and functioning of empires have
              tended to focus more on the `core` or capital regions of empires and less on
              peripheral areas. To gain a better perspective, both core and periphery must be
              taken into account and this research will provide insight into how both the
              Aztecs and Tarascans governed.  Mr. Silverstein has designed a two stage plan.
              First, sites known from previous research and air photo interpretation will be
              sampled and mapped. Secondly, an intensive field survey will be conducted over
              a 60 km square area between the nearest Aztec and Tarascan habitations. Sites
              located will be plotted on air photos, sampled through intensive collection and
              all visible features will be sketched and photographed. Artifact samples will
              be analyzed to provide information on both chronology and exchange.  This
              research is important for several reasons. It will provide new information on
              how prehistoric empires functioned and interacted. It will help to fill in the
              archaeological record for a poorly known part of Mexico and will assist in
              training a promising young scientist.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
