Title       : Renewal Proposal for the National Nanofabrication Users Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a9731293

Award Number: 9731293
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16334000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandip Tiwari st222@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9731293
MacDonald
The National Nanofabrication Users Network (NNUN) was
              established by NSF in 1994 as a partnership of advanced user facilities
              providing the national research and development community with access to
              state-of-the-art micro- and nanofabrication facilities, instrumentation,
              processes, and expertise. The Network is composed of a consortium of five
              universities: Cornell University, Stanford University, University of California
              at Santa Barbara, Howard University, and Pennsylvania State University. The
              NNUN is supported by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG), Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences (MPS), Biological Sciences (BIO), and Computer and
              Information Science and Engineering (CISE).

The NNUN's mission is to provide
              opportunities for the nation's scientists, engineers and educators to move
              innovative ideas in nano-scale science and technology to the laboratory to
              develop prototype structures, devices and systems. The network serves a broad
              and diverse engineering and scientific community in academia, industry and
              government, and is committed to education, training and technical
              outreach.

The experimental activities carried out at the NNUN facilities
              impact a wide range of scientific and technical fields including biology,
              chemistry, physics, electronics, magnetics, superconductivity, materials, MEMS,
              nanostructures, and optics.

The NNUN facilities are hands-on user facilities
              where researchers, with minimal training, can perform individual
              state-of-the-art projects with tools otherwise inaccessible to them. Research
              activities undertaken at NNUN may range in duration from a day or so, to an
              extended period of time. In some cases, research projects can be undertaken
              remotely, with NNUN personnel assisting with fabrication processes for network
              users.

Under new 5-year Cooperative Agreements, NNUN will continue to
              operate as five university nodes and will enhance the capability and
              infrastructure to support an increasing number of external users in traditional
              and in emerging new fields that are impacted by micro- and nanofabrication. The
              NNUN will continue to support and enhance its mission in the integration of
              research and education through the training of students, outreach activities
              and topical workshops.

The URL is http://www.nnun.org/ to obtain information
              about the National Nanofabrication Users Network.
***

