Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Improving Friction Brakes by Eliminating
               Tribological Problems and Reducing Wear
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9731221

Award Number: 9731221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13445              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Bryant mbryant@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5942,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9731221  Bryant    This  award provides funds to permit Dr. Michael D. Bryant, 
              Mechanical Engineering Department, University of  Texas  at  Austin,  to 
              pursue with Dr. Chung Kyun Kim, Department  of  Mechanical  Engineering, Hongik
              University,  Seoul,  Korea,  for  36  months,  a  program  of  cooperative 
              research  on  improving   friction  brakes  by  eliminating  tribological 
              problems and reducing wear.  The collaborators will seek to  improve  high 
              speed  brake systems  through  complementary  efforts,  with each researcher
              working to improve different  aspects of disc brakes, later to be combined. 
              The combined  effort  could result in efficient, long lasting  brakes  on  high
               speed  trains, airplanes, automobiles, and industrial  machinery    Dr. Kim
              will contribute a new disc design and will analyze  nonlinear thermal behavior
              of the disc and brake pad system  using the Finite Element Method.  He will
              redesign  materials and geometry on the disc to optimize removal of  heat and
              minimize thermal expansion problems that lead to  brake noise and premature
              brake wear.  Dr. Bryant will  contribute new brake pad and disc designs that
              incorporate  patented techniques that reduce brake pad wear and extend 
              (double) life.  Cooperative research issues will focus on  problems that arise
              when combining the two designs: (1)  necessary redesigns of both systems, (2)
              solving any  problems that would prevent the two systems from  functioning in a
              combined manner, (3) extensive testing of  the new brake system, and (4)
              technology transfer to  industries in both countries.  Doubling brake life and 
              eliminating other tribological brake problems could save  both societies
              billions of dollars.  This project is  relevant to the objectives of the
              U.S.-Korea Cooperative  Science Program which seeks to increase the level of 
              cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and  engineers through the
              exchange of scientific information,  ideas, skills, and techniques and through
              collaboration on  problems of mut ual benefit.  This project provides an 
              international research experience for a U.S. graduate  student.  It also will
              add an international cooperative  dimension to ongoing research under NSF Grant
              No.  CMS-9713942, supported under the Surface Engineering and  Tribology
              Program.  Korean participation is supported by  the Korea Science and
              Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).  ***
