Title       : SGER Proposal: Rare Research Opportunity to Study Geotectonic Fluids in
               Bransfield Strait and Scotia Arc, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1997   
File        : a9731695

Award Number: 9731695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Klinkhammer gklinkhammer@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9731695  Klinkhammer  This award supports participation of Oregon State
              University  (OSU) researchers in an expedition of the German oceanographic 
              research vessel POLARSTERN to the Antarctic Ocean (POLARSTERN  cruise
              ANT-XV/2).  Previous OSU researchers supported by the US  Antarctic Program
              identified several areas of hydrothermal  venting in the Bransfield Strait. 
              This discovery has important  implications to the biogeography of vent animals,
              the geological  evolution of ore deposits, and the chemical and heat budgets of
               the Earth.  The previous work sampled water and particles from  above the vent
              sites at a reconnaissance level.  Subsequent  chemical analyses of these
              samples provided insight into the  chemistry of fluids emanating from vents on
              the sea floor.  The  POLARSTERN cruise affords a unique opportunity to build on
              these  discoveries in the Bransfield Strait, foster future international  work
              in the Bransfield area, extend research on hydrothermal  activity to other
              parts of the Antarctic Peninsula region, and  develop a working relationship
              with a strong international group.  In particular, the POLARSTERN expedition
              provides the opportunity  for: 1) additional sampling of water and suspended
              particulate  matter in the water column over the Bransfield hydrothermal sites 
               this sampling would be aided by German photographic  reconnaissance; 2)
              reconnaissance, to determine the broader  geographical extent of hydrothermal
              activity, would be extended  to the Scotia Arc and trench areas following the
              general theme of  the German program which is fluid expulsion from the Scotia- 
              Bransfield system; and 3) the use of unique tools available on  the POLARSTERN
              such as a camera sled and grab bottom sampler.  This work will make it possible
              to better define the location of  hydrothermal vents and to begin to quantify
              the amount of water  being expelled by this hydrothermal activity.  If vents
              can be  precisely located, the bottom photography holds the promise of 
              revealing possible biologic al communities associated with these  submarine hot
              springs.
