Title       : Materials Instabilities: Regularity Theory and the Calculus of Variations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a9731957

Award Number: 9731957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164531             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irene Fonseca fonseca@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The general objective of this project is the development of techniques in the
              
calculus of variations and in the regularity theory for systems of partial
              
differential equations.  The applications that guide this work come mainly
              from
the areas of continuum mechanics of liquids and solids.  Tools from
              geometric 
measure theory, a theory for the study of generalizations of
              surfaces, will play an
important role.  The analysis will be undertaken for
              time-dependent problems, 
including in some cases certain idealizations where
              inertial effects are neglected.
The main focus will be on the search for the
              effective description of  
materials with complicated composition, on the
              study of regularity properties 
of solutions in the bulk and at interfaces,
              and on the prediction of their 
oscillatory or hysteretic behavior as time
              evolves. 

The research will be on the mathematical description and
              prediction of a range of
phenomena that occur in material science. This
              includes phase transformations 
(between liquid and solid phases), the
              structure, nucleation and growth of such 
phases, and fracture and defects in
              solids.  An important part of this work will
be the study of mathematical
              models for novel man-made materials such as 
shape memory alloys,
              ferroelectric, magnetic and magnetostrictive materials,  
composites, liquid
              crystals, and thin films.  Although unexpected, the mathematical
theory also
              provides new methods for image segmentation in computer vision. 
The
              mathematical challenges lie in the description of the dynamics and evolution of
              
microscopic structures and of phenomena that occur at vastly different
              temporal or spatial
scales. They require recently developed mathematical tools
              and the introduction 
of new mathematical techniques.


