Title       : RUI: An Observational Study of Novae in Differing Stellar Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a9731641

Award Number: 9731641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathleen D. Eastwood                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143886             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen W. Shafter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1217,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                AST-9731641   Shfter    An observational program will be carried out to study
              the spatial distribution and outburst properties of novae in nearby galaxies. 
              The long-range motivation of the study is to acquire a deeper understanding of
              the effect the underlying stellar population has on the formation, evolution,
              and properties of close binary systems.  Among close binary systems, the study
              of novae are ideally suited to this task because novae are luminous (Mv about
              -6 to -9), readily identifiable (due to their eruptive nature), and reasonably
              numerous (the Galactic nova rate is estimated to be several dozen per year). 
              Unfortunately, despite observations of Galactic novae spanning most of this
              century, little is known about the spatial distribution and population of
              novae, in particular, and close binaries, in general.  Taken at face value, the
              available Galactic data suggest that novae belong primarily to an old disk
              population, but that there may exist a distinct Population II, or "bulge" nova
              component as well.  The existence of two distinct populations of novae is
              difficult to establish from Galactic data, however, as it is clear that these
              data are heavily biased by virtue of our position within the Galaxy.  The major
              source of bias results from interstellar absorption, which obscures most novae
              from our view, and causes uncertainty in the distances and thus uncertainty in
              the spatial distribution of the relatively small fraction of Galactic novae
              that are observed.    The best approach to studying the population of novae,
              and for establishing whether population differences may affect their outburst
              characteristics, is to measure the outburst frequency, fade rates, and spatial
              distribution of novae in external galaxies.  As part of the research to be
              carried out, the frequencies and spatial distributions of novae will be
              measured for the galaxies M33, M81, and the outer disk regions of M31.  In
              addition to measuring spatial distributions and nova rates, B-band light curves
              of novae in th e disk of M31 will be measured and compared with published light
              curves of bulge novae in order to study any differences that may exist due to
              the variation in the underlying stellar population.    There will be
              undergraduate students and master's degree students involved in the
              observations and data reduction of  the observations in this project.  ***
