Title       : Instrumentation for the Macromolecular Biophysics Facility at the UCSD
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9731612

Award Number: 9731612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan S. Taylor staylor@ucsd.edu/gyuasaacosta@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1189,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Essential to our understanding of a large number of  biological processes is
              the characterization of molecular  structure and molecular interactions.
              Faculty at the  University of Califomia San Diego proposes to establish a 
              Macromolecular Biophysics Facility (MBF) to advance these  types of studies.
              The function of the MBF is to provide the  necessary instrumentation for
              biomolecular and biophysical  studies and to facilitate interactions between
              investigators  at UCSD with interests in biophysical and biomolecular 
              research. The primary goal of the MBF is to create a  biophysical
              infrastructure that will make essential  instrumentation readily available and
              at the same time foster  interactions between researchers. Instruments to be
              provided  by this project include a circular dichroism spectrometer to  analyze
              secondary structure of proteins and conformational  changes due to ligand
              binding, an analytical ultracentrifuge  for the characterization of the
              physical properties of  macromolecules, and a surface plasmon resonance
              instrument  for the study of protein-protein, protein-DNA, and ligand  receptor
              interactions. These instruments will be combined  with peptide synthesis and
              N-terminal sequencing  instrumentation currently located in individual
              laboratories  that will be contributed to the facility.    The MBF will be used
              by a diverse set of faculty for  biophysical analysis of macromolecules
              including analysis of  protein-protein, protein-lipid, and protein-nucleic acid
               interactions important in such diverse biological processes  as cell-cell
              interactions, signal transduction and  transcription. To be effective, a
              facility such as this must  be properly administered and maintained. The aim of
              the  facility is not simply to purchase state-of-the-art  instrumentation, but
              to establish a well-coordinated facility  where staff will be available for
              training students,  postdoctoral fellows, and faculty. The MBF is part of a 
              concerted effort to maximize the research environment at UCSD  an d to foster
              interdisciplinary research efforts. The MBF  will join three other existing
              centers at UCSD (the NIR  Research Resource for Data Collection, the National
              Center  for Microscopy and Imaging Research, and the National  Biological
              Computing Resource) under the umbrella of the  newly formed Center for Research
              in Biological Structure and  will complement the existing centers by providing
              crucial  common analysis instruments for macromolecular biophysics.
