Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Investigation of the Novel Electronic, Stuctural
               and Dynamical Properties of Cubane and Various Cubane Derivatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a9731014

Award Number: 9731014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28332              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Briber rbriber@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Taner Yildirim  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5940,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Description: This award is for support of a cooperative research by Drs. Taner
              Yildirim, and Robert Briber, Department of Materials and Nuclear Engineering at
              the University of Maryland, and Dr. Selim Ciraci, Physics Department at Bilkent
              University in Ankara, Turkey.  They plan to study the solid state physical
              properties of cubane materials.  Cubane (C8H8), an atomic scale cube, is an
              immensely strained molecule whose 90 degree bond angle challenges classical
              notions of the sp3 bonding of carbons.  Its high heat of formation and density
              make it an exciting candidate for a new generation of fuels and explosives. 
              Many solid state properties of cubane and its derivatives are poorly
              understood.  The scientists propose to investigate the (a) stability,
              energetics, and dynamics, (b) effect of pressure on structure and phase
              transition, (c) electronic structure, and (d) interaction of cubane and its
              derivatives with various metals, with other molecules, surfaces, and solids
              (e.g. graphite and C60).  The study will involve first principle calculations
              and molecular dynamics simulations by groups from the Universities of Maryland
              and Bilkent, and x-ray and neutron scattering measurements performed by the
              National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) scientists.  Scope: The
              U.S. PI is a recent Ph.D. who has established a solid reputation in this
              research area.  He is collaborating with well-established colleagues at NIST
              and at the University of Maryland, and with a well-respected physicist at
              Bilkent University.  The study will contribute substantially to our
              understanding of the design and control in strained-molecule engineering, and
              will benefit continuing attempts to create cubane-based materials with novel
              properties.  The scientific methods used by the US and Turkish sides are
              complementary in terms of material synthesis, measurement, and theoretical
              expertise.  The scientific collaboration should be mutually beneficial.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
