Title       : RPG: The Influence of Clonal Reproduction on Population Sex Ratios in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1998     
File        : a9731181

Award Number: 9731181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. McLetchie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1228,9136,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726931  McLetchie      Many plants occur in populations where males outnumber
              females or vice   versa.  In some instances where females outnumber males,
              reduced sexual   reproduction has been observed and attributed to this low male
              frequency.   This planning grant is designed to obtain baseline ecological
              information   that will support a full proposal to study 1) the causes of
              sex-specific   clonal (asexual) reproduction and 2) the effects of this
              reproduction on   the number of males and females in populations. 
              Diplasiolejeunea   pellucida, a small tropical plant that grows on living
              leaves of other   plant species will be the focal test species. This species
              grows on a   transient substrate; thus individuals must colonize, grow and
              sexually or   asexually reproduce quickly to colonize new substrate.  The
              activities   planned in this study includes: a) collecting demographic data on
              male and   female plants (by monitoring individual plants), b) determining the
              cause   of reduced sexual reproduction (by manipulating male frequency), c)  
              establishing protocols for culturing plants in natural and laboratory  
              conditions, and d) detecting sex-specific DNA markers and clonal structure  
              among plants in the population.         This project has broad scientific
              importance in three main areas of study   1) the contribution of asexual
              reproduction in reducing population   extinction, 2)  the causes and
              consequences of the differences between male   and female plants and 3) the
              relationships of asexual reproduction to other   characteristics of the
              organism (sexual reproduction, growth and survival).   Asexual reproduction has
              been largely ignored in evolutionary studies of   plants despite the fact that
              clonal growth greatly influences survival.   Some clonal plants show no sign of
              aging, making asexual reproduction a   distinctive and important ecological and
              evolutionary trait.  Information   obtained on Diplasiolejeunea pellucida can
              be invaluable in modeling sex   ratio patterns and consequence s in other plant
              species that are more   difficult to study.  Finally, many studies focus on
              allocation of resources   (energy and nutrients) for sexual reproduction,
              growth and survival.   Asexual reproduction is rarely incorporated into these
              studies yet most   organisms (animals, plants, fungi and others) are able to
              reproduce   asexually.  This study will contribute to our knowledge of how
              resource   allocation to asexual reproduction affects and is affected by sexual
                reproduction, growth and survival .
