Title       : Surfactant-Assisted Growth of Giant Magnetoresistive Magnetic Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2000   
File        : a9731733

Award Number: 9731733
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harsh D. Chopra hchopra@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9731733  Chopra    This is a study of NiO-Co-Cu-based "giant" magnetoresistive 
              magnetic multilayers in spin valve configuration, deposited  by dc-magnetron
              sputtering.  The goal is to employ  surfactants to control elementary film
              deposition steps at  the atomic level in order to modify the nature of
              interfaces  and film morphology.  This approach should result in basic 
              understanding of the structure sensitivity of the magneto-  transport
              properties in these layered systems.  Deposition  of a suitable number of
              layers of a surfactant on a given  layer of a multilayer should alter the
              balance between  surface and interface energies.  The potential surfactant 
              species (Ag, As, Sn, Sb, and Pb) are soft metals having  large atomic volumes,
              properties that favor their "floating"  out to the surface during over-layer
              growth and leaving  behind intact layers with smooth interfaces less prone to 
              intermixing.  Surfactant assisted evolution of surface  topography with respect
              to surfactant-free spin valves is  studied at different stages of film growth
              in-situ and ex-  situ (using scanning tunneling microscopy and atomic force 
              microscopy).  Surface segregation of surfactants is  monitored by X-ray
              photoelectron spectroscopy.  Magnetic  properties, domain structures and wall
              transition in applied  field are measured.  %%%  Artificially modulated
              magnetic multilayers comprised of  magnetic and non-magnetic films are the
              subjects of intense  research.  These systems have potential device
              applications  as magneto-optical storage materials using multilayers with 
              perpendicular anisotropy and as next-generation read-heads  for high-density
              storage.  ***
