Title       : Pragmatics, Metalanguage, and Addressee-Uptake in Language Acquisition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a9731781

Award Number: 9731781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228457             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eve V. Clark eclark@psych.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project looks at the METALANGUAGE DIRECTIONS about words and word
              meanings contained in child directed speech, and at their UPTAKE by children.
              Metalanguage directions may be explicit, as in the provision of a term for a
              category (`That's a squirrel`) or implicit, as when the speaker assumes the
              addressee can infer the identify the target referent (`Bring me the soup
              spoon`). Both explicit and implicit directions can  be used to introduce
              children to new terms and to offer repairs when children come up with terms
              that are inappropriate or not specific enough. The theoretical issue here is
              the extent to which children aged 1;6 to 5;0 are offered and can make use of
              such metalanguage directions in their word learning. Identification of the
              pragmatic information available to and usable by you ng children offers an
              alternative to proposals based on constraints on word acquisition.  The studies
              are both observational and experimental. In the observational studies, we will
              analyze the range of metalanguage directions actually used, and examine the
              consistency with which they serve to introduce members of different word
              classes (e.g., nouns vs verbs vs prepositions) as well as different semantic
              relations (e.g., inclusion, part of). We will also look at evidence for uptake
              (from children's usage) and its relation to the type of metalanguage direction
              used. In the experimental studies, we examine in detail the range of forms
              adults make use of in their metalanguage directions when they are asked to
              teach words from different word classes (e.g., nouns vs adjectives vs verbs).
              We also look at children's ability to understand differences between explicit
              and implicit directions used both to introduce new terms and to repair terms
              already under consideration. Lastly, we look at whether the same range of
              metalanguage directions is used when adults teach other adults new terms in an
              unfamiliar domain.  These studies will allow us to establish (a) the extent to
              which there is a continuum of forms for metalanguage directions, from explicit
              to implicit, and also a continuum from implicit directions to inductions; (b)
              whether words in some word classes can be taught while others must be induced
              (e.g., nouns and verbs vs prepositions); (c) whether adults favor particular
              kinds of metalanguage directions for particular word classes (e.g., whether
              proper nouns are typically offered in explicit directions, compared to verbs,
              say, in implicit ones), and (d) how effective different metalanguage forms are
              for word learning, as measured by child uptake.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
