Title       : Magnetic Resonance Studies of Strongly-Correlated Electron Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2000   
File        : a9731361

Award Number: 9731361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas E. MacLaughlin douglas.maclaughlin@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9731361
MacLaughlin

Electronic structure, magnetism, and superconductivity
              in highly correlated electron materials (heavy-fermion metals, and transition
              metal oxides) will be investigated using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and
              muon spin rotation (mSR) techniques. NMR and mSR are sensitive to microscopic
              (atomic) charge and spin correlations and make excellent local probes of strong
              electron correlation. The techniques are applied to a number of problems in
              strongly correlated-electron physics, including (1) the effect of disorder on
              non-Fermi-liquid behavior in heavy-fermion compounds and alloys, (2)
              nonmagnetic Kondo phenomena in non-Kramers f-electron compounds, (3)
              paramagnetic NMR/mSR frequency shifts and unconventional superconductivity in
              UBe13 and its alloys, and (4) mSR studies of doped lanthanum cuprates and
              colossal magnetoresistance manganites. The grant will provide graduate training
              in state-of-the-art magnetic resonance techniques. The research will be carried
              out in collaboration with researchers in government (Los Alamos National
              Laboratory, Iowa State Ames Laboratory) and industrial (Lucent Technologies
              Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill) laboratories and with research groups abroad
              (Leiden, Zurich).
%%% 
This projects investigates the way interactions among
              electrons influence the magnetism and conduction in solids. This so-called
              strongly correlated electron problem is a major unsolved problem in condensed
              matter physics. It is a fundamental issue that has technological implications
              in many technological areas. This project employs magnetic resonance techniques
              as probes of correlated-electron behavior at the atomic level. In nuclear
              magnetic resonance (NMR), "probe" nuclear magnetic moments, similar to compass
              magnets, sense the local magnetic environment created by the surrounding
              electrons. This research should lead to a better understanding of the behavior
              of heavy-electron metals, in which electrons behave as if they were hundreds or
              even thousands of times more massive than electrons in ordinary metals. The
              project also deals with metal-oxide colossal magnetoresistance materials which
              have potential for applications in information storage technology. The grant
              will provide graduate training in state-of-the-art magnetic resonance
              techniques. The research will be carried out in collaboration with researchers
              in government (Los Alamos National Laboratory, Iowa State Ames Laboratory) and
              industrial (Lucent Technologies Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill) laboratories
              and with research groups abroad (Leiden, Zurich).
***


