Title       : Strategic and Normative Analysis of Resource Allocation Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9731431

Award Number: 9731431
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184184             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Thomson wth2@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Allocating kidneys, apportionment in Congress, pricing the internet, and
              matching of medical interns to hospitals for residency programs are all
              examples of situations that we face in our daily life, and that modern economic
              theory can help us solve in a much more satisfactory way than would have been
              possible just a few years ago. This project is concerned with finding ``good`
              solutions to such problems.  The author addresses two kinds of issues:
              normative issues of economic justice (Who should pay, and how much?   What is
              fair?); and strategic issues of incentives (How can  we provide self-
              interested economic agents the incentive to behave in accordance with the good
              of society?).  In this research the point of departure then is to identify
              desirable properties of decision procedures.  For each specific class of
              problems, the author investigates how restrictive the properties are.  Do the
              rules that are used in practice satisfy these properties? If not, are there
              rules that do satisfy these properties?  Can a complete description of all the
              rules satisfying the properties be obtained?  Among them, are some better than
              others?  This methodology is applied to several classes of problems: allocating
              scarce resources; scheduling and sequencing problems; problems of timing; and
              problems of allocation over time.  Exploiting the considerable methodological
              advances of the last few years, the goal of this project is to identify methods
              of reaching decisions that all economic agents find fair and that provide them
              with the right incentives to participate.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
