Title       : Collaborative Research: Maritime Origins on California's Channel Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9731434

Award Number: 9731434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28710              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon M. Erlandson jerland@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. John Erlandson and Mark Rabb will
              conduct a collaborative archaeological research project. Building on past work,
              they will continue their excavations at two sites located on California's
              Channel Islands. The Eel Point site located on San Clemente Island is a large
              and deeply stratified shell midden which results from multiple occupations from
              approximately 8,200 to 500 years ago. The site contains a wealth of excellently
              preserved of cultural features, shell and bone artifacts and faunal remains.
              The second site, Daisy Cave is among the most important archaeological and
              paleontological locality on the Channel Islands. Located on San Miguel Island
              the cave and rockshelter complex contains stratified artifact and fossil
              bearing deposits dating from ca. 10,400 to 700 years ago. At present it is the
              earliest documented coastal shell midden in North America. Five major
              archaeological components have been identified and they contain delicate
              materials as basketry and cordage remnants rarely preserved in archaeological
              sites. A variety of chipped stone tools and artifacts made from bone and marine
              shell are also present. The investigators will build on their prior work at
              these sites and conduct both fieldwork and laboratory analyses. The immediate
              goals are to obtain a more complete picture of site use over time, to increase
              artifact and ecofact samples, and to obtain a suite of radiocarbon
              determinations for more precise dating. The faunal and artifactual materials
              will be analyzed.      Taken together, data from the two sites will permit
              archaeologists to trace the development of marine adaptations in North America
              from the end of the last ice age through early and mid Holocene times. Until
              recently scientists believed that it was difficult for hunters and gatherers
              with relatively simple technology to utilize marine environments effectively;
              such areas, it was argued, were habitats of last resort. On mainland
              California, shoreline settlements are relatively recent in time. However the
              discovery of early Channel Island sites has changed that picture and
              archaeologists wish to understand this early marine adaptation and how it
              developed and was modified over time. The sediments on and near the islands
              contain an excellent environmental record and it is possible to trace variation
              in ocean temperature and concomitant changes in biotic communities. Thus Drs.
              Erlandson and Raab can gain insight into basic human subsistence strategies and
              how these accommodated significant variations in food type and availability.   
                  This research will shed light on an extremely early and poorly understood
              aspect of North American prehistory. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists and provide insight into an important facet of human adaptation.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
