Title       : Marine Bioproducts Engineering Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a9731725

Award Number: 9731725
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Tapan Mukherjee                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15120000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Bidigare bidigare@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Oskar R. Zaborsky  (Principal Investigator former)
              Alexander Malahoff  (Principal Investigator former)
              Charles M. Kinoshita  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                97-31725  ZABORSKY    This award initiates the Engineering Research Center for
              Marine Bioproducts Engineering.  The lead institution is the University of
              Hawaii at Manoa with the University of California, Berkeley as a core partner
              institution.  The award funds the first five years of effort under a new
              cooperative agreement, with a potential duration of ten years.  The vision of
              the ERC for Marine Bioproducts Engineering is to build the foundations of
              engineering research and education for a 21st century marine biotechnology
              business devoted to high-value products destined for the chemical,
              pharmaceutical, nutraceutical, cosmetic, food, feed, and life sciences
              industries.  The ERC brings together two disparate topics, marine sciences and
              process engineering, in order to address apreviously under-utilized bioproducts
              resource, the world's'oceans.  The Center builds on well-established expertise
              in marine sciences at the University of Hawaii and in bioprocessing at the
              University of California, Berkeley, the open ocean collection resources at the
              University of Hawaii, and the Center's partnership with the nascent marine
              biotechnology industry.    The world's oceans represent a great, and largely
              untapped, resource of marine organisms containing products or the raw materials
              for products that are of use in many different industries.  The Center's
              research spans from exploration of the oceans for new product leads, through
              the development of production processes, such as bioreactors and separation
              technologies, to the formulation and stability of newly discovered marine
              bioproducts through combinatorial chemistry and other techniques.  The research
              program involves chemists, oceanographers, biologists, bioengineers and
              chemical engineers.    By introducing marine concepts into undergraduate and
              graduate courses taught at both institutions, the Center will produce marine
              biotechnology engineers who have theoretical and practical engineering
              expertise and a working knowledge of marine and life scie nces disciplines and
              practices.  The Center will also provide training for professional marine
              bioengineers, will outreach to K-12 school children and the general public
              through the Bishop Museum in Honolulu, and will partner with community
              colleges.       The Center will collaborate with industrial partners from
              Hawaii, the U.S. Mainland and the Pacific Rim.  It also will have support from
              banks and venture capital firms that fund the nascent marine biotechnology
              industry in Hawaii.    This award is the outcome of the entry of the ERC's
              preproposal in the FY 1997-98 Engineering Research Centers Competition under
              the ERC Program Announcement, NSF 97-5.
