Title       : Synthesis and Characterization of Crystalline and Liquid Crystalline
               Poly(silylenemethylenes)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a9731345

Award Number: 9731345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Jesser waj@virginia.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry L. Farmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard V. Interrante  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9731345  Farmer    A detailed and systematic study of crystalline and liquid 
              crystalline order in poly(silylenemethylene)s (PSMs), is  proposed.  By virtue
              of their structural relationship to the  purely organic polyolefins and such
              inorganic polymers as the  polysilanes, polysiloxanes and polyphosphazenes,
              these hybrid  inorganic/organic backbone polymers provide a unique opportunity 
              to examine the effects of the polymer backbone on the structure  and properties
              of linear polymers with structure-directing groups  or side chains.  This study
              will employ synthesis methods  recently developed in the PI's laboratory to
              prepare a senes of  monosubstituted and symmetrically disubstituted polymers
              having  fluorine, cyano, n-alkyl, alkoxy, aryloxy, and mesogenic side  chain
              substituents.  Preliminary work on some of these polymers  indicates the
              existence of novel structural transitions and  properties.  Prior work on
              related hybrid polymers provide  directions for future synthesis efforts that
              seem likely to yield  new polymers with interesting behavior. These polymers
              will be  examined by a wide range of characterization methods, including x- 
              ray diffraction, optical microscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance  and
              differential scanning calorimetry.  The structures and  properties of the PSMs
              will be compared with those of the related  organic and inorganic backbone
              polymers.  Molecular modeling  methods will also be employed for selected
              polymers in an effort  to provide an understanding of the observed structures
              and  properties and the role of the polymer backbone in determining  their
              behavior.  %%%  In addition to a better fundamental understanding of structure-
               property relationships in polymeric materials this study may lead  to new
              functional polymers that may be useful as NLO, electro-  optic, and
              piezoelectric materials in devices for optical storage  and processing.  ***
