Title       : SGER: Modified Sol-Gel Processing of Nanostructured Multifunctional Active
               Coatings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1997  
File        : a9731396

Award Number: 9731396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1997   
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jackie Y. Ying jyying@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gan-Moog Chow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9161,9237,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                PROJECT SUMMARY                CTS-9731396       The development of smart
              materials in the form of multifunctional active coatings is proposed in this
              exploratory research program.  To demonstrate the feasibility and potential of
              multifunctional active coatings in this six-month collaborative project between
              Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Naval Research Laboratory, research
              focus will be directed towards hybrid active coatings that will serve to
              protect against environmental hazards, such as toxic fumes associated with fire
              damage.  The smart coatings will present a combination of superb thermal
              barrier and catalytic functions.  To accomplish these goals simultaneously,
              novel materials processing will be explored to provide intrinsic capabilities
              for tailoring unique microstructures and compositional flexibility. The PI's
              propose the use of nanostructure processing to achieve coatings with enhanced
              performance and interfacial stability.  Specifically, modified sol-gel
              processing will be examined for nanostructure tailoring and coating
              applications.     The multifunctional coatings includes the design of a thermal
              barrier overcoat that protects the underlying structure from a high-temperature
              environment, and catalytically active layers that would neutralize the toxic
              gases released. Sol-gel processing will be used to achieve the ultrafine grain 
               size, high volume fraction of grain boundaries and tailored pore structures of
               nanostructured yttria-stabilized zircona for controlled transport
              characteristics through the coatings.  This advanced wet chemical approach is
              attractive for its intrinsic flexibility in tailoring compositional homegeneity
              grain size and pore structure, and will enable realization of a thermal barrier
              coating with superior thermal resistance than the conventional coarse-grained
              counterpart.  The toxic fumes diffused past the thermal barrier overcoat will
              further be catalytically treated by the underlying nanocrystalline layers.  The
              ultrahigh surface-to-volume  ratio of nanostructured materials will be
              exploited to provide unique surface reactivity and ultrahigh dispersion of
              active species for effective catalytic remediation of toxic gases.  Various
              processing parameters will be examined to control the relative nucleation and
              growth rates and minimize particle agglomeration to achieve high surface area
              nanoparticles.  The PI's will further develop barium hexaaluminate as an
              effective catalyst for oxidation of hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide.  This
              material is much less expensive and more thermally stable than conventional
              noble metal catalysts.  The PI's propose an innovative controlled sol-gel
              hydrolysis synthesis in reverse nanoemulsion for the low-temperature derivation
              of ultrahigh surface area, nanocrystalline doped barium hexaaluminate for
              effective oxidation of hydrocarbons and CO.     The proposed research will
              demonstrate that nanocrystals can be processed in the form of coatings with
              controlled microstructures that will retain their unique transport and
              catalytic characteristics displayed in the respective bulk ceramic form and
              particulate form.  It is further sought to investigate the structural, thermal
              and chemical stability of the interface of these hybrid coatings. 
              Nanocomposite processing has demonstrated the possibility to engineer the
              surface reactivity and grain boundary structure to mechanically reinforce and
              thermally stabilize desirable microstructures.
