Title       : The Analysis of Geopolitics: Reconceptualizing International Borders through the
               Application of GIS (Geographic Information Systems)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9731056

Award Number: 9731056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84589              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey Starr starr@garnet.cla.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Over the past 15 years there has been a renewed attention to the role and
              impact of geography in the study of international relations.  Much of this is
              related to the `new geopolitics: which treats geography as an essential part of
              the context of possibilities and constraints that face foreign policy decision
              makers.  Based on earlier work which conceptualized and described international
              borders, this projects seeks to establish a major reconceptualization and
              revision of how borders may be seen (theory) and measured (method).  The use of
              Geographic Information Systems (GIS) permits a much fuller and clearer
              specification of borders by allowing an operationalization of the specific
              qualities of borders in terms of opportunity and willingness:  ease of
              interaction and salience, respectively.  Using data available in the data
              layers found in ARC/INFO's Digital chart of the world, indexes of both ease of
              interaction and of salience have been constructed.  These indexes aggregate
              values generated from ARC/INFO.  they can be used to characterize any border
              (or arc) or border segment on the globe.  thus, the use of a GIS dataset
              permits a new mechanism for operationalizing a state's borders.  Through the
              indexes generated, values can be attached to the ease of interaction a border
              or border segment provides, and/or the importance of any particular border or
              border segment.  These two dimensions can be used separately or combined.  A
              border with high values on both could be considered a `Vital Border.`  The GIS
              generated indexes permit investigators to tap both dimensions, and to use them
              singly or combined given the research under consideration.  This theoretically
              based reconceptualization will lead to the creation of a dataset which will
              permit research to go beyond simply observing the number of borders a state
              possesses, whether or not a border existed between two states, or the length of
              that border.  The dataset to be produced should be of  interest to numerous
              scholars in international relations and geography and regional science.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
