Title       : Determinants of Education and Mobility among Second- Generation
               Mexican-Americans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a9731280

Award Number: 9731280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134389             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Smith rsmith@barnard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a study of the determinants of education and work mobility among
              second-generation Mexican-Americans in New York City.  The fate of the children
              of immigrants, the "second generation," is an increasingly important scholarly
              and public policy topic. This research will contribute to our understanding of
              the fate of the second generation through an ethnographic and interview study
              that considers the effects of gender, market niche, ethnic identity and social
              organization on their educational and occupational mobility patterns.     This
              study is based on earlier ethnographic research on immigrants from the Mexican
              town of Ticuani, and the present project will seek to understand several
              puzzling ethnographic findings, including: Why would second generation
              Ticuanense women be more likely to be upwardly mobile in the mainstream economy
              and to attend college and obtain professional jobs, while the men are more
              likely to leave school and be upwardly mobile in the "immigrant economy"? What
              accounts for the upward mobility of a significant minority of second generation
              Ticuanense men and women, and the stagnation or even downward mobility of the
              rest? Why do some second generation Mexican-Americans view ethnic and racial
              discrimination as not stopping them from achieving in school or work, view
              themselves more as "second generation ethnics" and identify more with "ethnic"
              immigrants (like Greeks or Italians), while others see discrimination as
              precluding their mobility, view themselves as "native racial minorities" and
              identify more with Blacks and Puerto Ricans.  What relationship, if any, do
              their views of discrimination have to their occupational and educational
              mobility?      This project is supported under the Research in Undergraduate
              Institutions program.  It fulfills the RUI aims to support high quality
              research by faculty with active involvement of undergraduate students,
              strengthen the research environment in academic departments that are oriented
              primarily toward undergraduate instructi on, and promote the integration  of
              research and education at predominantly undergraduate institutions.  The study
              will also contribute to our understanding of the second generation of
              immigrants and of educational and occupational mobility
