Title       : Sixth International Conference on Fundamentals of Adsorption, Presq'ile de
               Giens, France, May 24-28, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1998   
File        : a9731369

Award Number: 9731369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Chapman                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Orhan Talu talu@talu.csuohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cleveland State University
	      East 24th and Euclid Ave
	      Cleveland, OH  44115    216/687-2000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                ~ -    1-I'    l  Abstract     Proposal No:  9731369   Proposal Type:  Request
              for Conference Support   Principal Investigator:       Orhan Talu  
              Affiliation:  Cleveland State University    This grant is awarded through the
              Separations and Purification Program sub-element of the Interfacial, Transport
              and Separations Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division. The
              principal investigator is Dr. Orhan Talu at Cleveland State University. This is
              a grant application for conference support. The conference is the Sixth
              International Conference on Fundamentals of Adsorption which will be held in
              Presq'ile de Glens, France, May 24-28, 1998. This is a topical area fully
              relevant to the Interfacial, Transport and Separation Processes Program. The
              objective of the conference is to provide a forum for the exchange of research
              results and ideas related to adsorption processes. Topics that will be
              emphasized include adsorption for bulk gas separations, gas storage, cooling,
              air and water pollution control and environmental remediation. A special
              emphasis in this conference is the design of adsorption materials which include
              new and novel materials such as carbon nanotubes.    The conference is a good
              blend of engineering science, materials chemistry and process engineering.
              There is also a good blend of scientists from industry, academia and government
              laboratories. Highly reputed international researchers are also part of the
              presentation and discussion schedule. The conference will benefit US scientists
              and engineers through interaction with their international colleagues.
              Participation by young faculty will be especially encouraged. The conference
              proceedings will be published after peer review. It is expected that NSF
              partial sponsorship of the conference will allow US researchers to fully
              benefit from the technical content of the program and will help advance the
              state of the art in adsorption science and technology.    J
