Title       : Mechanisms of Arylhydrocarbon Receptor-Mediated Interactions with Estrogen
               Receptor in Hypothalamus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a9731599

Award Number: 9731599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra L. Petersen sandyp@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                        ABSTRACT      IBN 97-31599  PI =  PETERSEN, Sandra L. 
                         The objective of this research is to understand the  role of the
              arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) in the regulation  of estrogen actions in the
              hypothalamus, the part of the  brain that plays a central role in reproduction.
               The AhR is  generally considered as the receptor that binds dioxin and 
              dioxin-like environmental contaminants.  However, this  receptors has
              apparently been conserved throughout evolution  and, therefore, is likely to
              have ligands other than the  dioxins that have been produced only within the
              past 50  years.  Although the AhR has been studied in non-neural  tissue,
              virtually no studies have been conducted in the  brain.  In other
              estrogen-sensitive tissues, such as breast  tissue, activation of the AhR is
              anti-estrogenic.       Dr. Petersen recently discovered  that the genes for 
              AhR and estrogen receptor (ER) are co-localized in regions  of the hypothalamus
              that control ovulation.  Other recent  work has shown that a single dose of
              dioxin (which activates  the AhR) blocks the ability of estrogen to induce the 
              preovulatory surge of luetinizing hormone (LH) required for  ovulation.  Based
              on this finding, Dr. Petersen hypothesized  that activation of the AhR may
              interfere with specific ER  functions in hypothalamus.  To test this
              hypothesis, it will  be determined whether: (1) activation of the AhR alters 
              estrogen expression or receptor protein expression, (2)  activation of the AhR
              induces the gene expression of  specific hydroxylases that metabolize estrogen,
              thereby  decreasing hormone availability and creating neurotoxic  substances,
              and (3) known estrogen actions in the  hypothalamus, such as progesterone
              receptor induction and  changes in proopiomelanocortin, tyrosine hydroxylase
              and NPA  gene expression, are blocked by activation of the AhR.       Taken
              together, these studies will provide important  new insights into the
              mechanisms by which ligands for the  AhR might affect  ER-mediated events
              required for ovulation.  In addition, the proposed experiments will provide
              important  clues to help identify the endogenous ligand(s) for the  receptor.
