Title       : Intraband Transitions in Strongly Confined Quantum Dots: Spectroscopy and
               Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9731642

Award Number: 9731642
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philippe Guyot-Sionnest p-guyot-sionnest@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9731642  Guyot-Sionnest    This  research by Professor P. Guyot-Sionnest of  the
               James  Franck  Institute  of  the University of  Chicago  addresses  crucial 
              questions  of the behavior of quantum  dots/quantum  wells,  also  known as
              artificial atoms or  single  electron  transistors  (SET).   Among these is the
               predicted  "phonon  bottle neck" which would severely limit the applicability
              of  SETs in nanotechnological applications.  The typical size of  a  quantum
              dot (QD) is of the order of 1000 times that of  a  free  atom  yet very much
              smaller than that of  conventional  semiconductor  elements.  Their quantum
              mechanical  behavior  can thus not be predicted by simple scaling or
              extrapolation  and  must  be  determined  by experimental  work.   In  this 
              research   the   PI  will  fabricate  QDs  using   colloidal  nanocrystals  
              rather  than  those  made   by   conventional  semiconductor  fabrication
              techniques.   Infrared  intraband  pump-probe  spectroscopy  will  be  used  to
               determine  the  relaxation  kinetics of electronically  excited  QDs.   This 
              will  be  done  in stages over the duration  of  the  grant:  excited  state
              spectroscopy by single color spectroscopy  of  optically excited QDs, and
              investigation of the dynamics and  fine   structure  of  intraband  transitions
               by  dual-color  infrared  pump-probe spectroscopy of optically excited  QDs. 
              These   experiments  will  advance  our  knowledge  of   the  relaxation
              dynamics of the electronic states of a QD,  which  is  a  basic  issue that is
              key to the future generation  of  optical devices based on QDs.  %%%  This 
              research by Professor P. Guyot-Sionnest of  the  James  Franck  Institute  of 
              the University of  Chicago  addresses  crucial  questions  of the behavior of
              quantum  dots/quantum  wells,  also  known as artificial atoms or  single 
              electron  transistors  (SET).   Among these is the  predicted  "phonon  bottle
              neck" which would severely limit the applicability of  SETs in
              nanotechnological applications.  The  typical size of  a  quantum dot (QD) is
              of the order of 1000 times that of  a  free  atom  yet very much smaller than
              that of  conventional  semiconductor  elements.  Their quantum mechanical 
              behavior  can thus not be predicted by simple scaling or extrapolation  and 
              must  be  determined  by experimental  work.   In  this  research   the   PI 
              will  fabricate  QDs  using   colloidal  nanocrystals   rather  than  those 
              made   by   conventional  semiconductor  fabrication techniques.   Infrared 
              intraband  pump-probe  spectroscopy  will  be  used  to  determine  the 
              relaxation  kinetics of electronically  excited  QDs.   This  will  be  done 
              in stages over the duration  of  the  grant:  excited  state spectroscopy by
              single color spectroscopy  of  optically excited QDs, and investigation of the
              dynamics and  fine   structure  of  intraband  transitions  by  dual-color 
              infrared  pump-probe spectroscopy of optically excited  QDs.  These  
              experiments  will  advance  our  knowledge  of   the  relaxation dynamics of
              the electronic states of a QD,  which  is  a  basic  issue that is key to the
              future generation  of  optical devices based on QDs.  ***  ***
