Title       : Valle Imperial - Project in Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2001   
File        : a9731274

Award Number: 9731274
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3509989            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Klentschy mklent@mail.ecsd.k12.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah Quinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alicia Armenta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie Garrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : El Centro School District
	      1256 Broadway avenue
	      El Centro, CA  92243    760/352-5712

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9731274  Klentschy    The Valle Imperial Project in Science (VIPS) Local
              Systemic Change project represents a unified regional effort of 16
              participating school districts, the Imperial County Office of Education, and
              San Diego State University to improve K-6 science instruction.  Located on the
              California-Mexico border, the Imperial Valley region experiences geographic
              isolation, poverty, and limited access to science education training.  However,
              the uniqueness of this project is not in the magnitude of need, but in the
              capacity of the districts to draw on local experience and science expertise to
              efficiently transform this NSF supported effort into an independent,
              self-sustaining program.     The LSC is based on five essential elements: high
              quality curriculum, sustained professional development, dependable material
              support, strong administrative and community backing, and a comprehensive
              assessment and evaluation plan.  Inquiry based units from each of the major
              science disciplines comprise the heart of the science program.  Teachers
              receive a minimum of 100 hours support in the use of these materials, through
              intensive training on grade level units, inquiry-based instruction of science
              content, and individual classroom support.  Institutes, symposiums, leadership
              training, and a graduate degree program exemplify the advanced training
              component of the program.  Student assessment will focus on embedded unit
              clusters, end of unit performance tasks and the evaluation of student
              notebooks.  A regional network of science professionals, educators, business
              leaders, and representatives of higher education will provide collaborative and
              comprehensive governance for the entire initiative.
