Title       : Aqueous Dispersion of Ferroelectric Ceramic Powders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a9731769

Award Number: 9731769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291174             (Estimated)
Investigator: Burtrand I. Lee lburtra@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry A. Mann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9150,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9731769  Lee    The objective of this GOALI project is to achieve a better 
              understanding of the behavior of submicron ferroelectric ceramic  powders in
              aqueous liquid media.  Although these powders are  processed in nonaqueous
              media satisfactorily, the need for  environmentally safer media for
              manufacturing ferroelectric  components is increasing.  Two of most widely used
              ferroelectric  ceramic powders, barium titanate (BT) and lead zirconate
              titanate  (PZT), will be used as "model" systems.  Fine powders of BT and  PZT
              will be characterized and dispersed in aqueous media, and the  particles will
              be stabilized by adsorbed organic molecules.  The  stabilizer molecules will be
              selected for their solubility in  water, strong anchoring groups, and
              sterically stabilizing chains  for dispersion and binding of the ceramic
              particles.  Strong and  uniform adsorption of the organic stabilizer acting
              also as  passivating agents to prevent the dissolution of metal ions from  the
              powders will be investigated.  The interaction between  liquid-particle,
              particle-dispersant, and liquid-dispersant will  be studied based on the
              physicochemical properties of the  participants.  The effect of the dispersant
              on stabilization of  the submicron ferroelectric ceramic particles will be
              assessed by  analyzing the rheology, zeta potential/isoelectric points, 
              sedimentation behavior, particle characteristics, conformation of  the
              adsorbates, green body properties, and metal ion dissolution  of BT and PZT. 
              %%%  The ultimate goal of this study is to obtain high density green  bodies
              with uniform microstructure of high reproducibility and  reliability.  Formed
              under these conditions, the green ceramics  will lead to lower organic content
              with high green density which  will shorten processing times and lower
              sintering temperatures.  The results will provide the needed assistance to the 
              manufacturing problem the industry is facing now by better  controlling the
              reproducibility of ferroelectric powder slips.  This control wil l bring lower
              manufacturing cost with higher  product quality and more environmentally
              "friendly" systems. This  project will be carried out under interdisciplinary
              cooperation  among the Ceramic & Materials Engineering Department at Clemson 
              University, Kemet Electronics Corporation, and the National  Institute of
              Standards and Technology. Kemet Electronics  Corporation, the industrial
              partner, will provide their research,  analytical, and production capabilities
              available to Professor  Lee, as well and providing a summer internship for a
              graduate  student.  In addition, a graduate student will spend a summer 
              working at the National Institute of Standards and Technology,  using
              facilities that are not available at Clemson or at Kemet.  The scientific
              results obtained from this study will be  transferred to the industrial
              partner.  Because of the strong  linkage with industry, the educational aspects
              of the project are  enhanced.  The summer internship at Kemet will expose the 
              graduate student to industrial-type research.  This GOALI project  is co-funded
              by the Ceramics Program of Division of Materials  Research, the Particulate and
              Multiphase Processes Program of  Division of Chemical and Transport Systems,
              the Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical 
              Sciences Directorate, and the GOALI Office of the Engineering  Directorate. 
              ***
