Title       : New Production and Nitrogen Cycling in the Off-Shore Regions of the Black Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1998     
File        : a9731232

Award Number: 9731232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162170             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. McCarthy jmccarthy@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1650,4444,5940,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Many scientific papers have been written that detail environmental changes in
              the Black Sea, and many speculate regarding implications of further potential
              anthropogenic changes 1) in various drainage basins that provide freshwater to
              this sea, 2) along its coastal margins, and 3) in extraction of its resources.
              While the ecological effects of industrial activity and changing land and water
              use are most apparent in coastal regions of the Black Sea, they are also
              evident off shore. For example, the observed trend of increasing nutrient
              concentrations and doublings of both phytoplankton biomass and primary
              productivity throughout the central region of the sea between the mid 1970s and
              early 1990s, have been attributed to anthropogenic causes.  Perhaps the most
              dramatic basin wide changes have, however, resulted from accidental
              introductions of carnivorous gelatinous zooplankton, most recently Mnemiopsis
              leydii. These species have profoundly affected Black Sea community structure,
              and probably community dynamics with respect to element and energy flow.  There
              have been no studies of the annual nitrogen cycle and no determinations of new
              production in the Black Sea. Moreover, generalizations that have been made,
              such as in models, are predicated upon the generalized behavior of a Black Sea
              planktonic ecosystem prior to the environmental changes of the last decade.  In
              conjunction with colleagues in Turkey, the off shore nitrogen cycle during all
              four seasons will be thoroughly investigated. Rates of nitrogen uptake,
              nitrogen fixation, and nitrogen flux among dissolved components will be
              measured with stable isotope techniques and interpreted within the context of
              plankton community structure and hydrography. This study will serve to document
              current conditions, provide a basis for inferring the effects of recent
              environmental changes, and contribute to more realistic modeling efforts of the
              Black Sea ecosystem. In the course of this work our Turkish colleagues will
              gain experience in the design, analysis and interpretation of results of
              nitrogen flux experiments, and our facilities will be available to them for
              follow on studies of changing conditions in the Black Sea.  The physical scale
              of the Black Sea makes a comprehensive study of its pelagic ecosystem
              tractable. In this regard the Black Sea is an important resource for developing
              and testing understanding of ecosystem function and stability in more broadly
              applied coupled physical and biogeochemical models of the pelagic plankton
              realm.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
