Title       : US-Southern Africa Workshop: Scientific Foundations of Programs for Community
               Based Management of Wildlife, Gwaai River, Zimbabwe, August 4-7, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1998      
File        : a9731004

Award Number: 9731004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22508              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne Marcus Getz getz@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louise P. Fortmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 5928,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9731004  Getz & Fortmann    This award supports 22 participants  (8 US and 14
              African) in the US-Southern Africa Workshop on the Scientific Foundations of
              Programs for Community Based Management of Wildlife, to be held at Gwaai River,
              Zimbabwe, August 4-7, 1998.  Additional participants include 2 from Europe, and
              about 40 from the Southern Africa region, including South Africa.  The
              co-organizers are Drs. Wayne Getz and Louise Fortmann, Department of
              Environmental Science, Policy, and Management at the University of California,
              Berkeley, and Dr. David Cumming, Head of the World Wildlife Fund Program Office
              in Harare, Zimbabwe.  This multidisciplinary workshop will include natural and
              social scientists, resource managers, and policy makers.      Many parts of
              Southern Africa are starting to use community based natural resource management
              (CBNRM) programs to preserve rural savanna lands as a mean of augmenting
              national park areas.  Currently there is a great deal of variation among the
              sets of data collected, interpreted, and disseminated by the CBNRM programs. 
              As a result there are no reliable regional assessments on these ecosystems, or
              on how they are being affected by  development and global change.  During this
              workshop participants will learn about CBNRM programs in Botswana, Namibia, and
              Zimbabwe, after which they will form working groups in the areas of: 1)
              environmental monitoring and evaluation, 2) software and hardware programs, and
              3) community management and program evaluation.  Each group will identify its
              database needs and requirements, and then collectively they will establish a
              common set of scientific protocols and software packages to be used by all
              CBNRM programs for the collection, interpretation, and management of data, and
              for program evaluation.  The use of these common protocols and software
              packages will increase the reliability of data collections and assessments,
              which will enable the information to be used for a new, long-term regional data
              base on Southern Africa's savanna ecos ystems which are outside of the national
              parks.  The establishment of such a database will be a very significant
              contribution to the region's scientific infrastructure, and its availability
              will also  enable researchers worldwide to have access to new knowledge about
              the loss of biodiversity in Southern Africa.  The common protocols will also be
              used in a SAVE GAME (Southern African Veld Ecosystems Geographic Assessment,
              Monitoring, & Evaluation) pilot program to provide areas of rural Southern
              Africa with scientifically well designed CBNRM programs.  This grant will
              support the participation of two graduate students from the United States.  The
              Division of International Programs and the Division of Biological
              Infrastructure are jointly supporting this workshop.
