Title       : Experimental Probes of Density Wave Deformations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2000     
File        : a9731257

Award Number: 9731257
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Brill jwbrill@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9731257 
              Brill    This  experimental research project is devoted to  properties  of 
              Charge Density Waves (CDW) and Spin Density Waves (SDW) in quasi- 
              one-dimensional  conductors.  In  these  states,  the  electronic  charge 
              and/or  spin  density  is  spatially  modulated,  with  a  wavelength  which 
              differs from that of the  underlying  crystal.  Many  of the anomalous
              properties, however, result from the  fact  the  Density  Wave  (DW)  itself 
              is  deformable,  and  that  its  deformations, which can be charged, interact
              with each other  and  with  other  charges  and defects in the  crystal.  This 
              project  focuses  on  the effect of such deformations in 1) modifying  the 
              elastic  properties of DW materials, 2) allowing  current  to  be  injected 
              into  the DW, and 3) driving materials into  glass-like  states  at low
              temperatures. Experimental techniques include:  1)  electromodulated   infrared
               transmission   (to   study   charged  deformations that accompany polarization
              and current injection in  the  CDW in blue bronze); 2) ac calorimetry to study
              the specific  heat; and, 3) low frequency elastic measurements, which are  made
               using  a radio frequency cavity in conjunction with small magnets  to  strain
              the small samples. The combination of these techniques  allows  a  search  for
              glass-transitions in CDW  materials.  This  research  program  is 
              interdisciplinary in nature  and  involves  several  graduate  students, who
              receive  excellent  training  in  preparation  for careers in industry,
              government laboratories  or  academia.  %%%  This  experimental research
              project is devoted to  properties  of  "quasi-one-dimensional  conducting"
              materials.  These  materials,  which  include  Tantalum  Triselenide  and 
              Potassium  Molybdenum  Trioxide, are often needle-like in their crystal forms
              and  allow  for   electrical  conduction  along  only  one  direction.  These 
              compounds in some cases undergo transitions at low te mperature to  unusal
              states in which the motion of electrical charge occurs  in  a  correlated way,
              in Charge Density Waves (CDW). A related state  is  called a Spin Density Wave
              (SDW). Such CDW and SDW states  in  quasi-one-dimensional conductors feature
              electronic charge and/or  spin  density  which is spatially modulated,  with  a
               wavelength  which  differs  from  that of the underlying crystal.  Electrical 
              conduction  in  the  CDW state occurs as the  whole  wave  moves,  rather than
              by individual charge motion as in copper. Many of the  anomalous  properties,
              however, result from the fact the  Density  Wave  (DW) itself is deformable,
              and that its deformations, which  can  be  charged, interact with each other
              and with other charges  and defects in the crystal. This project focuses on the
              effect of  such  deformations in 1) modifying the elastic properties  od  DW 
              materials,  2) allowing electrical current to be injected  in  to  the  DW, and
              3) driving materials into glass-like states  at  low  temperatures.    
              Experimental     techniques     include:     1)  electromodulated   infrared 
              transmission   (to   study   charged  deformations that accompany polarization
              and current injection in  the  CDW in blue bronze); 2) ac calorimetry to study
              the specific  heat; and, 3) low frequency elastic measurements, which are  made
               using  a radio frequency cavity in conjunction with small magnets  to  strain
              the small samples. The combination of these techniques  allows  a  search  for
              glass-transitions in CDW  materials.  This  research  program  is 
              interdisciplinary in nature  and  involves  several  graduate  students, who
              receive  excellent  training  in  preparation  for careers in industry,
              government laboratories  or  academia.  ***
