Title       : Bayesian Analysis, Computation and Communication in the Social Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2000        
File        : a9731037

Award Number: 9731037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239933             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Geweke   (Principal Investigator current)
              Siddhartha Chib  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1338,1339,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to provide tools for Bayesian inference that
              will be used by social scientists and their students - not just specialists in
              statistics or methodology, but anyone who does quantitative work with data,
              including undergraduates.  This is an extension of a previous project that
              developed tools for Bayesian communication.  These tools allow the user to
              approximate posterior moments, modify prior distributions, combine models, and
              approximate posterior density functions, given the output of a posterior
              simulator, which can be made available by the investigator at an ftp or web
              site.  The proposed project extends this work by placing posterior simulators
              themselves at the disposal of social scientists, in an environment that meets
              current standards for user orientation.  Ongoing research will support the
              following steps to meet this objective:  1) Develop redundant algorithms for
              the models that form the analytic core of empirical work in the social
              sciences.  In large part, a generic Hastings-Metropolis algorithm will provide
              this redundancy.  2) Provide windowing interfaces for all procedures including
              posterior simulators, the Bayesian communication tools developed in the
              previous project, and new procedures to be developed in this project.  Make
              these interfaces available for all common operating systems, using the
              scripting language and windowing toolkit Tcl/Tk.  3) Facilitate incorporation
              of new models and methods in the software.  The proposed system is designed to
              incorporate simulators developed by third parties, with no modification of
              their code.  All the software developed in this project will be freely
              available and fully documented for anyone with an internet connection.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
