Title       : Development of Diiron Bridging Acyl Complexes in Organic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2000     
File        : a9731574

Award Number: 9731574
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Gilbertson srg@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the development of improved methods for the  
              synthesis of optically pure organic compounds, using   alpha,beta-unsaturated
              acyl diiron carbonyl complexes incorporating a   chiral thiol.  Reactions of
              these reagents with nitrones results in the   formation of asymmetric
              isoxazolidines.  Structural studies will be   carried out to determine the
              origin of the observed product   selectivities, and the isoxazolidines will be
              used as intermediates in   the synthesis of optically active  beta-amino acids
              and beta-lactams.    The acyl diiron complexes will also be used in asymmetric
              Diels-Alder   reactions in the regioselective addition of nitrile oxides, and
              as   organometallic components for the  asymmetric Michael addition.  With this
              renewal award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program   provides
              continuing support for the research  of Dr. Scott R. Gilbertson   of the
              Department of Chemistry at Washington University.  Professor   Gilbertson's
              research is focused on developing new and improved synthetic   methods for the
              preparation of organic compounds.  The methodology,    based on organometallic
              reagents,  has potential for use in the   preparation of organic compounds
              having interesting biological   properties.  In this work, students will
              receive training useful in   developing synthetic skills of great interest to
              the pharmaceutical   industry.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
