Title       : Importance of Secondary Dispersal in Determining Patterns of Spatial Abundance
               in Macro-Invertebrate Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a9731718

Award Number: 9731718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Peterson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9731718  Peterson  Soft-bottom benthic habitats represent one of the most 
              ubiquitous environments within the marine ecosystem;  however, our knowledge of
              the processes which determine  species abundance and distribution pales in
              comparison to  other types of benthic systems. The majority of past  research
              in benthic systems has focused on the role of  predation, disturbance, and
              competition on adult benthic  populations. Recent attention to the potential
              role of  larval supply and the entire recruitment process has greatly  expanded
              our knowledge of the processes which structure  benthic communities.
              Nevertheless, for soft-bottom  communities, one large, critical gap exists in
              our  knowledge, the role of secondary movement or redispersal of  organisms
              following larval recruitment. Through a series of  field and laboratory
              experiments designed to address this  topic, research will focus on two
              objectives: to quantify  and describe the secondary movement of selected marine
               benthic macro-invertebrates, particularly juveniles, and to  determine the
              role secondary movement has in structuring  soft-bottom communities and
              mediating interactions of other  processes. Research will focus on three common
              estuarine  benthic invertebrates which vary in their dispersal  abilities and
              include two bivalves and one polychate worm.  The research will involve direct
              examination of these  organisms in situ and will include a characterization of
              the  hydrodymanic regimes. Research on the interaction of habitat  structure,
              predators and density dependence on secondary  dispersion is planned. The
              results will add knowledge to a  poorly understood aspect of the factors which
              influence  community structure and function in soft-bottom benthic 
              environments.
