Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Multimedia Document Analysis and Representation
               for Content-Based Indexing and Retrieval
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1998      
File        : a9731007

Award Number: 9731007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16770              (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Murat Tekalp tekalp@ece.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0104000   Information Systems                     
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 5940,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for the support of cooperative research by Dr. A.
              Murat Tekalp, Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of
              Rochester, Rochester, NY, and Dr. Fatos Yaman-Vural, of the Electrical and
              Computer Engineering Department at the Middle East Technical University (METU)
              in Ankara, Turkey.  In an effort to maximize the utility of the digital
              multimedia archives, there is a need for efficient and universal tools for
              searching and browsing the desired content in large databases.  This research
              addresses two important problems in the database management systems: content
              extraction/understanding and content-based access.  The first problem relates
              to automatic entry of large number of paper documents or raw multimedia
              information into digital databases.  Conversion of paper documents into one of
              the acceptable digital information standards requires automatic understanding
              of the scanned data, which entails identification of the logical structure and
              the semantics of the document.  The second problem concerns content-based
              access to visual information.  Many digital multimedia archives contain visual
              information in the form of images and video clips, and no generally recognized
              descriptors exist for representing visual information. There is need for
              content-based indexing and retrieval tools for searching multimedia archives
              including image and video collections.   Scope:  this project addresses an
              important emerging area, where advances would have immediate impact. The US
              P.I. and the Turkish collaborator have strong records of accomplishments.  The
              two sides have complementary capabilities and backgrounds.  The US P.I. has
              specific experiences in the area of applications.  The Turkish scientist is an
              active researcher with solid publication records, and with extensive industrial
              as well as academic experience.  The project would strengthen links between
              strong research groups at the U. of Rochester and METU.   The project fits well
              within the objectives of the Division of International Programs.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
