Title       : RUI: Secreted Ferritin: Structure and Cloning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1998     
File        : a9731745

Award Number: 9731745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria C. Linder   (Principal Investigator current)
              Maryam Hazegh-Azam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9731745  Linder  The investigators have obtained evidence that ferritin secreted
              by hepatic cells, and serum ferritin, have a different structure than the
              well-studied intracellular ferritins.  They hypothesize that secreted/serum
              ferritin has only partial homology to intracellular ferritins and is encoded by
              different genes.  The objective is to clone cDNAs for the subunits of
              secreted/serum ferritin to test the hypothesis.   Ferritin from horse serum and
              the medium of rat hepatoma cells will be isolated.  N-terminal and internal
              amino acid sequence will be obtained.  cDNAs will be cloned by using the amino
              acid sequence (a) to design probes with which to screen a rat liver library,
              and (b) to design primers with which to perform RT-PCR on rat liver mRNA.  Full
              sized clones will be sequenced and used to determine the primary structure of
              the subunits of secreted ferritin for comparison with that of known
              intracellular ferritins.  Clones will be validated by demonstrating (a) that
              they encode mRNAs transcriptionally responsive to iron, and (b) that amino acid
              sequences for different portions of the subunits are encoded by nucleotide
              sequence in appropriate regions of the clones.  If needed, clones will also be
              validated by showing that rat liver mRNA selected by hybridization to the
              clones encodes a product of the appropriate size and is recognized by antibody
              against intracellular ferritin.     Ferritin is an iron storage molecule found
              in significant amounts inside all cells.  A great deal is known about its
              structure, function and genetics.  Traces of a  ferritin  are also found in
              blood serum, but almost nothing is known about its structure, function and
              genetics.  The investigators have evidence that blood serum ferritin differs
              markedly from that in cells and will test this concept.  If they are correct,
              their findings will greatly change views about what is ferritin, and exactly
              what is being measured as ferritin in serum will become apparent.
