Title       : Dissertation Research: Medicinal Plants in the Greater Mississippi River Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1999  
File        : a9731555

Award Number: 9731555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7005               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gayle J. Fritz gjfritz@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Gayle Fritz, MS Michele Williams will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. She will study archaeological records and
              excavated material in four museums and universities in the United States. Her
              work focuses on botanical materials from native American sites in the Midwest
              which span an approximately 1,000 year period and which document the transition
              from a hunting and gathering way of life to a mode of subsistence based on
              agriculture. Archaeological data clearly demonstrate that over this span
              sedentary settlements of ever larger size appeared, population density
              increased and that societies assumed an increasingly hierarchical structure. It
              is interesting to note that these conditions resulted in a net decrease in
              health and skeletal analysis indicates decreasing age of death and a heavier
              disease load. MS Williams is interested in the changes in medicinal practice
              which accompanied this transition.  Ethnographic accounts of extant native
              American societies indicate the utilization of a wide range of wild plants for
              medicinal purposes and it is reasonable to assume that this practice has
              considerable antiquity. While carbonized plant remains have been recovered from
              many sites and have been extensive analyzed to provide insight into
              subsistence, none have ever been examined from a medicinal perspective. Seeds
              and other plant parts attributable to this function are assumed to be rare and
              hard to identify and the analytic results from a single site are unlikely to
              paint a convincing picture. Through a multisite analysis which spans both a
              considerable geographic region and time period, it should be possible to search
              for patterns, especially when the results are interpreted in light of
              ethnographic data. Such is the goal of MS Williams' research. The study gains
              power because it makes use of medical data derived from skeletal analysis and
              it should be possible to determine how cultural practices change (or do not
              change) in response to changing disease patterns.  This is innovative research
              which will make use of extant data and museum collections. It will provide new
              insight into prehistoric native American adaptation and provide data of
              interest to many archaeologists. It will also assist in training a promising
              young scientist.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
