Title       : Investigation of Early Neolithic Adaptive Strategies in Southern Jordan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  2001     
File        : a9731418

Award Number: 9731418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150426             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald O. Henry donald-henry@utulsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Donald Henry and his colleagues
              will conduct two seasons of archaeological fieldwork in the desertic Wadi Hisma
              region of southern Jordan. Previous archaeological work in this area has
              revealed the presence of a large Pre Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB) site which, on
              typological grounds, may be as much as 9,000 years old. The site, Ain Abu
              Nekheileh, consists of a constellation of curvilinear stone-walled structures
              exposed on the surface of a small alluvial fan over an area of ca. 2,250 square
              meters. Based on variation in house form, as many as five building phases may
              be present and thus the site may encompass a significant period of time.
              Associated sediments are finely stratified and, because of the dry conditions,
              preserve an abundance of cultural materials including large numbers of well
              preserved bones. Dr. Henry and his colleagues will conduct extensive excavation
              at the site and collect both cultural and environmental information to
              reconstruct PPNB social and subsistence patterns and set these into a broader
              ecological context. In particular he will focus on the wealth of faunal remains
              because they provide insight both into the season in the site was occupied and
              the extent to which purposeful manipulation of caprid species (sheep and goat)
              took place.  The Near East is one of the cradles of civilization and the
              domestication of plants and animals necessary to achieve this level of
              complexity took place in this region. Excellent data from many sites have
              provided insight into the evolution of domestic wheat and barley from their
              local wild progenitors. Data also indicate that not until ca. 1,000 years later
              do domestic sheep and goat appear in the archaeological record. However the
              history of this latter transformation and the processes which underlie it are
              unknown. Although many sites have been excavated in better watered regions of
              the Near East, relatively little is known about marginal desert regions and Dr.
              Henry has focused his attention in just such an area. Because wild caprid
              ancestors were present, Dr. Henry believes that work at Ain Abu Nekheileh may
              provide relevant data.  This research will provide basic information about an
              understudied region and the results will be of interest to many archaeologists.
              It will, hopefully, shed new light on one of the major transformations of human
              culture. The project includes a number of graduate students who will work with
              Dr. Henry in the field and thus important training will take place.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
