Title       : Measurements of Atmospheric Methyl Halides and Their Sources, and of Ethyl
               Halides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9731706

Award Number: 9731706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph J. Cicerone rjcicero@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Recent field studies show that methyl halides gases (e.g., methyl chloride,
              methyl bromide and methyl iodide) are released from rice paddies.  Given the
              worldwide cultivation of rice, this newly identified source is of potential
              global importance.  However, measurements are sparse.  In addition, atmospheric
              mixing ratios for the higher molecular weight analogs (chloro- and
              bromoethanes) are poorly known and there exists little information concerning
              the emission sources for these compounds.   The potential importance of
              halomethanes and haloethanes to the global atmosphere is due to their chemical
              behavior in the atmosphere that is expected to be similar to the well studied
              and better understood  class of synthetic chlorofluorocarbons.  Thus, methyl
              and ethyl halide gases also may produce profound effects on the concentrations
              and distributions of stratospheric ozone.
 
	This renewal project supports a 
              series of rice field measurements located in California and Texas.  Flux
              chambers will be placed over rice plants and samples will be collected into
              stainless canisters, and analyzed for methyl and ethyl halides by gas
              chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS).  The field experiments will produce
              quantitative data for updating the current global emission estimates of methyl
              and ethyl halides.  It is possible these emission data will lead to revised
              calculations for the lifetime of methyl bromide, thus changing the calculated
              impact of this gas on stratospheric ozone concentrations and distributions. 
              Further, the new emissions data should lead to significant improvement in the
              current understanding of the relative roles of natural and anthropogenic
              sources of methyl chloride and methyl bromide.   The benefit to atmospheric
              chemistry is the improved accuracy  of atmospheric models which investigate the
              global sources and sinks of alkyl halide gases.

