Title       : Environmental Policy Instrument Choice: A Comparison of Canada and the United
               States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1998     
File        : a9731030

Award Number: 9731030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Richards kenricha@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9198,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Richards  The study of policy instrument choice addresses the question of which
              policy instruments most cost-effectively produce the desired policy outcome and
              attempts to explain why certain policy instruments have been adopted in
              particular cases.  This conference focuses on gaining a greater understanding
              of the policy instrument choice field through a comparison of environmental
              policy instrument choice in Canada and the United States.  The primary goal of
              the conference is to facilitate discussion and research that explains the
              variation in instrument choice as it applies to environmental and natural
              resource issues in the two countries.  A wide range of explanatory factors will
              be explored, including differences in industrial structure, legal structure,
              nature of environmental problems, division of power, institutional structure,
              political milieu, public finance system, and public involvement.  Session
              topics have been arranged to first develop a framework for comparison of
              instrument choice in Canada and the United States.  Sessions will then examine
              various types of policy instruments regarding the environment (e.g., regulatory
              instruments, taxes and marketable allowances, government purchase, voluntary
              programs) in more depth.  Each session will have presenters from both the
              United States and Canada and will consider applications to various
              environmental fields (e.g., air pollution, water pollution, forestry resources,
              and fisheries.)  Because of the many economic, political and legal factors
              involved in policy choice, the conference is designed to be multi-disciplinary
              in nature.  Participants will come from a wide range of academic areas
              including economics, political science, anthropology, administrative science
              and law.  In addition, practitioners from both the Canadian and U.S.
              governments will be involved as presenters, commentators and discussants.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
