Title       : Contaminant Particle Formation in Radio Frequency Silane Plasmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a9731568

Award Number: 9731568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169148             (Estimated)
Investigator: Uwe R. Kortshagen uk@me.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Girshick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9731568
Kortshagen
The formation of ultrafine particles in processing plasmas
              has been a concern for some years.  Contaminant particles can cause
              considerable product yield loss in microelectronics fabrication or they can
              severely impair the quality of thin films used for the production of
              photovoltaic cells or the coating of optical devices.
While considerable
              progress has been made in the understanding of the transport and charging of
              micrometer-sized particles in plasmas, little is known about the nucleation of
              particles and the behavior of nanometer-sized particles.  The nucleation and
              growth of small particles is observed in particular in plasma enhanced chemical
              vapor deposition systems.  The particle formation in silane plasmas, which are
              of great importance for the deposition of amorphous silicon, has been
              extensively studied, however, the true nature of the particle formation
              mechanism has not been determined.  Different and even contradicting scenarios
              for particle formation in silane plasmas have been proposed by various
              researchers.  For instance, the important precursor for the particle nucleation
              in silane plasmas is still controversially discussed.  The influence of the
              plasma conditions on the nucleation process are not understood.  Also,
              experimental results on the particle nucleation phase are scarce, due to the
              serious difficulties in in-situ detection of nanometer-sized particles.
Since
              the understanding of particle nucleation is a very complex problem, a combined
              experimental and theoretical approach will be pursued in the proposed project. 
              The proposed research has three main objectives: 1. A nucleation model for
              particles in silane plasmas will be developed which takes into account the
              chemical aspects involved. 2. The nucleation model will be coupled to a
              self-consistent plasma model for a silane plasma chemical vapor deposition
              system in order to enable predictions about the occurrence of particle
              nucleation. 3. The model to be developed will be verified by a number of
              experimental studies on a capacitively coupled RF discharge in diluted
              silane.
The nucleation model to be developed will consider the formation of
              hydrogenated silicon clusters by both anionic and neutral mechanisms.  It will
              be coupled to an aerosol model capable of predicting particle growth,
              coagulation and transport.  This model will be combined with a kinetic
              discharge model for a capacitive RF discharge.  The kinetic discharge model,
              which will be based on already existing codes, will be used to calculate the
              spatial profile of the important species involved in the nucleation process. 
              Since the nucleation rate depends sensitively on the precursor concentrations
              it is expected that predictions about nucleation thresholds and the spatial
              location of nucleation regions can be obtained.  Unlike in some other
              approaches, the effects of a non- Maxwellian electron distribution function,
              which are crucial for an accurate determination of various chemical reaction
              rates, will be taken into account by calculating the actual distribution
              function by solution of the Boltzmann equation.
The experimental studies will
              focus on the detection of small particles in order to verify the nucleation
              model and on the measurement of the electron distribution function using
              Langmuir probes in order to test the kinetic discharge model.  For the particle
              detection a high power YAG laser will be used for evaporative particle
              explosion and electron detachment.  Furthermore, a new diagnostics will be
              tested which is based on the propagation of acoustic waves coupled to the
              particle population in the plasma.  This diagnostic should be able to reveal
              in-situ information about the particle size and mass even for subnanometer
              particles, which are extremely difficult to detect with laser methods.


