Title       : Phase Inverted Structures in Polymer Blends: New Chemistry and Processing
               Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9731502

Award Number: 9731502
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173144             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Hudson sdh6@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander M. Jamieson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9731502  S. Hudson/Case Western    Rubber modification to improve
              the impact behavior of polymeric materials is ubiquitous, yet high-impact
              polystyrene (HIPS) is unique in it s efficient use of rubber modifier.  Such
              performance derives from the unique phase-invented morphology of the HIPS
              modifier particles, whose effective volume is several times the actual volume
              of rubbery material.  Recent experiments in our laboratory demonstrate that
              this desirable morphology can be achieved also by blending, if the minor
              (rubbery) component strongly solubilizes an interfacially active block
              copolymer.    Reactive melt processing of polymers is rapidly becoming an
              important industrial process, because of its efficient preparation of
              interfacial agents at the site where they function, thus obviating the
              difficulty involved in transporting them to the interface.  The proposed
              research combines the concepts of reactive melt processing and phase-invented
              blend morphology to develop a novel and efficient approach to mechanical
              property modification of polymers.  The solubilization of the copolymer will be
              varied systematically to determine the optimal blend formulation and
              processing.  The morphology, mechanical properties (tensile and impact), and
              deformation mechanisms of these novel, melt-processable, reactive polymer
              blends will be tested.  The proposed work aims to establish a scientific
              understanding using model blend systems containing polyamides.  A versatile and
              simple chemistry has been selected, so that this new strategy may then be
              extended to a variety of other polymers that now suffer from inefficient
              modification procedures.    The proposed activity also benefits graduate,
              undergraduate and high school teacher training and education.  Collaboration
              with industrial contacts supports this and related projects within PI's
              laboratory.  ***
