Title       : Magnetic, Electronic, and Structural Development in Atomic Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9731592

Award Number: 9731592
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis A. Bloomfield lab3e@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9731592  Bloomfield    This  research program examines magnetic and electronic
              structure  in  isolated atomic clusters, with the goal of connecting present 
              understandings of atoms and molecules to those of bulk materials.  Because  of
              their low dimensionalities, clusters provide  insight  into  surface  effects,
              quantum size effects, thermal  relaxation  processes, and the molecular origins
              of structural and electronic  phase  transitions.  In this program, clusters 
              are  prepared  in  laser-based  sources and studied with molecular beam 
              techniques.  Magnetic  structure  is  probed  using  the  Stern-Gerlach   beam 
              deflection   method   and   effects  such   as   surface-enhanced 
              magnetization, surface and shape induced magnetic anisotropy, and  spin-canting
               in local moment systems are studied.  This  program  also  searches  for
              additional magnetically ordered  clusters  of  normally  non-magnetic  elements
              and alloys.  Cluster  electronic  structure is studied by anion photodetachment
              spectroscopy.  This  work  looks  at the effects of cluster size, composition, 
              shape,  and  temperature  on (1) the modes of electron  accommodation  in 
              these  systems, (2) their structural and electronic  phases,  and  (3) their
              electronically excited states.  %%%  This  research  program  examines  the 
              magnetic  and  electronic  properties of material particles only slightly
              larger than  atoms  themselves,  as a way to bridge the gap in understanding 
              between  solids  and  molecules.  As electronic  components  and  magnetic 
              memory systems become smaller, they reach sizes at which they can  no  longer
              be treated simply as small versions of larger objects.  Instead,  these tiny
              devices must be viewed in part as  elaborate  molecular  systems,  with the
              complexities of quantum  mechanics,  thermal  fluctuations,  and  surface 
              structure  altering   their  behavior.  By  studying  magnetism in  clusters 
              of  atoms,  this  research  program  is learning how magnetism in  solids 
              develops  from molecular st ructure and is mapping out possibilities for the 
              ultimate  generation of magnetic storage media. In  its  work  on  electronic 
              and  spatial structure in clusters, this  program  is  exploring  the  world of
              insulators and metals  near  the  atomic  scale  and is examining their
              behaviors when they become so small  that nearly all their atoms are on their
              surfaces.  ***
