Title       : The Rheology of Polymer Solutions in Ultrathin Films via a Combined Finite
               Elements-Brownian Dynamics Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a9731896

Award Number: 9731896
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael W. Plesniak                     
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Stefan G. Shaqfeh eric@chemeng.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    Proposal Number:  CTS-9731896    Principal Investigator:  Shaqfeh   
              This is a grant to address a number of important problems in the study of
              polymer rheology that can be characterized as non-continuum or non-local. 
              These are typically associated with the influence of boundaries or constrained
              environments on the stress-strain rate relationship.  The burgeoning interest
              in these problems arises from the growing need to process materials at the
              molecular level.  In most cases, new physical principles need to be applied to
              such problems because the most fundamental relationships, e.g. the relationship
              between the tension along a molecular backbone and the average extra stress in
              the mixture, need to be derived anew.  Moreover these highly constrained flow
              fields are now only beginning to be experimentally interrogated, but the early
              data suggests that qualitatively new Theological behavior needs to be
              understood in these cases. Three problems that can serve as paradigms for
              theoretical model-building have been selected for  study: a) the
              Couette-Poiseuille flow of flexible chains in solution when the pore or channel
              thickness is comparable to the radius of gyration of the polymers, b) the bulk
              shearing flow of polymer solutions near a boundary where the interface may
              contain adsorbed or grafted polymer layers, and c) the squeeze flow lubrication
              of "wet" polymer brush covered surfaces.  The technique will be used is a novel
              hybrid scheme involving self-consistent flow calculations using HP adaptive
              finite elements and large scale Brownian dynamics simulations of bead-rod
              (Kramer's) chains.
