Title       : Economic Integration, Competition and Welfare: A Study of the Automobile
               Industry in Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a9731979

Award Number: 9731979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156271             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pinelopi Goldberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The effects of economic integration on competition and welfare have been of
              interest to economists for some time. For anyone interested in these issues,
              the European automobile industry during the 1980s and 1990s provides a unique
              study experiment. The industry has been characterized by significant internal
              and external trade barriers, many of which were eliminated in 1992. Issues of
              market power and labor rents seem a priori important, given the oligopolistic
              structure of the sector and the presence of unions. In addition, car prices in
              European countries are characterized by large and persistent differences across
              countries, that are often viewed as the result of market segmentation and price
              discriminating practices. Empirically, the price dispersion in the European
              market coincides with large exchange rate movements and substantial, evolving
              cross country differences in value added taxes, botch of which are bound to be
              affected by the process of economic integration.  The purpose of this project
              is to shed light on these issues and estimate the effects of various aspects of
              economic integration, using detailed data on prices, characteristics, market
              shares and production location of all available car models in seven European
              countries over the period 1980   1996. Contrary to previous studies that
              employed a calibration approach, this study is based on econometric estimates
              of the relevant parameters. This research proceeds in three steps. The first is
              to carry out a descriptive analysis to document the basic patterns in the price
              data and relate them to factors such as exchange and tax rates, demographic
              characteristics, and trade restrictions, using a reduced form approach. A
              question of particular interest is whether prices across European countries
              appear to converge over time, as European integration progresses and the year
              for the European Monetary Union approaches.  The second step is to estimate a
              structural model of oligopoly with product differentiation, to obtain the
              demand and cost parameters required in policy simulations and welfare
              calculations. The model incorporates exchange rate fluctuations, tax
              differences, and multicountry production. Apart from forming the basis for the
              simulations, the structural framework offers the advantage of providing
              estimates of the unobserved marginal costs and markups in the industry. These
              estimates are required in order to address the effects of economic integration
              on competition.  The third step in the analysis is to use the estimated
              structural model parameters in simulations to investigate the effects of
              various aspects of economic integration on welfare in European countries. The
              four main aspects of integration are: (a) removal of internal tariff barriers,
              (b) tax harmonization, (c) transition to a common currency, and (d) elimination
              of market segmentation and price discrimination.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
