Title       : Dissertation Research: Animal Exploitation at Aksum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1998      
File        : a9731243

Award Number: 9731243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6528               (Estimated)
Investigator: Fiona Marshall fmarshal@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Fiona Marshall, Mr. Chester Cain will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze faunal remains recovered through
              archaeological excavation from the site of Aksum, the ancient capital of
              Ethiopia. The process which led to the rise of civilization took place
              independently in many parts of both Old and New World. Archaeologists work in a
              comparative context and wish to reconstruct these individual cases in order to
              compare them and search for underlying processes of cultural development. While
              some regions of the world such as China, the Near East and Middle America have
              been the subject of extensive study, others are much less well known. Ethiopia
              falls within this latter category. Available data indicate that the Ethiopian
              highlands served as a center for the domestication of such plant species as
              sorghum and millet (as well as other less well known species) and that the
              donkey may also have been domesticated in the area. Prehistoric and early
              historic peoples built cities with impressive stone carved monuments and
              buildings. During much of the first millennium Aksum served as capital of a
              widespread empire.   Only in the last several years has work at the site been
              possible and Mr. Cain has participated in the field research. Excavations have
              yielded large numbers of animal bones, both wild and domestic and these have
              been recovered in several different social contexts. With National Science
              Foundation support Mr. Cain will analyze these materials. The study has two
              goals. First it will provide a list of species consumed and their relative
              frequencies. On this basis it will be possible to reconstruct diet. Secondly,
              distribution of species and body part in different portions of the site will be
              determined. This provides insight into the economic context of consumption and
              gives some indication of the methods of social control which underlie it. In
              some instances butchering and distribution of meat is centrally controlled.
              Animals are butchered in one place the meat distributed to individual household
              units and this implies a high degree of hierarchical organization. In others
              cases production essentially takes place on a household level.  This research
              is important for several reasons. It will shed new light on how empires are
              organized and function. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists
              and assist in training a promising young scientist.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
