Title       : ERC: Research Center for the Engineering of Living Tissues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a9731643

Award Number: 9731643
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Sohi Rastegar                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15600000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Nerem robert.nerem@ibb.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9731643  NEREM    This award initiates the Engineering Research Center for the
              Engineering of Living Tissues.  The lead institution is the Georgia Institute
              of Technology and the Emory University School of Medicine is a core partner
              institution.  The award funds the first five years of effort under a new
              cooperative agreement, with a potential duration of ten years.  This ERC will
              address an area of great importance to health and health care at an opportune
              time.  The tissue engineering industry is at a nascent stage, and many of the
              developments in the field are based on empiricism or art.  This center will
              bring a more fundamental understanding of the underlying biological and
              engineering principles to the area of tissue engineering, filling the gap that
              currently exists between academic understanding and industrial reduction to
              practice.  Equally, if not more importantly, this Center will produce well
              trained engineers with a strong background in the biological and medical
              sciences who have worked closely with clinical practitioners and industry.   
              This ERC focuses on the design and development of tissue substitutes that
              replace, enhance or maintain natural tissue function.  The Center's research
              program is organized into three thrusts that represent a continuum of the
              challenges of tissue engineering:  cell technology, cell construct technology
              (prototype organ or tissues structures) and integration into living systems. 
              Integrated with expertise in medical theory and practice, the ERC will carry
              out research on the underlying biology and immune response of tissue cells, the
              application of fundamental engineering design concepts to the growth and
              function of cell structures or constructs, and the incorporation of these
              constructs into living systems.  This Center promises to produce breakthroughs
              in both the underlying understanding of tissue function and the technology
              required for tissue replacement.    The two institutions will develop a joint
              program of bioengineering in support of th e ERC.  ERC outreach will involve
              Spellman College and Morehouse College, local historically Black institutions,
              and a special program to involve local high school teachers and their students.
               Industry will be actively involved through a group of firms, representing both
              emerging start-up and well-established firms.    This award is the outcome of
              the entry of this ERC's pre-proposal in the FY 1997-98 Engineering Research
              Centers Competition under the ERC Program Announcement, NSF 97-5.
