Title       : US-South Africa Dissertation Enhancement: Modeling of Herbivore Population
               Dynamics at Kruger National Park
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a9731202

Award Number: 9731202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne Marcus Getz getz@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jessica Flint  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1066,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9731004  Getz & Fortmann    This award supports 22 participants  (8 US and 14
              African) in the US-Southern Africa Workshop on the Scientific Foundations of
              Programs for Community Based Management of Wildlife, to be held at Gwaai River,
              Zimbabwe, August 4-7, 1998.  Additional participants include 2 from Europe, and
              about 40 from the Southern Africa region, including South Africa.  The
              co-organizers are Drs. Wayne Getz and Louise Fortmann, Department of
              Environmental Science, Policy, and Management at the University of California,
              Berkeley, and Dr. David Cumming, Head of the World Wildlife Fund Program
              Officer in Harare, Zimbabwe.  This multidisciplinary workshop will include
              natural and social scientists, resource managers, and policy makers.      Many
              parts of Southern Africa are starting to use community based natural resource
              management (CBNRM) programs to preserve rural savanna lands as a mean of
              augmenting national park areas.  Currently there is a great deal of variation
              among the sets of data collected, interpreted, and disseminated by the CBNRM
              programs.  As a result there are no reliable regional assessments on these
              ecosystems, or how development and global change is affecting them.  During
              this workshop participants will learn about CBNRM programs in Botswana,
              Namibia, and Zimbabwe, after which they will form working groups in the areas
              of: 1) environmental monitoring and evaluation, 2) software and hardware
              programs, and 3) community management and program evaluation.  Each group will
              identify its database needs and requirements, and then collectively they will
              establish a common set of scientific protocols and software packages to be used
              by all CBNRM programs for the collection, interpretation, and management of
              data, and for program evaluation.  The use of these common protocols and
              software packages will increase the reliability of data collections and
              assessments, which will enable the information to be used for a new, long-term
              regional data base on Southern Africa's savanna ecos ystems which are outside
              of the national parks--a very significant contribution to the region's
              scientific infrastructure.  The availability of such a database will enable
              researchers worldwide to have access to new knowledge about the loss of
              biodiversity in Southern Africa.  The common protocols will also be used in a
              SAVE GAME (Southern African Veld Ecosystems Geographic Assessment, Monitoring,
              & Evaluation) pilot program to provide rural Southern Africa areas with
              scientifically well designed CBNRM programs.  This grant will support the
              participation of two graduate students from the United States.  The Division of
              International Programs and the Division of Biological Infrastructure are
              jointly supporting this workshop.
