Title       : Use of Molecular Techniques to Assess Diversity Among the Bdellovibrios
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1998      
File        : a9731055

Award Number: 9731055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry N. Williams hnw001@dental.umaryland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9135,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Bdellovibrios are procaryotic predators which prey on susceptible gram
              negative bacilli basteria. The unique predatory and intraperiplasmic growth
              phase makes the lifestyle of the bdellovibrios different from that of other
              bacteria and places these organisms in a distinctive class. Although the
              bdellovibrios are widely distributed in nature, little is known about the
              diversity of the organisms in various ecosystems.  Characterization of
              different isolates of the predatory bacteria has been insufficient to allow for
              more than a rudimentary classification scheme and taxonomic system. The
              halophilic group of the bdellovibrios are all placed in one group in the
              existing system. This situation exists because state of-the art molecular
              methods used to differentiate among bacterial species and subspecies have not
              been applied to the study of these organisms.   The aim of this project is to
              use the available molecular fingerprinting and ribosomal RNA sequencing
              techniques to differentiate among over 40 isolates of bdellovibrios in Dr.
              Williams' collection, which is the most extensive one known. Isolates in this
              collection were obtained from various environmental sources from wide
              geographical areas of the world including the Chesapeake Bay, coastal waters of
              St. Johns Island in the Caribbean, Puerto Rico, Bermuda, Hawaii, several
              isolates from soil, sewage and rivers in Russia and water and soil samples from
              Nigeria.  Another major aim of this project, which is consistent with those of
              the Minority Career Advancement Award, is to provide the Principal Investigator
              with the opportunity to develop expertise in the application of molecular
              techniques to his area of expertise, the ecology of the bdellovibrios.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
