Title       : Reconceptualizing Mathematics Teaching and Learning Through Professional
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a9731424

Award Number: 9731424
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathryn B. Chval                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3596400            (Estimated)
Investigator: Genevieve Hanlon GHanlon@nycboe.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lucy West  (Principal Investigator former)
              Catherine Fosnot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Community Sch Dist 2
	      333 Seventh Avenue
	      New York, NY  102821002    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                      9731424  Mahon     The Reconceptualizing Mathematics Teaching and
              Learning through Professional Development Local Systemic Change project
              involves Community School District Two of New York City and the following
              higher education partners: City University of New York, Bank Street College,
              and New York University.  The project also involves Marilyn Burns' Education
              Associates, the Federal Reserve Bank, and the 14th Street Business Improvement
              District as private sector partners.  The project focuses on the implementation
              of mathematics education reform initiatives at the K-8 levels.  It is the
              project's goal to enhance the capacity of all 1,200 teachers of K-8 mathematics
              by focusing on their mathematics content knowledge, challenging their
              instructional beliefs, and building their ability to utilize
              constructivist-based instructional strategies.       The project plans to
              implement the NSF-funded Investigations (elementary) and Connected Mathematics
              (middle) curriculum materials.  It will also link up with the NSF-funded
              Mathematics in the City Project and New York's Urban Systemic Initiative.  A
              very thorough evaluation of the project will be completed, via a subcontract
              with New York University.       District Two is the only one of New York City's
              32 school districts to work with Lauren Resnick and Marc Tucker's New Standards
              Project.  The district is now implementing the New Standards and this project
              will expand District Two's efforts in professional development and the use of
              exemplary curriculum.        An interesting aspect of this project is the use
              of a variety of partners and prior and current projects in extending
              professional development efforts to include the implementation of a
              standards-based K-8 mathematics curriculum.
