Title       : Realistic Computer Graphics for Natural Scenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9731859

Award Number: 9731859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366926             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. Shirley shirley@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian E. Smits  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to improve the quality of computer graphic  images of outdoor,
              natural scenes.  To date, renderings of  outdoor terrain have had a
              cartoon-like quality that  significantly distracts from a sense of realism. 
              Partially, this  is due to computational and source data constraints that limit
               the geometric complexity of terrain that can be rendered.  The  thesis of the
              research described here is that illumination and  material properties play an
              equally important role in creating a  sense of realism from these scenes. 
              Moreover, there are  important interactions between geometry, illumination, and
               material properties in a model of outdoor terrain that should be  understood
              when real-time constraints must also be satisfied.    Significant progress has
              been made in the last decade in  understanding how to generate realistic
              renderings of indoor  scenes.  The general approach is to analyze the physics
              of light  transport in such environments and then to embody approximations  to
              the physics in computational algorithms.  Correct modeling of  illumination and
              material properties is vital.  It is now known  that a sense of realism depends
              critically on accounting for  shadows, secondary illumination, and non-uniform
              reflectance  functions.  Accurately approximating the effect of these 
              properties involves great computational expense.  As a result,  methods for
              rendering realistic imagery almost always exploit  assumptions about the nature
              of the geometric structure and  illumination and materials properties likely to
              be encountered.  Most of these assumptions derive from a presumption of indoor 
              environments.    Outdoor scenes present very different computational 
              characteristics.  While the physics is the same, geometry,  illumination, and
              reflectance properties are all distinctly  different.  Many of the techniques
              developed to support realistic  rendering of indoor scenes will require
              substantial modifications  for natural, outdoor environments.  The most 
              difficult computational prob lem to overcome is the need to be  able to
              aggregate the effects of micro-structures into large  enough units that they
              can be rendered effectively, while at the  same time preserving key aspects of
              visual appearance.  This  problem exists across a wide range of scales, ranging
              from  foliage, in which a collection of individual leaves generates a 
              collective appearance that is quite different than that of the  constituent
              members, to distant landmarks, where detail must be  suppressed without
              removing those properties that make landmarks  distinctive and thus useful.
