Title       : U.S.-Mexico Joint Workshop on Research and Educational Opportunities in
               Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9731022

Award Number: 9731022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1997  
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28800              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Rene Villalobos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5922,9149,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9731022  Villalobos    This award will support a U. S.-Mexico program
              development  workshop on research and educational opportunities in 
              manufacturing.  Organized by Prof. Rene Villalobos of the  University of Texas
              at El Paso and Prof. Louis Martin Vega  from Lehigh University for the U.S.
              side, and Prof. Eugenio  Garcia of the Instituto Tecnologico de Monterrey and
              Prof.  Felipe Rubio of the Centro de Investigacion y Asistencia  Tecnica del
              Estado de Queretaro for the Mexican side, the  workshop will serve to identify
              opportunities for joint  research between the academic and industrial
              communities in  both countries and as a catalyst for the development of 
              academic/governmental/industrial partnerships.    The links in the area of
              manufacturing between the United  States and Mexico are becoming stronger.  The
              evolution of  manufacturing in the United States, the increased presence  of
              Mexican companies in the U.S. market, and the  implementation of the North
              American Free Trade Agreement  (NAFTA) are all conducive to the expansion of
              integrated  manufacturing operations between the two countries.  For  these
              reasons, the NSF and the Mexican National Council for  Science and Technology
              (CONACYT) have agreed to support this  program development workshop with the
              expectation that it  will arrive at a set of recommendations that will be
              useful  to both agencies and to others concerning the manufacturing  arena. 
              The activity is being jointly funded on the NSF side  by the Division of
              Design, Manufacture, & Industrial  Innovation (DMII) and the Division of
              International  Programs.  ***
