Title       : Video Cases for Mathematics Professional Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a9731339

Award Number: 9731339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica M. Neagoy                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1958725            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas A. Branca   (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith Mumme  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nanette Seago  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9731339  Branca    This four-year project creates K-12 mathematics professional
              curriculum materials based on classroom videos.  The materials consist of a
              series of professional development sessions based on video cases from grades
              K-12 and include such features as:  videoclips, student work samples, teacher
              and mathematician commentaries, and facilitation guides that allow materials to
              be used flexibly in many settings and with a variety of audiences from K-12. 
              Mathematicians explicate the mathematical content in the video lessons through
              analyses and discussions.  Their resulting commentaries and videotaped
              discussions provide a perspective to enrich case discussions about the
              mathematics situated in practice, enhancing opportunities for increased
              mathematical content knowledge.  Building on the methodology and technology of
              the TIMSS Video Study, the technological tools provide efficient and flexible
              access to the features of the video cases.  The tools that accompany each case
              permit educators to engage in face-to-face and Internet conversations about the
              video cases, enhancing analysis opportunities and extending professional
              development opportunities beyond the "workshop" door.  The facilitation guides
              will provide strategies to engage participants in critical discussions aimed at
              improving mathematics teaching practices K-12.       The proposed modules are: 
              (1) "Algebraic Thinking as Generalized Arithmetic," which will examine how
              algebraic ideas at the secondary level are developed from elementary work with
              number; (2) "Algebraic Thinking from a Geometry Perspective," which will
              examine lessons from middle and high school classrooms and highlight instances
              of algebraic reasoning from geometric models; (3) "Modeling," which will
              provide opportunities to develop a language to discuss and support a robust
              understanding of the role of modeling in mathematics; and, if a fourth module
              is possible, (4) "Language and Representation," a K-12 examination of changes
              in levels of sophistication o f mathematical language from elementary through
              high school.      Project evaluation is focused around three key questions:  *
              What are the effects, if any, of using these video cases in professional
              development on teachers' knowledge of mathematical content and the theories of
              teaching?  * What are the effects, if any, of using these video cases in
              professional development on teachers' instructional decision-making and
              classroom practice?  * What are the effects, if any, of using these video cases
              in professional development on student learning?     The project will work
              closely with the Mathematics Renaissance K-12, Local Systemic Change projects,
              and other Teacher Enhancement projects, using the video cases as part of the
              professional development program with nearly 4000 teachers.  Cost sharing,
              derived primarily from the San Diego State University Foundation, is
              approximately 43% of the NSF request.
