Title       : System for Automated Radio Tracking of Animals in the Field
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a9731002

Award Number: 9731002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $540915             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald P. Larkin r-larkin@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The project will develop a flexible instrument for conducting field studies of
              animals. An array of towers (at least two) permits measurement of XY locations
              of miniature radio transmitters, providing nearly continuous data on dozens of
              subjects simultaneously if necessary. In suitable habitat, accuracy of
              direction finding by each tower is comparable with present labor-intensive
              techniques widely used by observers on foot or in vehicles or aircraft. The
              system has no moving pans and operates with off-the-shelf or slightly modified
              radio transmitters of the kind commonly employed in research on
              wildlife.

Design goals include high data availability; modularity of
              software and hardware; inclusion of autocalibration, environmental data, stares
              reporting, and security features; and able to be configured on scales from
              small study plots to 500-km arrays of towers. Use of some existing equipment
              will permit rapid prototyping of the front end, which in turn will promote
              robust, user-friendly interfaces. This is important, because nearly bulletproof
              operation will be necessary for such an appliance to be accepted and properly
              employed by field biologists. Field testing of the instrument will be done in
              collaboration with ongoing projects run by biologist
              colleagues.

Availability of such an instrument will (1) reduce the cost of
              many studies; (2) greatly (by orders of magnitude, if desired) increase the
              rate and daily coverage of data gathering; (3) permit critical investigations
              that are logistically or technically infeasible without automated collection
              and real-time display of data, and (4) provide high availability and
              flexibility to gather telemetered information from radio transmitters, alert
              the investigators to significant events, and coordinate with concurrent data
              from other instruments. Critical investigations include research fundamental to
              ecology and conservation biology, investigations of endangered species or their
              surrogates, studies of problem species in human-dominated habitats, and
              investigations of disease transmittal and wildlife rehabilitation.


