Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: A New Implicit Polynomial Technology for
               Advanced Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1998     
File        : a9731598

Award Number: 9731598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35520              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Wolovich waw@lems.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 5940,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Description: This award is for support of a cooperative research by Dr. William
              Wolovich, Division of Engineering at Brown University and Dr. Aytul Ercil,
              Department of Industrial Engineering at Bogazici University in Istanbul,
              Turkey.  They plan to extend and apply recent advances made in the US and
              Turkey on implicit polynomials (IP) technology in order to improve the ways
              manufactured objects are modeled, identified, measured, aligned, designed and
              fabricated.  Specifically, they plan to apply and extend the new IP
              technologies, including conic-line factorizations and related-point ratios, 3L
              and PIM fitting algorithms, boundary curve blending procedures, and new scaling
              and shaping methods to a wide variety of manufactured objects.  They will
              investigate: the use of IP models and their algebraic invariants for rapid and
              accurate object identification and alignment; 3L fitting of experimental
              (vision and CMM) data to obtain useful IP models for reverse engineering and
              metrology; physical fabrication (CAM) of 3D objects modeled using IP equations;
              new ways of controlling a CMM while maintaining proper tool tip orientations;
              use of IP curve blending to enhance industrial design, including the various
              ways that IP curves and surfaces can be scaled and shaped to produce simple and
              innovative designs; and identification and reconstruction of 3D objects from 2D
              boundary information.    Scope: the U.S. PI is well known and his laboratory is
              recognized in this field.  The Turkish scientist, who also received her
              doctorate at Brown, is a professor at one of Turkey's best universities.  At
              least two, and possibly three, graduate students from Brown University will
              have opportunities to work in this international collaboration.  They will be
              joined by a similar number of graduate students from Bogazici University.  The
              two sides have complementary facilities, with Brown offering excellent
              facilities in the Laboratory for Engineering Man/Machine Systems (LEMS),
              including workstations dedicated to experiments in 3D object visualization, and
              a state-of-the-art Chameleon Coordinate Measuring Machine (CMM) with both
              mechanical and laser scanning probes.  The Industrial Engineering Department at
              Bogazici is using excellent visual facilities that were developed by Dr. Ercil,
              and used in collaboration with industrial partners.  This proposal meets INT
              objective of supporting US-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
