Title       : Collaborative Research: Measurement of Aerosol Chemical and Radiative Properties
               in Nepal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9731098

Award Number: 9731098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack E. Dibb jack.dibb@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project supports an aerosol sampling program that will be carried out in
              collaboration between the University of New Hampshire, the University of
              Colorado/CIRES, and the Nepalese Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM).
              The concentrations of soluble ionic species, organic carbon and elemental
              carbon in aerosol will be determined on a continuous basis (at a nominal 2-day
              resolution) at these stations for approximately two years. This filter sampling
              will be complemented by continuous multi-wavelength aerosol optical depth
              measurements at each station. One station will be situated near Kathmandu, and
              the other at an altitude of 4100 m. The primary objective is to determine the
              modifications in the aerosol content of air masses as they traverse Nepal from
              south to north and encounter the Himalayan Massif. The alternating influence of
              summer monsoon air from the Bay of Bengal and wintertime westerlies are
              expected to cause large seasonal variations in the concentration and
              composition of aerosols. Optical depth measurements will provide information on
              the relationships between surface-level air masses and the aerosol burden in
              the overlying column. Little is currently known about the atmospheric chemistry
              over much of central Asia due to a lack of systematic sampling in this broad
              region. The central Asian monsoon circulation is the primary source of water
              for densely populated regions of Asia, and is also a major component of the
              global climate system. Model predictions suggest that anthropogenic
              modifications of atmospheric composition could greatly modify regional climate,
              including the strength of the summer monsoon and therefore the amount of much
              needed precipitation. 
