Title       : Corporate Governance Around the World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9731336

Award Number: 9731336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364725             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei Shleifer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Vishny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the institutions of corporate governance around the world,
              with a particular focus on the role of legal institutions in addressing agency
              problems between corporate insiders and outside investors, and on corporate
              decisions made in different countries operating under different legal
              institutions. The approach in all the specific projects is to compare outcomes
              across countries that have different legal institutions. Earlier work has shown
              that legal institutions governing investor protection, including both the
              nature of the laws and the quality of their enforcement, differ significantly
              across countries and that these differences matter enormously for how firms are
              owned and financed. Three projects are undertaken that continue this line of
              analysis, but deal with new topics.  The first project  deals with dividend
              policies around the world. Recent research has argued that dividend policies
              help to address agency problems because the cash that is disgorged by firms to
              investors cannot be wasted or diverted by corporate insiders. There are two
              broad versions of the agency theory of dividends: one, dividends are an outcome
              of investors using their powers to force firms to disgorge cash; another, firms
              choose to pay dividends to establish a reputation for good treatment of
              investors, so that they can raise more equity funds in the future. These two
              theories have different predictions for dividend policies of firms operating
              under different legal regimes. The predictions of these theories on a cross
              section of about 4,000 firms from 33 countries.  The second project focuses on
              ownership patterns of large corporations in 25 to30 wealthy economies. While
              there is a general recognition that the Berle Means widely held corporation is
              a peculiarity of wealthy Anglo Saxon economies, there is a conspicuous gap both
              in the theory of ownership of firms operating in poor legal environments, and
              in the knowledge of facts in this area. A database of about 30 large firms per
              country is being constructed, which contains detailed information on the
              ownership structure of each firm. In most countries, firms are owned by other
              firms, holding companies, and financial institutions, which in turn are owned
              by more firms and institutions, etc. An attempt is made to `go up the pyramids`
              and to identify the ultimate owners of each firm. The data will allow for the
              development of basic facts about ownership patterns of firms in different
              countries.   The third project focuses on government ownership of commercial
              banks around the world, which appears to be a pervasive phenomenon. Government
              finance is one of the three ways of financing economic growth, in addition to
              capital markets and private banks. The effects of government ownership of banks
              on economic growth is examined, and compared to the effects of private
              financing. To this end, a database is being constructed of both complete and
              partial government ownership of the largest commercial banks in over 90
              countries. These data are used to examine the growth question, and to also
              address the more microeconomic question of how government ownership of banks
              influences the allocation of credit in different countries between private and
              state firms, firms of different sizes, and firms in different sectors of the
              economy.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
