Title       : POWRE: Visiting Professorship at Harvey Mudd College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1997 
File        : a9731797

Award Number: 9731797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114196             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Barsony   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1207,1215,1592,9225,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT - BARSONY    A Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and
              Engineering  (POWRE)award will support an 18-month Visiting Professorship at
              the  Physics Department at Harvey Mudd College.  This award will allow a  full
              time collaboration with Prof. Alex Rudolph to develop the  Claremont-Riverside
              InfraRed CAMera (CLRIRCAM-pronounced "clearer cam")  project.  The visit will
              start in January of 1998.  Harvey Mudd College  is one of the Claremont
              Colleges, a group of five small colleges  located in Claremont, California. 
              Pomona College, the oldest and  largest of the five, owns a 1.0-meter
              telescope, whose use is shared  among the five colleges.  A three-year
              collaboration with Dr. Rudolph  involves the acquisition of a near-infrared
              array camera for this  telescope.    The POWRE Visiting Professorship at Harvey
              Mudd College will be spent  developing the design specifications for the
              camera, developing  software for data acquisition-including an efficient
              mosaicing mode,  integrating the camera control software with the telescope
              control  software, developing an efficient data archiving system using
              writeable  CD-ROMs, and developing IDL data reduction routines for photometry, 
              astrometry, mosaicing, and re-scaling and combining of multi-color  images. 
              Well-documented software, and student manuals on the use of  the telescope, the
              instrument, and on the correct steps for data-taking  and data reduction with
              CLRIRCAM will be produced.    The Pomona College 1.0-meter telescope is a
              superb instrument for the  CLRIRCAM project.  It is located at Table Mountain
              Observatory, a high,  dry site, at an altitude of 7200 feet, on the other side
              of the San  Gabriel Mountains away from the lights of the Los Angeles basin,
              making  it ideal for near-infrared observations.  CLRIRCAM will open up 
              astronomical research opportunities for an entire community, including 
              faculty, post-docs, graduate students, and undergraduates from each of  the six
              collaborating institutions.    The research plans usi ng CLRIRCAM include
              systematic large-area  multi-color imaging surveys of dark, interstellar
              molecular clouds to  study embedded young stars and star clusters, the search
              for the  youngest protostars, and frequent and long-term monitoring projects of
               variable young stellar objects (YSOs) to elucidate infall, outflow, and  disk
              accretion mechanisms. The YSO monitoring projects have the  potential to lead
              to new breakthroughs in our understanding of  fundamental physics relating to
              the gas motions in the immediate  circumstellar environments of young stars,
              that may also shed some  light on planet formation scenarios.
