Title       : REU: Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory Summer Intern Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a9731923

Award Number: 9731923
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathleen D. Eastwood                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417630             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine Jones cjf@cfa.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberly Dow  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian-Astrophys Obs
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    716/831-3051

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1217,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9731923  Dow    The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) Summer Intern
              Program offers talented undergraduates, interested in a career in the physical
              sciences, the opportunity to work with a scientist for ten weeks during the
              summer at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge, 
              Massachusetts.   Ten students are recruited nationally each year for the
              program.  Women, minorities, persons with disabilities, and students from
              colleges where research opportunities are limited are encouraged to apply.   
              The potential areas of research for the students include: observational and
              theoretical cosmology, extragalactic and galactic astronomy, interstellar
              medium and star formation, laboratory astrophysics, supernovae and supernovae
              remnants, and planetary science.   The program activities include trips to
              nearby observatories, taking part in informal scientific talks, and attending a
              colloquium series.  The students write a research paper and present the results
              of their projects at an Intern  Symposium at the end of the summer.  The
              students will have an opportunity to use optical and radio telescopes at the
              Oak Ridge Observatory in Massachusetts and  to visit Haystack Radio
              Observatory,  a major research facility in Massachusetts not too far from
              Cambridge.  There will  be opportunities for selected students to present a
              paper on the results of their research at a professional society meeting.   
              The program begins in mid-June and runs until mid-August each year.   The
              applicants must be U.S. citizens or permanent residents and enrolled in a
              degree program leading to a bachelor's degree.  The application deadline is
              February 15th.  The information about the program, including application
              information, is available at the SAO Summer Intern Program Web site:
              http://hea-www.harvard.edu/REU/REU.html.  ***
