Title       : Error Bounds and Algorithms for Complementarity and Related Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1998        
File        : a9731273

Award Number: 9731273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117087             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Y. Tseng tseng@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              An error bound for a problem is a bound on the distance from any  point to the
              solution set by some error function evaluated at  that point.  There recently
              has been active interest in using  error bounds to design and analyze solution
              methods for  optimization and complementarity and variational inequality 
              problems.  One focus of this project is a continued study of this  subject, but
              in new directions.  In particular, the following  problems are being studied:
              (i) error bounds for perturbations  of linear/nonlinear programs and
              complementarity problems, (ii)  the use of error bound to implicitly identify
              active sets and  obtain local superlinear convergence of methods under weaker 
              assumptions  than those existing, (iii) error  bounds and their use in
              estimating the convergence ratio of Gauss-  Seidel and Jacobi methods for
              infinite-dimensional convex  minimization.    A second focus of the project is
              the design and the analysis of  solution methods for  complementarity and
              related problems.  In  particular, these problems are being studied: (iv) 
              branch-and-  bound strategies for globalizing local methods for 
              complementarity problems, (v) extension of  interior path-  following and
              non-interior methods and merit functions for  complementarity problems  to the
              semi-definite setting, i.e., in  the space of symmetric real matrices.    A
              third focus of the project is (vi) the development of epsilon-  relaxation
              methods for  multicommodity network flow problems  and, more generally,
              linearly constrained minimization  problems  with separable convex costs. 
              Computational study of the above  methods is being conducted.
