Title       : U.S.-Korea Seminar on Composites, Seoul, Korea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9731013

Award Number: 9731013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40876              (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Thomas Hahn hahn@seas.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5942,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9731013  Hahn    This award supports the participation of thirteen U.S. 
              researchers in the "1998 U.S.-Korea Seminar on Composites,"  to be held in
              Seoul, Korea, September 7-11, 1998.  The U.S.  and Korean Coordinators are,
              respectively, Dr. H. Thomas  Hahn, Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
              Department,  University of California, Los Angeles, and Dr. Chul Rim  Choe,
              Polymer Hybrids Research Center, Korea Institute of  Science and Technology,
              Seoul.  This seminar will bring  together leading scientists/engineers to
              discuss and  exchange information in this area of research and to  identify
              topics which may be suitably addressed in future  cooperative activities.    As
              a result of extensive research efforts over the past  three decades, a variety
              of composites have become  available which can provide the kind of unique
              performance  that conventional materials cannot.  Unfortunately,  however, such
              unique performance is frequently obtained at  a high cost, hindering wider
              application of these  materials. Nevertheless, cost can be brought down by
              using  an integrated approach to the development and production of  composite
              products.  The necessary integration requires  collaboration of engineers from
              diverse areas of composites  science and technology.  Thus, the main purpose of
              the  proposed joint seminar is to provide a forum for  researchers/educators
              from widely different backgrounds to  exchange information and explore the
              possibility of future  cooperation between the U.S. and Korea to realize mutual
               benefits from the technology of composites.  This project  is relevant to the
              objectives of  the U.S.-Korea  Cooperative Science Program which seeks to
              increase the  level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and 
              engineers through the exchange of scientific information,  ideas, skills, and
              techniques and through collaboration on  problems of mutual benefit.  This
              project will provide  international training and experience for one U.S.
              graduate  student in an important area of res earch.  Korean  participation is
              supported by the Korea Science and  Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).  The Korean
              Society for  Composite Materials (KSCM) will serve as host.  ***
