Title       : ERC: Center for Power Electronics Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a9731677

Award Number: 9731677
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lynn Preston                            
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12350000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred C. Lee fclee@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0207000   Transportation                          
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9731677  LEE    This award initiates the Center for Power Electronic Systems,
              an Engineering Research Center (ERC).  The lead university for the ERC is the
              Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University and the following
              universities are core partners:  the University of Wisconsin at Madison, the
              Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, the North Carolina A&T State University, and
              the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez.  The award funds the first five
              years of effort under a new cooperative agreement, with a potential duration of
              ten years.  The vision of the proposed Center for Power Electronics System
              (C-PES) is to provide the nation with the technological capabilities to become
              a world leader in Power Electronics.  The Center's vision for power vision for
              power electronics technology will make the US the most efficient user of
              electrical energy in the world through the widespread use of power electronics
              systems, improve industrial productivity and competitiveness, eliminate the
              roadblock to further advancements in computer and telecommunication
              technologies, and enable the hybrid electric vehicle technology.    The C-PES
              strategy is to integrate research in a systems-level approach the form of
              Integrated Power Electronics Modules (IPEMs), and to focus upon the lower power
              range of power electronics (1kW-200kW), for example, packaged drivers foor air
              conditioning and refrigeration for domestic and industrial applications, hybrid
              electric vehicles, high performance adjustable speed drives for industrial
              automation, distributed power supply systems for ultra-low voltage and high
              speed very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI) and future generation of
              processors.  The ERC will create an affiliate program of industrial partners to
              initiate a demonstration program in each of the applications areas, joint with
              industrial partners, and concurrently transfer technology to industry.  The ERC
              will create an education program including curriculum developments and
              collaboration, cross-linking distan ce-learning (satellite, video and the
              Internet), joint team teaching, co-operative Ph.D. programs, a wider range of
              options for students, an exchange program, a Virtual Corporation.  This
              Engineering Research Center will significantly increase in the number of
              students graduating with expertise in power electronics.  The collaboration
              with the North Carolina A&T State University and the University of Puerto Rico
              at Mayaguez will play a strong role in increasing the number of graduates from
              under-represented minorities in the field.      This action is the outcome of
              the entry of this ERC's pre-proposal in the FY 1997-1998 Engineering Research
              Centers Competition under the ERC Program Announcement, NSF 97-5.
