Title       : Computational Methods In Markov Chains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9731856

Award Number: 9731856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333574             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl D. Meyer meyer@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to study both practical and  theoretical aspects
              surrounding the application and  implementation of algorithms for computing
              stationary  probabilities and analyzing transient behavior of discrete Markov 
              chains. One facet of the research is dedicated to applications of  discrete
              models for understanding and analyzing the dynamics of  large systems comprised
              of collections of  loosely coupled subsystems such as in the study of queuing
              models  and networks, telecommunications, computer performance  evaluation,
              stochastic automata networks, economic and biological  forecasting, and
              flexible manufacturing systems. Special  attention is devoted to making Markov
              chain technology widely  available to researchers in diverse areas. Specific
              research  objectives include the following aims. (1) The project seeks to 
              relate properties of specific Markov chain models to  characteristics of
              numerical algorithms with the goal of devising  a sieve from which the most
              appropriate algorithm and  implementation for a given application can be
              extracted. (2)  Another objective is to develop both theoretical and numerical 
              mechanisms to facilitate the determination or estimation of  stationary
              probabilities of large-scale finite Markov chains by  utilizing a variety of
              aggregation/disaggregation methods. A  specific goal is to formulate a
              comprehensive theory of errors  which can simplify and unify the analysis of a
              broad range of  aggregation/disaggregation processes and algorithms. (3) The 
              project seeks to develop practical preconditioning techniques for  iterative
              algorithms which can be applied to Markov models which  are formulated as
              stochastic automata networks. (4)  A final  objective is to develop a
              comprehensive software package which  provides access to sophisticated
              computational tools for Markov  modeling. The goal is to structure the package
              for researchers in  applications areas who do not want to be diverted by or
              become  immersed in technical numerical analysis details.
