Title       : Physical Phenomena in Superconducting Arrays, High-Tc Superconductors, and
               Composite Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2000   
File        : a9731511

Award Number: 9731511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Stroud   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9731511  Stroud    Theoretical studies will be conducted in three areas of 
              research.  The first involves the study of the properties of  superconducting
              arrays.  The circumstances under which these  arrays can be made to oscillate
              coherently will be studied  by both numerical and analytical techniques. 
              Additional  calculations are planned to treat vortex motion, quantum  effects,
              flux noise, a.c. magnetic susceptibility, classical  magnetoresistance, and
              long-range interactions in such  arrays, using a variety of theoretical
              techniques.  The  second area is a theoretical investigation of flux lattice 
              melting and related phenomena, primarily in high temperature  superconductors. 
              A previously developed lowest-Landau level  representation will be extended to
              treat flux lattice  melting in the presence of disorder, and to study the 
              behavior of the c-axis Josephson plasmon in the flux liquid  state, both with
              and without disorder.  Further calculations  of flux lattice melting are
              planned in a uniformly  frustrated XY model and a layered London model, both
              with  and without pinning.  As a speculative project, the  possibility of
              extending these approaches to layered  magnetic materials will be investigated.
               Finally, several  aspects of the physics of classically inhomogeneous 
              materials will be studied.  The emphasis will be on the  nonlinear optical
              response of such materials, and on the  linear a.c. response of polycrystals of
              anisotropic  materials (such as quasi-one-dimensional conducting  polymers). 
              It is also planned to examine the possibility of  treating a disordered
              two-dimensional superconductor as a  model system for chaotic propagation of
              classical  electromagnetic waves.  %%%  Theoretical research will be conducted
              in three areas of  research using numerical and analytical techniques.  These 
              three areas are the study of superconducting arrays; flux  lattice melting; and
              classical inhomogeneous materials.  The first two areas are ones which have
              received increased  attention due t o their applicability to the high
              temperature  superconductors.  The third area is one of great interest in 
              designing composite materials with unique (optical)  properties.  ***
