Title       : Research Opportunities for Minorities Program (ROMP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a9731991

Award Number: 9731991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206799             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis Walsh dwalsh@massbay.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Jackson  (Principal Investigator former)
              Donna E. Jensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chandrakant S. Panse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Massachusetts Bay Cmty Col
	      50 Oakland Street
	      Wellesley Hills, MA  024815359    781/239-3000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9731991    The Research Opportunities for Minorities Program is a  highly
              rigorous but exciting research-training program for  undergraduates and
              post-baccalaureates who belong to groups  underrepresented in basic-science
              research.  The program  provides participants up to 2 years of intensive
              research  training in molecular biology through the Biotechnology (BT) 
              Programs at Massachusetts Bay Community College (MBCC).  Concomitant or prior
              admission to the BT program at MBCC is  a prerequisite for entry into the ROMP.
              The majority of  research training occurs in the BT laboratories at MBCC, the 
              most advanced undergraduate research facility in the nation.  However, each
              ROMP student undertakes at least one summer  research externship at one of over
              50 eminent research  institutions in the United States and abroad. 
              Representative of these are the Marine Biological  Laboratory, Woods Hole; the
              Texas Medical Center, Galveston;  The University of Edinburgh, Scotland, and
              the Molecular  Biology Institute of the University of Quebec, Canada.  For 
              every student admitted, the ROMP begins with an intensive 10-  week
              molecular-biology research project conducted at MBCC in  the summer preceding
              their Fall entry into the BT program.  The projects are designed to be
              expandable and extend into  the subsequent academic year.  During the academic
              year, all  ROMP students are assigned 4 or 5 entering Freshman BT  students who
              must conduct tangential sub-projects under the  direction of ROMP students. 
              This mentoring role is designed  to foster leadership skills and
              research-management skills  in ROMP students.  In the second summer of the
              ROMP,  participants can undertake a challenging research externship  at one the
              many foreign and domestic research institutions  that collaborate with the
              ROMP.  Summer research projects  are then extended into the second and final
              year of the  Program as described above.  ROMP students are assisted in 
              advancing to baccalaureate or graduate-degree programs by  MBCC, which h olds
              numerous transfer and application-  articulation agreements with colleges and
              universities  throughout the United States and abroad.
