Title       : Efficient Computation in Finite Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9731799

Award Number: 9731799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104264             (Estimated)
Investigator: Akos Seress akos@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates efficient manipulation of finite groups  and
              estimation of their parameters.  Potential application areas  include
              computational group theory, graph isomorphism testing (of  relevance to
              chemical documentation), efficient interconnection  networks based on groups,
              and possibly, group-based cryptography.  The main focus is on the design and
              analysis of efficient  algorithms for large group theoretic problems.  These
              algorithms  combine profound recent results of group theory with new 
              elementary combinatorial structure theory and estimates, from  which an
              entirely new algorithmic methodology emerged.  Some of  the algorithms work in
              the generality of black box groups, hence  they can be applied both in the
              matrix group and the permutation  group setting.  The project will refine and
              extend the  construction of natural representation of classical matrix groups 
              from arbitrary representations.    Several "pure" algebraic and combinatorial
              problems are also  being studied.  In particular, the interest is in base size 
              problems for permutation groups, problems concerning the action  of groups on
              the power set of the permutation domain, and  problems related to Cayley
              graphs: the diameter of Cayley graphs  and the investigation of non-Cayley
              graphs with vertex-transitive  automorphism group.  Small bases are important
              for fast  implementations and for improving the running time estimates of 
              algorithms.  Estimates of diameters of Cayley graphs are closely  related to
              the expansion rate and through this to a host of basic  questions of the theory
              of computing and probability theory.
