Title       : RUI: Acquisition of CCD Camera and Instrument Selector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9731062

Award Number: 9731062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Caton catondb@appstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appalachian State Univ
	      
	      Boone, NC  28608    704/262-2000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1218,9141,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              AST-9731062  Caton    The study of the properties of other stars provides a
              fundamental understanding of how our sun and other stars function and evolve. 
              Research on eclipsing binary star systems provides the only data on the mass of
              other stars, and the majority of data on their radii.  The variations in the
              observed light during eclipses yields these important basic parameters.  In
              addition, differences between the times of the predicted and observed eclipses
              can be used to determine the internal constitution of stars as well as
              interesting effects of general relativity.    Mira variable stars, on the other
              hand, are single stars that intrinsically vary in brightness and color due to
              pulsation in radius and temperature.  The exact mechanisms for this pulsation
              are still not completely understood.    This project is to upgrade an existing
              telescope by installing a new detector--a CCD camera.  The camera will be used
              with special filters that will allow observers to obtain brightness
              measurements of variable stars throughout their orbit or phase variations.  For
              observations of  the Mira variable stars, the camera will provide photometric
              imaging with nearly simultaneous spectrographic data acquisition on the
              telescope.  For the eclipsing binary work, the new camera will allow data to be
              obtained that is of better quality than previously obtained.  Data may also be
              acquired on nights where thin clouds or other variations in atmospheric
              transparency prevent use of older, photoelectric techniques.    The CCD camera
              will capture electronic images of the field of stars being studied.  These
              images are saved on computer disk files and later studied with special image
              processing software.  The brightness of the variable star is determined by
              comparing the data to data from  other stars of constant brightness in the same
              image.  The measurements made through different color filters will provide
              information on the color, and thus the temperature of the stars.    The upgrade
              to the telescope will also i nclude the installation of an automated instrument
              selector to allow rapid redirection of the telescope beam to either the
              spectrograph, the new CCD camera, or a visual eyepiece.  This will allow rapid
              changeovers between spectroscopy and imaging modes, and will help preserve the
              quality of the instruments by minimizing equipment removal and installations. 
              It will also facilitate the remote operation of the telescope from a
              climate-controlled room, providing a safer and more comfortable environment for
              the observers.    The project will involve undergraduate students in all phases
              of the work (data acquisition, reduction, analysis, and publications).  The new
              equipment will allow more students to participate in exciting and fundamental
              scientific research.  ***
