Title       : ERC: Engineering Research Center for Computer-Integrated Surgical Systems and
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a9731748

Award Number: 9731748
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lynn Preston                            
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6101871            (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell H. Taylor rht@cs.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                9731748  TAYLOR    This award initiates the Engineering Research Center for
              Computer-Integrated Surgical Systems and Technology (CISST).  The lead
              institution is Johns Hopkins University in partnership with Carnegie Mellon
              University and Shadyside Hospital, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology
              and Brigham & Women's Hospital.  The award funds the first five years of effort
              under a new cooperative agreement, with a potential duration of ten years.  The
              vision of the ERC is to advance knowledge and technology needed to develop a
              new generation of minimally invasive surgery techniques for the 21st century,
              which will dramatically impact health care in the U.S., reaping substantial
              economic and social impacts.  Critical to the vision are two core concepts:  1)
              Computer-assisted surgical planning/computer assisted surgical execution
              systems will integrate accurate patient-specific models, surgical plan
              optimization permitting the plans to be carried out accurately, safely, and
              with minimal invasiveness; 2) Surgical Assistant Systems will work
              cooperatively with surgeons in carrying out precise and minimally invasive
              surgical procedures.  The center's research program is multidisciplinary and
              designed to produce fundamental advances in core technologies of modeling and
              analysis and interfacial technologies for surgical systems.  These will be
              integrated into a robust, modular family of systems and subsystems promoting
              rapid prototyping of multi-surgical testbed applications, as well as
              facilitating transfer to end use within commercialized systems.  A
              multidisciplinary educational program will facilitate the training of
              engineers, scientists, and clinicians to advance all phases of this work from
              basic research to deployed systems.  Practitioners and industry will be
              actively involved in the center.  NSF funds will be used for the fundamental
              research needed to explore and advance these concepts, clinical work will be
              supported through other sources.    This award is the outcome of the entry of 
              this ERC's preproposal in the FY 1997-98 Engineering Research Centers
              Competition under the ERC Program Announcement, NSF 97-5.
