Title       : Theory and Applications of Information-Based Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9731858

Award Number: 9731858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299665             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph F. Traub traub@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henryk Wozniakowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses three areas of research in information-  based
              complexity:Theory, Applications, Software.    THEORY: A major theme is the
              study of the computational  complexity of multivariate problems in a large
              number of  variables.  In particular, the computational complexity of path 
              integrals, that is, integrals in an infinite number of variables,  will be
              studied.  Often high dimensional  multivariate problems are intractable in the
              worst case  deterministic setting.  The research emphasis will be on 
              conditions which yield tractability and strong tractability in  various
              settings.    A second research area is to explain why low-discrepancy 
              sequences are excellent for computing the high dimensional  integrals (often,
              the dimensionality is in the hundreds) of  mathematical finance.  This belief
              is based on extensive software  testing but there is no satisfactory
              theoretical explanation.  The goal is to characterize very high dimensional
              integrals for  which low-discrepancy sequences are superior  to Monte Carlo.  A
              third area is to continue research on the  computational complexity of
              implementation testing for continuous  problems.    APPLICATIONS: The theory
              will be applied to a number of  application areas, including computational
              complexity and new  algorithms for combinatorial circuit verification.   
              SOFTWARE: The FINDER software library contains modifications of 
              low-discrepancy sequences.  FINDER has been made available to  researchers in
              various disciplines.  Further improvements, tests,  and dissemination of FINDER
              are planned.
