Title       : U.S.-South Africa Dissertation Enhancement: Seasonal Variation in the Hunting
               Activities of the Prehistoric Inhabitants of the South African Cape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9731229

Award Number: 9731229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis W. Marean   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1066,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9731229  Marean & Lam    This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US
              graduate  student, Mr. Yin-Man Lam, working under the guidance of Dr.  Curtis
              W. Marean, Associate Professor of Anthropology at the  State University of New
              York at Stony Brook, to do field  research in South Africa.  The South African
              Cape contains  some of the earliest fossil evidence of anatomically modern 
              humans, from which much has been learned about the evolution  of modern human
              behavior.  But little is known about the  manner in which Middle Stone Age
              (MSA) peoples and Late Stone  Age (LSA) hunter-gatherers interacted with prey
              animals at  different times of the year, or if the timing of those 
              interactions influenced the manner in which they adapted to  seasonal
              variations in climate and resource availability.  By  determining the time of
              the year during which human foragers  interacted with and killed prey animals,
              Mr. Lam hypothesizes  that the season of occupation of MSA and LSA peoples can
              be  identified.  The season of death of prey animals,  specifically bovids and
              seals, will be determined by use of a  technique which will analyze the
              cementum increments of  mandibular specimens from fossil prey animals
              previously  extracted from MSA and LSA sites, and from modern samples 
              collected from the all-year rainfall and winter rainfall  regions of the Cape. 
              The resulting data will be interpreted  to determine if early and recent modern
              humans used different  foraging patterns, and whether those patterns were due
              to  changes in such variables as climate, population pressure, or  their
              respective cognitive abilities.  The results are  expected to identify how
              prehistoric peoples reacted to  seasonal climatic and resource fluctuations in
              their  environment, from which a better understanding can be gained  about the
              manner in which early and modern peoples adapted to  the many large-scale
              climatic changes that occurred during  the Pleistocene. The analytical
              technique of studying growth  increments in the tooth cem entum of prey animals
              has not been  used before in this region, and Mr. Lam also expects the  results
              to show its feasibility of using the technique for  the interpretation of
              archaeological data from southern  Africa.  Staff members at the South African
              Museum and the  Department of Archaeology at the University of Cape Town will 
              collaborate with Mr. Lam on this project.    This study will expand the
              existing knowledge of prehistoric  human behavior and evolution in the South
              African Cape, and  it will create a reference collection of cementum increment 
              analysis samples for the interpretation of archaeological  data from the
              region.   Additionally, it will also explore  the feasibility of using the
              cementum increment analysis  technique for the study of prehistoric human
              behavior in  southern Africa. The grant will also provide support to  enable a
              promising student to establish a strong, independent  research career.  Funding
              for this project is being jointly  provided by the Division of International
              Programs and the  Division of Social, Behavioral and Economic Research.
