Title       : Bubbles, Ions and Vortices in Cryogenic Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a9731523

Award Number: 9731523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Williams gaw@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9731523  Williams    This  low  temperature  physics  project  is  composed  of 
              three  components. (1) The superfluid phase transition of very thin He-4  films
               adsorbed  in  porous materials will be  studied,  using  a  torsion oscillator
              to measure the superfluid density. This allows  a  measurement  of  the vortex
              core diameter  in  the  superfluid  films.  The  increase of in the vortex core
              size with added  He-3  will  be studied, and also the effect on the vortex
              structure  of  pre-plating  the  substrate with 2-3 atomic layers  of 
              hydrogen.  Measurements  will  also be undertaken in a  new  porous  ceramic 
              material,  known as MCM-41, where the pore size of  the  material  can  be
              varied between 16   and 100   by changing the fabrication  process. Theoretical
              studies of the vortices in helium films will  be carried out, investigating the
              effect of a finite supercurrent  on   the  vortex  pairs  at  the 
              Kosterlitz-Thouless  superfluid  transition.  (2)  A  search  for 
              sonoluminescence  from  bubbles  acoustically  trapped in cryogenic liquids
              such as  nitrogen  and  oxygen  will be undertaken, and the oscillation
              dynamics  of  the  bubbles  will  be studied using laser scattering.  The 
              cryogenic  liquids  have  the advantages of being pure and inert.  They  are 
              also more transparent than water in the ultraviolet region, where  most  of the
              sonoluminescent energy is emitted. (3) Bubbles  will  also be created in liquid
              helium by injecting electrons into  the  liquid,  forming  multi-electron
              bubbles large enough  to  become  trapped in the acoustic fields. The bubble
              radius as function  of  the  electron  number will be measured, and also the 
              oscillation  dynamics of the bubble.  %%%  This  low  temperature  physics 
              project  is  composed  of  three  components. (1) The superfluid properties of
              liquid helium  films  will be studied, with the emphasis on understanding how
              quantized  vortex  flow  line  in  the  liquid can  bring  the  frictionless 
              superfluid  flow to a halt. Measurem ents of the fraction  of  the  liquid 
              helium  that is superfluid will allow  the  size  of  the  vortex  structures 
              to  be determined.  A  new  type  of  ceramic  materials  will be employed as a
              substrate for the helium  films,  one  whose pore size can be varied between
              about 16   and 100   .  Theoretical  studies will be carried out to provide  a 
              framework  for   interpreting  the  experimental  results.  This  work   has 
              applications to the High-Tc superconductors, where it is just now  being 
              understood  that quantized vortex flux lines  are  excited  near  the
              superconducting transition. These lines have the effect  of bringing to a halt
              the frictionless flow of the electrons. (2)  A  search for sonoluminescence
              from bubbles in cryogenic  liquids  such  as  nitrogen  and  oxygen  will  be 
              undertaken,  and   the  oscillatory motion of the surface of the bubbles will
              be  studied  using  laser light scattering. The mechanism that results in  the 
              100  picosecond bursts of light from oscillating bubbles in water  is  still 
              not  understood, and it is  important  to  find  other  liquids  where  the 
              phenomenon occurs. The  noble-gas  cryogenic  liquid have the important
              advantages that they are very pure  and  inert,  and  are  more transparent
              than water in the  ultraviolet  region  of  the spectrum where most of the
              light is emitted  from  the bubbles. (3) Bubbles will also be created in liquid
              helium by  injecting  electrons into the liquid, forming small bubbles  with 
              up  to several million electrons inside. The radius of the bubble  as  a 
              function  of the number of electron will be measured,  and  also the
              oscillatory motion of the bubble surface.  ***
