Title       : Apex Predators in the Pelagic Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2001      
File        : a9731531

Award Number: 9731531
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $542300             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Kitchell kitchell@mhub.limnology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Exploitation of apex predators in pelagic food webs should result in a set of
              ecological changes at several scales.  We will determine the dynamics of
              compensatory responses by apex predators (large tunas, billfishes and sharks)
              and some of their primary prey (squids, small tunas and juvenile mahimahi) in
              the pelagic food webs of the Central North Pacific (CNP).  We will test for
              fishery-induced changes in growth rates, predator-prey interactions (diets),
              life history characteristics such as size or age at maturity, and species
              composition of the fish community.  Analyses of food web dynamics will be used
              to evaluate the ecological consequences of changes in exploitation.          We
              will use retrospective analyses of long-term data sets provided by
              collaboration with the Honolulu Laboratory, National Marine Fisheries Service. 
              Responses to `pulse` manipulations will derive from analyses of recent evidence
              for major, rapid changes in exploitation effects, prey availability, and
              environmental effects (oceanic regime shifts).  Responses to `press`
              manipulations of apex predator populations will derive from the 35-50 year
              records of basic biological data, life history studies and catch data
              maintained by NMFS. Contemporary data on growth rates, diets, life history
              characteristics, and species composition will be compared with those collected
              since 1948.  This effort will employ three classes of analytical tools. 
              Time-series methods and Bayesian models will be used to discern signal from
              noise and to identify the interactions of causative variables.  Bioenergetics
              models will provide quantitative estimates of the changes in food web linkages
              for individual predators, their prey and the cumulative change for all members
              of the apex trophic guild.  A new simulation model (Ecosim II) creates the food
              web context of an entire ecosystem and will be used to explore responses to
              changing mortality rates, different life history strategies and the role of a
              habitat refuge created around the Northwest Hawaiian Islands.        The recent
              rise of conservationist concern for large predatory fishes is based on their
              unknown role in sustaining the ecological integrity of pelagic ecosystems.  It
              is imperative that we better understand the effects of these migratory
              predators and their interactions with habitats encompassed by current and
              future refuges for pelagic fishes.  That understanding must be set in the
              context of environmental changes that dampen or amplify food web effects.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
