Title       : Investigation of Scaling Laws for Rock Discontinuity Behavior Based on Fractal
               Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1998  
File        : a9731126

Award Number: 9731126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Plesha plesha@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) award is funded to support a
              primarily analytical, exploratory effort to develop fundamental, non-empirical
              theories for the scaling of rock discontinuity mechanical constitutive
              properties and behavior over a large range of length scales from laboratory
              size (on the order on tens of mm and smaller) to field size (order o m and
              larger).  This will be accomplished by idealizing rock discontinuities to have
              fractal shape (I. e., increasingly finer orders of detail with increasing
              magnification) in conjunction with established, plasticity-type microstructural
              constitutive theories for geomaterial interface behavior.  The mathematical
              properties and scale-invariance of fractals will be used to investigate how
              mechanical properties and behavior that are observable on one length scale
              (typically laboratory scales) transform to properties and behavior at other
              scale lengths (typically field scales).  This research will provide fundamental
              information on how discontinuity properties and behavior observed on laboratory
              sized specimens pertain and relate to properties at field scales.  In addition
              to providing physical insight, such an approach may also lead to more accurate
              scaling over larger ranges of length than is possible with empirical relations.
               Additionally, this research has the practical significance of enhancing the
              accuracy and reliability of numerical simulations.     Use of such simulations
              is of fundamental importance to engineers and scientists in making land use and
              remediation decisions.  Such simulations are usually large-scale and have
              domain sizes with lengths on the order of tens or hundreds of meters,
              kilometers, and larger.  An essential ingredient in the use of these methods is
              accurate constitutive models for the constituent materials, including material
              interfaces.  Presently, even if extensive laboratory data are available,
              because of the problems of scaling, users must rely on intuition and
              engineering judgment to specify appropriate interface constitutive models. 
              Because of these difficulties, very often empirical constitutive models or
              substandard interface idealizations such as simple, non-dilatant Coulomb
              friction are used.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
