Title       : COMET: Cases of Mathematics Instruction to Enhance Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a9731428

Award Number: 9731428
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica B. Mitchell                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276158             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Smith pegs@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward A. Silver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Kay Stein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9731428  Silver     The COMET Project is dedicated to the creation and
              dissemination of professional development materials in middle school
              mathematics. This project, directed by Dr. Edward Silver and located at the
              University of Pittsburgh, with a subcontract with Dr. Margaret Smith at The
              Pennsylvania State University, involves the development of sixteen cases, each
              involving a classroom lesson in which an important idea in middle school
              mathematics (grades 6-8) is linked with a cognitively challenging task.  The
              cases will be developed in four clusters; with about four cases in each
              cluster, each related to an important mathematics topic.  Tentative clusters
              include: solving measurement problems in two and three dimensions; solving
              problems related to algebra as the study of patterns and functions; solving
              problems involving reasoning with rates, ratios, and proportions; and solving
              problems involving the representation and analysis of statistical data in
              numerical and graphical forms. The project cases will involve the use of
              materials and experiences generated by the QUASAR Project.  In addition, the
              project will involve NSF-funded implementation centers (the University of
              Missouri and EDC sites) and NSF-funded curriculum projects (Connected
              Mathematics, Mathematics in Context, and Visual Mathematics) as field sites for
              the implementation of the cases.  The uniqueness of this project is in the use
              of cases based on actual practice and a strong research base and dealing with
              the middle school mathematics curriculum.     COMET will organize and host a
              small conference (to be held at NSF) on cases and their use in the enhancement
              of teacher content and professional knowledge in the first year of the project.
               Additionally, the project's evaluation will include a formative evaluation of
              the extent to which the COMET cases have impacted the content and professional
              knowledge of the project's field test participants (middle school teachers).
