Title       : The Geographic Scale of Larval Dispersal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a9731277

Award Number: 9731277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112409             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Hilbish hilbish@biol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Patterns of larval movement and the spatial scale of dispersal are expected to
              be major forces in regulating the dynamics of populations and communities in
              marine systems. The life history of most marine species includes a larval stage
              that is capable of dispersal over broad geographic areas and efforts to
              understand the population dynamics of these species have been stymied by the
              magnitude of larval dispersal inherent in planktotrophic development. The scale
              of larval dispersal is a key parameter in understanding the recruitment
              dynamics of marine species. We will exploit the genetic mosaics formed in a
              hybrid zone between two species of mussels to assess the geographic scale of
              larval dispersal. In this system, large numbers of larvae are produced at
              specific locations with distinct genetic signatures and released into the
              plankton. By monitoring the settlement of these `marked` larvae we will assess
              the geographic scale and dynamics of larval dispersal. In this study we will
              capitalize on molecular genetic markers, that we have developed with previous
              support from Biological Oceanography, that allow the population genetics of
              mussel larvae or spat to be determined. By exploiting both the molecular
              genetic markers we have developed, and the presence of genetic mosaics formed
              by hybridization between mussel species it will be possible to monitor the
              movement of larvae between geographic areas. Using this system we will 
              determine the geographic scale of larval dispersal, spatial and temporal
              variation in dispersal capacity and test the hypothesis that patterns of larval
              movement are predominantly controlled by local circulation dynamics.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
