Title       : Nonlinear Wave Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2002   
File        : a9731097

Award Number: 9731097
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119696             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey Segur segur@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Proposal # DMS-9731097  PI: Harvey Segur  Title: Nonlinear Wave Motion     
               The Kadomtsev-Petviashvili equation is a nonlinear partial  differential
              equation in two spatial dimensions plus time.  It is one of   very few
              nonlinear equations that: (i) is completely integrable and admits   "soliton"
              solutions;  (ii) involves two spatial dimensions plus time; and   (iii) arises
              naturally in  physics.  Specifically, the equation describes   approximately
              the motion of ocean waves in shallow water.  (Ocean waves   require two spatial
              dimensions because they occur on the water's   two-dimensional surface.)  For
              this application, the most interesting   solutions  are either exactly or
              approximately periodic, just as typical   ocean waves are approximately
              periodic.  Based on recent discoveries of the   mathematical structure of this
              equation, we can now solve this problem as   an initial-value problem for
              initial data that are either exactly or   approximately periodic in space.  The
              work to be carried out in this study   will exploit this structure to build an
              accurate model of waves in shallow   water.  The waves in the model will be as
              complicated as waves in the   ocean usually are: steady or unsteady, with
              either exact or approximate   periodicity in time or in space or both, with
              arbitrarily large amplitudes,   and with fully two-dimensional spatial
              patterns.  No other functioning   model of water waves includes all of these
              features simultaneously, so this   model should vastly improve our ability to
              predict waves in shallow water.      Nonlinear phenomena occur when a
              perturbation to a system triggers  a response that is not proportional to the
              perturbation.  Many of the   dramatic events in nature are nonlinear, including
              the "big bang"  in   cosmology, sonic booms in aerodynamics, hurricanes and
              breaking ocean waves   in geophysics.  The mathematical models used to describe
              these phenomena   are intrinsically nonlinear, and typically we cannot solve
              them in any   general sense.   The set  of models that admit "solitons" and are
                "completely integrable" are exceptions to this rule: usually these models  
              can be solved in complete detail, and they have provided great insight into  
              the nature of nonlinear wave phenomena.  The work to be carried out in this  
              study will exploit recently a discovered mathematical structure of one of these
                completely integrable models to build an accurate and realistic model of  
              ocean waves in shallow water.  Practical implications of more accurate  
              predictions of shallow water waves include better control of beach erosion,  
              fewer problems with shoreline pollution from dispersal of man-made waste,   and
              better design of offshore structures like oil platforms.
