Title       : GOALI: The Dynamics of Phase Inversion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2000      
File        : a9731509

Award Number: 9731509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. McHugh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-9731509  Anthony McHugh  U. of  Illinois    Studies are proposed of phase
              inversion, the process by which a cast polymer solution is converted into a
              porous, polymer gel by either thermal or nonsolvent quenching.  Pore size and
              pore size distribution in the solidified polymer render properties  favorable
              for membrane applications.  Such membranes are ubiquitous in the separations
              and biomedical industries, having an annual commercial basis in excess of $1.6
              billion.  Hence understanding and controlling the conditions for their optimal
              fabrication has technological and scientific importance.  Experimental and
              modeling analyses will be directed towards fundamental understanding of the
              dynamics by which membrane structures are formed and locked-in during
              quenching.  Experiments will utilize a combination of in-situ measurements
              techniques based on dark-ground microscopy and small angle light scattering,
              coupled with video imaging.  These provide unique quantitative data on the
              diffusion and liquid-liquid phase separation kinetics associated with phase
              inversion, as well as the freezing in of gel structure by glass transition or
              crystallization.  Microstructural analysis of the formed morphologies will be
              carried out using electron microscopy.  Quenching experiments will involve a
              number of polymer/solvent/nonsolvent systems, including crystallizable and
              amorphous polymers.  Data will be analyzed in terms of mathematical models
              based o spinodal decomposition coupled with external mass transfer.  The goal
              of modeling will be to quantify the mechanisms by which finger-like or spongy
              porous structures form during liquid-liquid phase separation and are then
              frozen in.  In-situ  techniques will also be applied to study phase inversion
              phenomena related to the in-vivo formation of controlled release drug delivery
              membranes, an area of growing importance in the biomedical and pharmaceutical
              industries.  Membrane formation dynamics will be monitored in the biodegradable
              copolymer, poly (lactic-co-glycol ic acid)  PLGA, dissolved in various nontoxic
              solvents, and quenched in water.  The simultanoeus release characteristics of a
              model protein, lysozyme, from the as-formed membranes will also be determined. 
              The objective will be to quantify relations among solvent water solubility,
              system glass-forming characteristics, and the formation of membrane structure
              favorable for simultaneous, in-situ encapsulation and controlled release of
              protein.  Results of these studies will have direct application in the field of
              controlled drug delivery.  ***
