Title       : Collections-Based Research Experiences for Undergraduates at The Academy of
               Natural Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2000     
File        : a9731886

Award Number: 9731886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Taylor                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52393              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dominique A. Didier didier@say.acnatsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon K. Gelhaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. McCourt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9731886  The number specialists dedicated to collections-based research has
              declined because students often receive little exposure to collections and
              research in organismal biology in many modern university science programs. 
              Museums with a strong research program such as The Academy of Natural Sciences
              offer an opportunity to fill this gap in undergraduate education.  The goal is
              to provide a diverse and exciting research experience for undergraduates in an
              effort to recruit new young researchers to this ever important field. 
              Education in biodiversity, systematics, and taxonomy along with conservation
              will enable students to explore, document and conserve global biodiversity and
              ecosystems.  Applicants will be sought primarily from colleges in the greater
              Philadelphia area (including New Jersey and Delaware), with emphasis on
              recruiting women and underserved minorities. Twenty, 10-week fellowships will
              be awarded and students will be chosen on the basis of academic performance,
              overall interest and potential ability, two recommendations, and an interview. 
              After a one-week introductory session, students will choose a mentor to serve
              as the primary advisor of their research project.  Research projects will cover
              diverse topics related to systematic biology, including evolution, molecular
              biology, ecology, and history of scientific collections.  Students will work
              side-by-side with curators and senior scientist and will be involved in all
              aspects of collections-based research including: conducting research in the
              museum's world-class biological collections, collection and curation of
              specimens, participation in field expeditions, participation in discussion
              groups with scientists, and dissemination of scientific results through oral
              presentation and publication.  Written evaluations by mentors and students will
              be used to assess the impact of this research program and to improve the
              program in subsequent, and after completing their research experience they will
              assess the value of the program t oward reaching these goals.  Mentors will
              also evaluate the student and program performance.  Students will present the
              results of their research in the form of a paper to be published in a refereed
              journal.  In addition, students will give oral presentations of their research
              in a one-day student symposium.
