Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeological Investigations at Three Saints Bay, Kodiak
               Island, Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9012871

Award Number: 9012871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11967              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aron Crowell  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Kent Lightfoot, Professor of                        
              Anthropology at the University of California, Berkeley, Mr. Aron               
              Crowell will conduct archaeological fieldwork and analysis to                  
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  Mr. Crowell will                  
              conduct a two year program of investigation at the site of Three               
              Saints Bay located on Kodiak Island, Alaska.  A village at this                
              site was established in 1784 by Grigorii Shelikhov as a fur trade              
              outpost and constituted the first permanent Russian settlement in              
              Alaska.  The goals of the settlement were to pacify the local                  
              Koniag Indians, to use them to exploit the untapped sea otter                  
              resources in the region, and to establish a permanent, largely                 
              self-sustaining outpost for the organization and administration                
              of fur procurement.  The Russians succeeded, at least                          
              temporarily, and the site was not abandoned until the early to                 
              mid-nineteenth century.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Mr. Crowell and his colleagues will conduct a remote sensing                   
              survey of the site to locate structural remains and then excavate              
              a series of houses.  Through recovery and analysis of artifactual              
              and faunal remains, they will attempt to reconstruct settlers'                 
              lifeways and their relations with local inhabitants.  The team                 
              will also excavate in the associated Koniag Indian village to                  
              determine the effect of the immigrants.  This contact situation                
              is extremely interesting because interactions between native                   
              Americans and European/Asian settlers and merchants were                       
              extremely variable, and the Kodiak case illustrates a rare                     
              situation of direct dominance and economic exploitation.                       
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will increase              
              our understanding of the processes of culture contact and change.              
              It will also help to fill in a blank in the record of North                    
              American colonization, and, finally, it will assist in the                     
              training of an extremely promising young scientist.
