Title       : Attentional Mechanisms of Feature Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1992  
File        : a9012471

Award Number: 9012471
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Asher Cohen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A large variety of evidence suggests that processing of visual                 
              objects is done in two separate stages.  The visual system first               
              parses the scene into visual features such as color, line                      
              orientation, and direction of motion.  At this early stage of                  
              processing there is no distinction between features that                       
              originate from different objects in the scene.  The particular                 
              visual features of each object in the scene are conjoined at a                 
              later stage.  The analysis of the visual features at the early                 
              stage of processing creates a serious problem for the visual                   
              system.  Given that there is no distinction at the early stage                 
              between features of different objects, how does the visual system              
              correctly conjoin features of one object without confusing them                
              with features of other objects in the scene?  What is(are) the                 
              mechnism(s) for feature integration?                                           
                                                                                             
              This research follows from the hypothesis that the visual system               
              uses two different mechanisms for feature integration.  One                    
              mechanism, the coarse location mechanism, is based on the notion               
              that visual features are perceived at the early stage with coarse              
              location information.  The coarse location mechanism integrates                
              features with overlapping location information.  This mechanism,               
              however, is not useful when objects are located spatially near                 
              each other.  In these situations, a second mechanism, the                      
              attentional binding mechanism must be used.  The attentional                   
              mechanism works by marking an area in space and conjoining the                 
              features present in that area.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Separate sets of experiments will examine properties of the two                
              mechanisms.  The first set of experiments will explore some of                 
              the basic characteristics of the coarse location mechanism and                 
              will show its applicability to everyday situations.  For example,              
              can the coarse location information detect two targets in                      
              parallel?  Does it use a simple (linear) activation rule for                   
              integrating features?  Can it ignore irrelevant features?                      
                                                                                             
              The second set of experiments will examine several spatial                     
              properties of the attentional binding mechanism and will look at               
              possible connections between the operation of this mechanism and               
              some of the Gestalt grouping principles.                                       
                                                                                             
              This research may lead to mechanisms for simulation of human                   
              object recognition by an artificial system.
