Title       : Developing an Independent Living Approach to Disability Technology: A Conference
               to Identify the Policy Issues, October 4-5, 1990
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1990    
File        : a9012680

Award Number: 9012680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18232              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Hakken hakken@sunyit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Burt Danovitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Tech Utica-Rome
	      PO Box 3050
	      Utica, NY  135043050    315/792-3301

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              Technologies, especially computer-based assistive technologies,                
              hold promise of enabling people with disabilities to participate               
              more and more effectively in social life.  Realization of this                 
              promise depends upon the development of appropriate policies as                
              well.  This conference will address the range of issues -- ethical,            
              social, economic and technical -- necessary to fashioning effective            
              disability technology policies.  The approach is to identify these             
              issues through a structured discussion involving leading disability            
              and technology scholars and practitioners and then to expand the               
              discussion to involve "grass roots" service providers, consumers,              
              and activists.  The first day of the conference is devoted to                  
              presentation of papers and discussion among the small group of                 
              invited partipants.  On the second day, the workshop will merge                
              with the annual conference of the Resource Center for Independent              
              Living in Utica.  RCIL is a member of the National Special                     
              Education Alliance and an important provider of services for                   
              disabled persons in New York State.  Funds from NSF will be used               
              to support some administrative and organizational conference costs,            
              as well as the participation of eleven invited scholars and                    
              practitioners.  Results will be widely disseminated in appropriate             
              journals and professional meetings.  Efforts will continue after               
              the conference, through the Project on Disability Technology Policy            
              of the SUNY Institute of Technology.                                           
                                                                                             
              This proposal is a modest request for support to enable leading                
              scholars and practitioners to begin to address more deeply and                 
              directly issues of equity and access to technologies for disabled              
              persons.  The principal investigators and project associates are               
              well qualified; institutional support is very good; the conference             
              plans are good and integrated appropriately with related                       
              activities; dissemination is likely to be broad and to reach a wide            
              range of audiences.  Support is highly recommended.
