Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in the History of Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1990   
File        : a9012988

Award Number: 9012988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2430               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy N. Stepan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The doctoral dissertation student, Ms. Nancy Robin Jaicks, is                  
              examining a case of local resistance to national science and                   
              medical policy in light of new scientific and medical practices.               
                                                                                             
              A truism of American political theory is that "all politics is                 
              local."  A corollary to that truism may well be, if all politics               
                                                                                             
              is local, localities will differ greatly in acceptance or                      
              rejection of national policies which differ from local needs.                  
              When national politics too greatly differ from factors affecting               
                                                                                             
              citizens, the policy fails.  In the US, such was the case with                 
              national prohibition of consumption and sale of alcoholic                      
              beverages.  The "law of the land" prohibited alcoholic                         
              consumption and sale, yet this policy was widely ignored.  Ms.                 
              Jaicks is studying the relationship of national policy and local               
                                                                                             
              resistance in the context of its relationship to science and                   
              medical practice.  Specifically she is examining the case of                   
              science and medical practice in Lyon in 19th century France.                   
              What she finds, however, has enormous implications for our                     
              understanding of the factors that make for failed public policy                
              in our times as well.                                                          
                                                                                             
              The 19th century was a period of major developments within                     
              science and medicine.  Embryology and reproductive physiology                  
              were making enormous advances.  The germ theory of disease was                 
              being developed, theories of antisepsis and discoveries of                     
              effective anesthesia made surgeries much safer.  For social,                   
              political and professional reasons, however, a very politicized                
              physician class had pushed through extremely restrictive                       
              requirements for medical procedures.  These restrictions ignored               
                                                                                             
              the new scientific developments.  What Ms. Jaicks has found is                 
              that, despite a national policy, local communities such a Lyon,                
              confronting there own set of local conditions, turned to the new               
                                                                                             
              developments in antisepsis, anesthesia and biological sciences                 
              and ignored the national policies.  Ms. Jaicks dissertation will               
                                                                                             
              examine how the federal policies were developed and how the local              
                                                                                             
              factors led to the failure of this federal public policy.
