Title       : Changes in the Sediment Regime and Channel Morphology of the Lower Mississippi
               River
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1990     
File        : a9012724

Award Number: 9012724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26825              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Kesel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Many stream channels have been modified significantly in the last         
              century.  Dams, levees, revetments, meander cut-offs, and reservoirs           
              have been constructed to control floods and to improve navigation.             
              These modifications have severely altered the morphology of the                
              channels and have changed the patterns of erosion and sedimentation.           
              The exact character of these changes is not well documented, however.          
              Among the most drastically modified streams is the lower Mississippi           
              River.  This project will use historic hydrographic survey maps to             
              measure changes in channel morphology and sediment regimes on the lower        
              Mississippi over the last century.  The data gathered in this project          
              will also be used to analyze the degree to which human versus natural          
              forces have altered flows and depositional patterns, and they will             
              provide a basis for more detailed examination of the processes of              
              meandering in large streams.                                                   
                   This project will yield useful results at a number of levels.  It         
              will provide a data set specific to the lower Mississippi River.  These        
              data will be valuable aids to scholars studying this stream and to             
              practitioners who must deal directly with flood control and navigation         
              systems.  The conclusions drawn in this project will also have broader         
              significance, offering new insights into the processes by which stream         
              flow and sediment transport respond to modification by humans and to           
              changes in natural conditions.
