Title       : Egg Dispersal, Water Movements, and Spawning Patterns in a Coral Reef Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1990    
File        : a9012054

Award Number: 9012054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Appeldoorn r_appeldoorn@rumac.uprm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              It has been hypothesized that pelagically-spawning coral reef                  
              fishes select spawning sites and times that lead to eggs being                 
              rapidly removed from reefs. This hypothesis is currently being                 
              tested by determining the fate of eggs spawned by a reef fish.                 
              One program component of this research is the dynamical                        
              modelling of current flow, which is necessary to understand                    
              forces affecting dispersal and to which fish may be responding                 
              in their selection of spawning sites and times, and for                        
              developing predictions of egg transport and potential                          
              predation. Data collected during simulated-spawning experiments                
              has not been sufficient for this task.  This award will support                
              this research program through the acquistion of a WeatherPak                   
              100 weather recording system with sensors for water temperature                
              and solar radiation.  Wind stress is the major component                       
              affecting water transport.  Strong winds will drive surface                    
              waters but are also thought to set up a cross-shelf pressure                   
              gradient due to the curl of the bottom stress.  The latter is                  
              believed to be responsible for observed current reversals.                     
              Wind stress effects will be determined by monitoring water                     
              pressure and current flow at an inshore and offshore station in                
              response to changes in wind speed and direction.  Measurements                 
              will be taken hourly over the course of a year to account for                  
              high-frequency (tidal) and low-frequency (seasonal) components.                
              Results will test the theory of current reversal, and be used                  
              to complete the dynamic model of current flow.
