Title       : Three Assignment Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1991      
File        : a9012155

Award Number: 9012155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74352              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. Ostroy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The research agenda is divided into the following topics: (1)                  
              perfect competition in large assignment models; (2) efficiency                 
              properties of competitive equilibrium with innovation; and (3)                 
              specialization and division of labor and monetary exchange.  The               
              first part involves extending the basic model assigning a finite               
              number of individuals to a finite number of positions to one in                
              which the number of individuals and positions are infinite and                 
              represented by a continuum.  The second part consists of modeling              
              the innovation problem as a two-tiered assignment problem in which             
              the allocation of resources, including the commodities available               
              for sale, is influenced by occupational choices.  The third part               
              examines the trade-off between the technological advantages of                 
              assignments exhibiting specialization and division of labor and the            
              disadvantages of such assignments in terms of the demands that this            
              places on the technology of exchange.                                          
                                                                                             
              Research on all three topics is potentially extremely important.               
              In the first topic the proposed work could lead to a new way of                
              conceptualizing competition that would capture as special cases                
              such criteria as non manipulability of prices and the appropriation            
              of agents' marginal contributions.  The assignment model has a rich            
              history as a laboratory for the development of important new                   
              theories such as linear programming and core theory.  Past work by             
              the investigator and his collaborators suggests that their study               
              of the uniqueness of equilibrium prices in large assignment models             
              could provide another new, powerful analytical tool for economic               
              theory.  The second and third parts should provide new insights                
              into such fundamental questions as: how are new commodities                    
              introduced? why are markets incomplete? how does specialization and            
              the division of labor depend on the exchange process, or                       
              transaction technology?
