Title       : Early Anthropoid Evolution in South America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1994      
File        : a9012154

Award Number: 9012154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164276             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Fleagle jfleagle@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 1392,9251,
Abstract    :
                   Anthropologists tend to overlook the New World monkeys                    
              because they are not on the main line of relationship to humans.               
              Nevertheless, they comprise an exciting side branch which                      
              provides anthropologists with examples parallel to changes which               
              have taken place in the catarrhine fossil record.  The history of              
              New World monkeys is still poorly known, compared with that of                 
              other major radiations of higher primates in the eastern                       
              hemisphere, and phylogenetic relationships among the relatively                
              distinct groups of platyrrhine fossils are largely unresolved.                 
              Until very recently, the entire fossil record for platyrrhines                 
              consisted of remains of fewer than thirty individuals.  During                 
              the past four years, paleontological research in Colombia and                  
              Argentina has yielded an abundance of new fossils that may be                  
              very important in sorting out these relationships.  Further                    
              systematic and functional studies of new Argentine fossils will                
              help clarify relationships among modern platyrrhines, and provide              
              additional documentation about their adaptive diversity.                       
                   The fossils from Argentina have come from two roughly                     
              contemporaneous formations, the Santa Cruz and the Pinturas, yet               
              the two formations have different species of monkeys.  This                    
              project will investigate the extent to which these morphological               
              differences are the result of differences in time, environment,                
              and/or geographical position of the two formations, and the PI                 
              will reconstruct the paleoenvironments of these formations.  The               
              project will contribute to our understanding of the phylogeny and              
              diversification of New World primates, and permit broader                      
              comparisons between those in South America and those on other                  
              continents.
