Title       : Collaborative Project: Macromolecular Organization of the Contractile Ring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1992      
File        : a9012165

Award Number: 9012165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159679             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joann J. Otto   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Schroeder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The contractile ring is the array of microfilaments located                    
              beneath the plasma membrane of the cleavage furrow of dividing                 
              cells and represents the intracellular machinery responsible for               
              cytokinesis.  Because it is composed of cytoskeletal proteins it               
              has been characterized superficially as a muscle-like organelle.               
              The contractile ring has defied detailed experimental or                       
              compositional analysis because it is too small, transient, and                 
              labile for conventional isolation.  This joint research project                
              will exploit a promising new method of preparing contractile                   
              rings in large numbers that will allow the first detailed                      
              analysis of the macromolecular composition and organization of                 
              this important cytoskeletal structure and its association with                 
              the plasma membrane.  The cell fraction enriched in contractile                
              rings will be prepared from synchronously dividing sea urchin                  
              eggs.  In one set of studies, the morphological organization of                
              the actin-myosin-membrane complex of the contractile ring will be              
              explored by immunofluorescence and electron microscopy, utilizing              
              available antiactin and antimyosin antibodies already known to be              
              effective.  In another set of studies, new monoclonal and                      
              polyclonal antibodies will be generated in order to discover and               
              identify as yet unknown regulatory and stabilizing molecules,                  
              using combined microscopic and immunochemical techniques.  A                   
              final set of experiments is designed to ascertain the extent of                
              myosin phosphorylation in the contractile ring and to evaluate                 
              its role in myosin organization.                                               
                                                                                             
              The results of this collaborative research should elucidate the                
              macromolecular machinery responsible for the separation of two                 
              daughter cells during cell division.
