Title       : Bacterivorous Ciliates in Marine Food Webs: Lipid Chemistryand Role in Copepod
               Nutrition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9012553

Award Number: 9012553
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133528             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. R. Harvey   (Principal Investigator current)
              George B. McManus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Bacterivorous ciliates are an important component of planktonic                
              food webs.  They can consume a large proportion of bacterial                   
              production, and convert material that is low in essential                      
              lipids (bacterial biomass and detritus) into lipid-rich ciliate                
              biomass.  How do consumers benefit nutritionally from these                    
              ciliates, and what role do they play in the biochemical                        
              transformation of ciliate carbon?                                              
                                                                                             
              To investigate the nature of ciliate lipids and their fate and                 
              importance in the marine food web Dr. Harvey and McManus will:                 
                                                                                             
              -    identify and quantify ciliate lipids, especially ones that                
                   may be useful as group-specific biomarkers in trophic                     
                   studies.                                                                  
              -    examine sources of lipids in the ciliate diet and follow                  
                   how ciliates assimilate and modify dietary lipids.                        
              -    measure the assimilation and transformation of ciliate                    
                   lipids by one of their principal consumers, copepods.                     
                                                                                             
              This project combines biochemical measurements with feeding                    
              experiments.  Detailed lipid analysis of a number of ciliate                   
              species will first provide additional data on the ubiquity of                  
              the unique compounds they have already observed.  They will                    
              measure in detail the role of diet on lipid content and                        
              distribution of several representative bacterivorous ciliates.                 
              Finally,they will conduct in-depth feeding experiments to                      
              follow the incorporation and transformation of ciliate lipids                  
              by grazing copepods.                                                           
                                                                                             
              These results will provide substantial new information on the                  
              role of bacterivorous ciliates in the marine food web,                         
              especially their importance in copepod nutrition.
