Title       : Effects of Vegetative Reproduction on the Distribution and Abundance of Benthic
               Marine Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1992     
File        : a9012168

Award Number: 9012168
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard R. Lasker hlasker@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Colonial species unlike aclonal species of ten generate new                    
              colonies a sexually through fission or fragmentation. This form                
              of vegaetative reproduction plays an important role in                         
              determining species abundances and community structure. Thus,                  
              an understanding of vegetative reproduction and the conditions                 
              under which it is successful is a necessary component of the                   
              study of marine communities. Vegetative reproduction also has                  
              important effects on population genetics and these effects may                 
              control the resilience of species to changes in climate.                       
                                                                                             
              Previous work on vegetative reproduction has focused on                        
              quantifying the effect of vegetative propagation on short term                 
              population dynamics within single populations. That work has                   
              not considered the effects of clonal growth on the production                  
              of new clones nor the selective pressures for propagules which                 
              can disperse between habitats. In the proposed research I will                 
              complement work on vegetative reproduction among Caribbean                     
              gorgonians with new data on larval production, dispersal,                      
              survival and settlement. These data will allow me to determine                 
              the interaction between vegetative reproduction, sexual                        
              reproduction and the dispersal of larvae to new habitats. The                  
              data will provide a quantitative basis for understanding the                   
              effects of vegetative reproduction on marine communities.
