Title       : ECSU Second Century Thrust for Excellence in Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1990      
File        : a9012845

Award Number: 9012845
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly P Baker                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49963              (Estimated)
Investigator: Johnny L. Houston houston@ecsvax.ucecs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Elizabeth City State Univ
	      1704 Weeksville Road
	      Elizabeth City, NC  27909    919/335-3230

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2886,
Abstract    :
                   The primary concern of the Elizabeth City State University                
              and the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science is the                  
              production of quality graduates in the mathematical sciences at                
              the undergraduate level.  Thus, all of the efforts of the                      
              department must be designed to advance and be supportive of this               
              concern.                                                                       
                   The first goal is to increase the percentage of our students              
              (at the upper division: junior-senior level), involved in                      
              research and/or practical experiences, to the seventy-five                     
              percent level over the next five years.  This will require                     
              enhancing faculty research activities and emphasizing the value                
              of research.                                                                   
                   A second goal is to modify the current program of study (a                
              B.S. degree in Computer and Information Sciences) in one or two                
              ways: either develop two distinct curriculum tracks:  one in                   
              computer science (scientific applications) and one in information              
              science (business application) or modify the current program of                
              study to be one in computer science only.                                      
                   A third goal is that of developing the current computer                   
              science program to the extent that the program will be accredited              
              by CSAB of the Association of Computing Machinery (ACM) during                 
              the next five years.                                                           
                   A fourth goal over the next five years is to modify the                   
              operation of the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science                
              so that the  computer science faculty will operate as a cohesive               
              group, devoting their primary efforts to teaching, research and                
              other activities relating primarily to the Computer Science                    
              Program.                                                                       
                   A fifth goal is that of increasing the percentage of their                
              graduates who will go to graduate school; currently about ten                  
              percent go.  Over the next five years they plan to increase that               
              number to twenty five percent.                                                 
                   To accomplish the goals outlined the following activities                 
              are  envisioned.                                                               
                   A. An expansion and improvement of the research/practicum                 
              activities of their majors by the development of new linkages                  
              with industry, government and other universities.                              
                   B.  A review and modification of the curriculum offering in               
              the computer science program to assure that courses exist at                   
              State-of-the-Arts levels and meet ACM accreditation standards.                 
                   C.  An enhancement and an expansion of current computer                   
              resources, including hardware, software and firmware; as well as               
              library publications in computer science;                                      
                   D.  An enhancement and expansion of faculty development                   
              activities, with emphasis on research involvement and learning                 
              new instructional strategies/teaching methodologies;                           
                   E.  A review and modification of the entrance, progression                
              and exit requirements of majors in computer science.
