Title       : SGER: Assessing Patchiness of Aquatic Organisms with Remotely Operated Vehicles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1990       
File        : a9012746

Award Number: 9012746
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig E. Williamson cew0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Moeller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce R. Hargreaves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   The patchiness of natural populations is of fundamental                   
              importance to many aspects of ecological theory.  In aquatic                   
              environments the lack of vegetational structure and low                        
              visibility compared to terrestrial environments combine with                   
              continuous mixing processes to make assessment of patch size,                  
              structure, and function particularly difficult.  Yet the                       
              importance of top-down control of aquatic communities suggests                 
              that the spatial and temporal distribution of predator and prey                
              populations may be a primary regulator in community dynamics.                  
              Recent developments in remotely operated vehicle (ROV) and video               
              imaging technologies provide the potential to resolve spatial and              
              temporal patchiness of plankton and fish populations on much                   
              finer scales than could ever be obtained with traditional                      
              sampling methods.  The primary objectives of the SGER project is               
              to apply recent advances in ROV and video imaging technologies to              
              quantify the distribution and abundance of invertebrate and                    
              vertebrate predators and their prey in lakes of different trophic              
              status.  As part of the multiinstitutional Pocono Comparative                  
              Lakes Program, the project will be carried out in a highly                     
              interactive research and educational environment that maximizes                
              the exposure of students and investigators to these new                        
              technologies.  Transfer of information on ROV and video sampling               
              will be facilitated by a symposium/workshop to be conducted after              
              testing the ROV
