Title       : ABR: Physiological Ecology of Hydrothermal Vent Animals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1991      
File        : a9012075

Award Number: 9012075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Carey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              From the age of 18 months on, toddlers learn new words at the                  
              phenomenal rate of over 9 a day|  To support such successful                   
              learning, children must have considerable knowledge of the nature              
              of the meanings words encode.  This research will seek a precise               
              characterization of that knowledge and of its roots in early                   
              infancy.  The research will focus on one aspect of word meaning,               
              that of quantification.  Language makes use of many different                  
              types of quantificational devices, including quantifiers ("a,                  
              another, some, more...."), the numerals, and count/mass syntax.                
              Knowledge of quantification would help even the learning of                    
              nouns, for nouns carry quantificational commitments in their                   
              meanings.  Children use quantifiers, apparently correctly, very                
              early in language production.  Recent research has shown,                      
              however, that children do not know what the count words mean for               
              over a year after they have been counting.  This raises the                    
              possibility that they do not know what the other quantifiers mean              
              either.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The studies will use new techniques to assess what even babies                 
              know about number.  Further, the techniques will allow the                     
              assessment of patterns of generalization to new contexts of                    
              various types of newly-taught words, supported by different sorts              
              of quantifiers.  A longitudinal study will assess the process by               
              which two-year-olds work out the meanings of number words.  The                
              outcome of these studies will be an understanding of the                       
              conceptual underpinnings normal young children bring to language               
              learning, and the conceptual change they must undergo to grasp                 
              the meaning of number words like "two."                                        
                                                                                             
              Research on normal cognitive development and normal language                   
              development is important  scientifically, for it bears on what                 
              makes humans unique among animals.  But it is also essential for               
              understanding the many ways language acquisition goes awry in                  
              various abnormal populations.  Such understanding must precede                 
              interventions to help children overcome specific cognitive                     
              deficits.
