Title       : Dissertation Support in Ethics & Values Studies: Examining the Consequences of
               the Priority Dispute Over the Discovery of the AIDS Virus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1990    
File        : a9012364

Award Number: 9012364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5401               (Estimated)
Investigator: Harriet Zuckerman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rosa Haritos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              A central focus in science, technology and society studies is the              
              identification of mechanisms by which scientific knowledge evolves.            
              The dissertation research of Rosa Haritos examines the concept of              
              discovery in science and the process by which the scientific                   
              community, along with others, formulates, debates and resolves                 
              conflict about discovery.  Discovery is a dynamic process comprised            
              of both empirical and social components.  Using the priority                   
              dispute over the discovery of the AIDS virus as a case study, this             
              project seeks to explain the dispute in terms of the value                     
              structure of the scientific community.  The study will investigate             
              four central problems: (1) the genesis and development of the                  
              dispute as it evolved over time; (2) how the discovery was defined             
              by the scientists involved in the discovery; (3) the values and                
              norms espoused by scientists and how their beliefs influenced their            
              behavior in the dispute; (4) the inter-connection between science              
              and its social context--identification of the consequences of the              
              dispute.  Three sources of data will be used: (1) focused                      
              interviews with the scientists involved in the discovery; (2)                  
              focused interviews with the 13 member Retroviral Subcommittee,                 
              responsible for the nomenclature and classification of the virus;              
              (3) a detailed content analysis of what was said about the                     
              discovery when it was cited in the scientific literature.                      
                                                                                             
              This project will provide important primary and secondary source               
              material about a major contemporary public controversy involving               
              international science, and should contribute to understanding how              
              priority disputes about scientific discovery arise and are                     
              resolved.  The research is being supervised by an eminent                      
              sociologist of science; the graduate student is very well prepared             
              to undertake it; institutional support is adequate; and the                    
              expected result--a dissertation--will be forthcoming.  The                     
              requested support is very modest and will allow the required                   
              interviews to occur.  The award is highly recommended.
