Title       : Biogeochemistry of Active Methane Seeps on the Continental Margin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1990      
File        : a9012323

Award Number: 9012323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77749              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Collier rcollier@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernd R. Simoneit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Pockmarks are errosive features found on the seabed that record                
              the recent activity of fluid seepage --primarily gas -- through                
              the sediments.  These craters-like features have been                          
              extensively documented on continental shelves throughout the                   
              world oceans and are thought to be primarily associated with                   
              the seepage of hydrocarbons from sediment reservoirs.  In spite                
              of their common occurrence, active systems are essentially                     
              unstudied and the biogeochemical impacts of these systems on                   
              shelf sediments and coastal waters are almost completely                       
              unknown.  The gas released is primarily methane (both biogenic                 
              and thermogenic) and the significance of this source to the                    
              marine and atmospheric budgets is completely unknown.  It has                  
              recently been hypothesized that these systems may even plan an                 
              important role -- enhancing fisheries production on continental                
              shelves.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Following up on the pioneering studies of fluid venting along                  
              the shelf and slope of the Oregon convergent margin and upon                   
              the guidance of local fishermen, the existence of an extremely                 
              active methane vent in a pock mark on the continental shelf off                
              Oregon has been verified.  This research is an exploratory                     
              effort to  demonstrate that samples can be obtained without                    
              loss or alterations of the contained gases and analyses to                     
              identify the  gases.
