Title       : Development of an Epi-Illuminating Fiber Optic Microprobe for Analysis of
               Chloroplast Specialization and Measurement of Chemical Parameters within Plant
               Tissue.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1993       
File        : a9012729

Award Number: 9012729
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Vogelmann tvogel@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John N. Nishio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel A. Buttry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This work will develop an epi-illumination fiber optic microprobe              
              that could be used to analyze metabolic events at microscopic                  
              sites within biological tissues.  Monochromatic light from a                   
              tunable dye laser will be coupled into an optical fiber and                    
              guided to the opposite end where there is a microscopic tip (5 um              
              diameter) that can be inserted within a biological target tissue.              
              The light will be used to stimulate fluorescence of intrinsic                  
              molecules, artificial fluorochromes or to monitor absorbance                   
              changes of electron carriers and metabolic intermediates.  We                  
              propose to develop and test the instrument within plants but in                
              principle, the epi-illumination probe could be used in a wide                  
              variety of biological systems.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Specific developmental efforts will be directed toward (1)                     
              analysis of the specialization of different absorbance changes of              
              photosynthetic electron carriers; (2) the development of fiber                 
              optic chemical senors that can be used to monitor metabolic                    
              changes, such as CO2 concentration, within cells and tissues.                  
              This will be pursued by attaching polymeric films with embedded                
              fluorochromes to the probe tip that undergo changes in                         
              fluorescence in response to changes in the probe environment.                  
                                                                                             
              The epi-illumination fiber optic probe will provide information                
              both in vivo and in real time within living tissues.  The                      
              response time is rapid (ns) and the probe will have high spatial               
              resolution so that it will be possible to measure events at                    
              microsites within light-scattering tissues, cells and to examine               
              the physiological specialization of small numbers (3-4) of                     
              organelles such as chloroplasts.
