Title       : Production and Perception in the Transition to Speech
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1990     
File        : a9012490

Award Number: 9012490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arlene S. Walker-Andrews arlenewa@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marilyn M. Vihman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lorraine McCune  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                  Wide individual differences have been reported for the                    
              production of early phonetic shapes and structures.  On the other              
              hand, infants' abilities to discriminate speech sounds have been               
              found to be remarkably strong, and universally available,                      
              regardless of the language of the environment.  Recent findings,               
              however, suggest a loss of ability to discriminate non-native                  
              speech sounds between 10 and 12 months.  The issue of the                      
              relation between perception and production in development remains              
              unresolved, particularly the completeness and accuracy of                      
              children's perceptual storage of adult words at the onset of                   
              their production of words.                                                     
                                                                                             
                   The goal of the present project is to test and refine a                   
              promising new methodology for experimental testing of the                      
              relationship between vocal production and perception in infants                
              in the course of their transition into speech.  The technique                  
              being developed is an operant conditioning paradigm which rewards              
              children's presses of an illuminated panel under appropriate                   
              stimulus conditions.  If the technique proves reliable, it will                
              be possible for the investigators and others to use it to examine              
              children's capacities for phonetic discrimination more thoroughly              
              and accurately than has been done before.
