Title       : Kinemataic and Dynamic Accuracy Performance Synthesis for Planar and Spatial
               Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1993    
File        : a9012456

Award Number: 9012456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Devendra P. Garg                        
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185005             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur G. Erdman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The research goal is to advance the state of the art in the                    
              design of planar and spatial mechanisms, with particular                       
              focus on kinematic and dynamic accuracy performance.  Four                     
              topics will be investigated.  In the first topic, kinematic                    
              synthesis for closed chain mechanisms, the relationship                        
              between the sensitivity to variations of link lengths and                      
              the location of the moving pivots of four link, six link                       
              and other complex mechanisms will be investigated for the                      
              objective of three and four position synthesis.  The second                    
              topic, kinematic synthesis for three dimensional open chain                    
              mechanisms, looks at design guidelines for optimizing                          
              mechanism endpoint accuracy performance.  In the third                         
              topic, dynamic synthesis for open chain multi axis                             
              mechanical systems, a new way of modeling three dimensional                    
              dynamic error as a function of frequency domain transfer                       
              function gain and delay time variations between axes is                        
              developed.  The fourth and last research topic develops                        
              computer simulation tools for identifying spatial accuracy                     
              of open chain mechanisms.  The overall research results are                    
              expected to be useful for practicing engineers in                              
              optimizing designs of planar and spatial mechanisms early                      
              in the design process.  Traditionally, design for                              
              performance has been subordinated to the design for                            
              strength and design for manufacturing functions.  This                         
              research attempts to compensate for that reduced emphasis.
