Title       : Interdisciplinary Analysis of Materials from Akrotiri- Aetokremnos, An Early
               Archaeological Site in Cyprus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1992   
File        : a9012998

Award Number: 9012998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29937              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan H. Simmons   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      P.O.Box 60220
	      Reno, NV  895060220    702/673-7311

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Excavations by Dr. Alan Simmons and his colleagues at the site of              
              Akrotiri-Aetokremnos, located on the Akrotiri Peninsula of                     
              southern Cyprus, have greatly surprised both archaeologists and                
              biologists, because they seem to indicate the co-occurrence of                 
              humans and pygmy forms of both hippopotamus and elephant.  Dated               
              to the ninth millennium BC, this stratified cave site contains                 
              both stone tools as well as the broken bones of both species.                  
              These data also indicate that human settlement of the eastern                  
              Mediterranean islands occurred ca. 2,000 years earlier than                    
              previously expected.  Evidence seems to indicate that a true                   
              association exists between the bones and stone tools.  This                    
              implies human hunting of these species and a probable human role               
              in their extinction.  In this project, Dr. Simmons and his                     
              colleagues will analyze the materials recovered during multiple                
              seasons of field research.  Objectives include analysis of faunal              
              and material culture assemblages, of site geomorphology,                       
              stratigraphy and paleoenvironment, as well as refinement of the                
              chronological sequence.                                                        
                                                                                             
              In many parts of the world the disappearance of many species of                
              animals appears to be associated with human factors.                           
              Archaeologists and biologists have, for many years, argued about               
              the human role in the extinction of such large species as                      
              mammoths and mastodons in North America.  What makes the issue                 
              complicated is that these faunal changes occurred at the end of                
              the last "Ice Age," and it is difficult to separate out the                    
              potential climatic factor.  Therefore, researchers have turned                 
              their attention to other areas of the world.  It is in this                    
              context that the Cyprus case is of primary interest.  Through                  
              study of the cave sediments insight will be gained into climatic               
              change - or stability.  Analysis of bone breakage patterns will                
              indicate how humans utilized and possibly killed these animals.                
                                                                                             
              Given the serious problem of species loss today, this research is              
              important because it will set the issue into a broader                         
              chronological context.  It will also increase our understanding                
              of early Mediterranean prehistory and help to document expanding               
              human capabilities there.
