Title       : The Role of Legality in the Struggle Against Apartheid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1994      
File        : a9012250

Award Number: 9012250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68511              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Abel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0307000   Human Rights-Minority Rel               
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              One of the key theoretical debates over the role of law in society             
              is under what conditions and how does law shape political                      
              domination or resistance.  The variables that may affect the                   
              influence of legality on political conflict are many and must take             
              into account historical, cultural, moral, economic, social, and                
              ideological forces as well as political forces.  There exists                  
              little empirical research that adequately addresses the issue, in              
              part because to do so requires a setting where the political and               
              legal frameworks are unstable.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This study will explore the circumstances under which legality does            
              or does not shape domination and resistance in South Africa, and,              
              when it does, the nature and consequences of that influence.  In               
              the struggle against apartheid, law has been a central battleground            
              between the South African regime and its opponents.  Drawing                   
              hypotheses from social science and social theory, Dr. Abel will                
              examine the circumstances under which each party chooses or avoids             
              legal norms and institutions and will analyze the consequences of              
              those choices for the transformation of the dispute and its                    
              ultimate outcome.  Discrete cases will be studied in different                 
              substantive areas where either the state or the anti-apartheid                 
              movement either uses or avoids law.  Data will be drawn from                   
              lawyers' files and in-depth interviews with lawyers, parties, and              
              judges.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This research promises to be pathbreaking in advancing our                     
              understanding of the role of law in political conflict and                     
              political movements in general and on the role of law in South                 
              Africa in particular.  The field research in South Africa will                 
              provide an opportunity to learn about a crucial issue in a society             
              whose transitional condition affords the ideal setting for such an             
              analysis.  Both parties to the struggle recognize that the role of             
              law will profoundly shape the nature of legality in post-apartheid             
              South Africa.  The study will present a creative framework that                
              will elucidate the conditions and substantive legal areas in which             
              the state or opposition avoids or opts for law.  Thus, this                    
              research will chart the course for much subsequent work on this                
              topic in the future.
