Title       : Neuroendocrine Regulation of Memory Storage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1993     
File        : a9012239

Award Number: 9012239
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen Sigvardt                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298030             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Gold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                  Recent findings from this laboratory indicate that increases              
              in blood glucose levels can enhance the formation of new memories              
              in rodents and humans.  Preliminary findings indicate that                     
              glucose effects on the brain appear to interact with central                   
              nervous system neurotransmitter actions.  In particular, glucose               
              effects are somewhat analogous to those of brain acetylcholine                 
              agonists and opiate antagonists.  This research project examines               
              the pharmacological bases by which modest increases in                         
              circulating glucose levels alter memory and other brain                        
              functions.  One set of experiments will attempt to demonstrate                 
              that direct brain injections of small amounts of glucose have                  
              effects on the brain similar to those observed after increases of              
              blood glucose levels.  Such findings would support the view that               
              behavioral effects of increases in circulating glucose levels                  
              reflect direct glucose actions on the central nervous system.  A               
              second set of experiments will compare glucose effects with those              
              of opiate antagonists, to explore the analogous actions of these               
              treatments.  Further experiments will examine the interactions of              
              glucose with specific central acetylcholine systems to begin                   
              identification of anatomical loci of glucose actions on the                    
              brain.  Together, the experiments in this project will provide                 
              additional characterization of the mechanisms by which relatively              
              small changes in blood glucose levels regulate the functions of                
              the brain.
