Title       : REU Supplement: Mesoscale Heat Exchangers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1994      
File        : a9012904

Award Number: 9012904
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George P. Peterson                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haim H. Bau bau@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay N. Zemel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project is an investigation of heat transfer processes in                 
              very small channels with the goal of developing highly                         
              compact, high performance heat exchangers (heat transfer rates                 
              on the order of 105W/m2K, are feasible).  Microfabrication                     
              techniques developed in the micro-electronic industry permit                   
              the fabrication of small size, high precision channels in                      
              silicon or other suitable materials.  The proposed dimensions                  
              of the channels will range from a few microns to fractions of                  
              a millimeter in width and depth.  The proposed lengths of the                  
              channel will be restricted to approximately 1-2 centimeters in                 
              the initial stages of the study.  Large numbers of channels                    
              can be accommodated in extremely small volumes.  Planar                        
              photolithographic technology provides a method for fabricating                 
                                                                                             
              extremely complicated fins and extended surfaces suited to                     
              optimizing the heat transfer process.  The proposed heat                       
              exchangers should be able to provide efficient heat                            
              transmission between two fluids or from a single fluid to the                  
              ambient.  Other advantages of the proposed heat exchangers,                    
              aside from efficiency, are their very small mass, low                          
              inventory of working liquids, small supporting structures, low                 
              cost, and vibration-free character.  This type of heat                         
              exchanger represents a class of thermal elements that have not                 
              been previously studied in the dimensional regime being                        
              considered here, suggesting that a fundamental inquiry into                    
              heat exchange in this mesoscale regime is desirable from a                     
              purely scientific viewpoint.  The proposed research is                         
              interdisciplinary in nature as it addresses simultaneously                     
              heat transfer, materials, sensor elements for monitoring the                   
              heat transfer processes, and microfabrication issues.
