Title       : Vitrification, Viscous Liquids and the Glass Transition in the Very High
               Positive Pressure Regimes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9012249

Award Number: 9012249
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282500             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Austen Angell caa@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George H. Wolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart M. Lindsay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Oliver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Professors C. Austin Angell, George H. Wolf, Stuart M. Lindsay,                
              and  Dr. William F. Oliver are supported by a grant from the                   
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to study                       
              vitrification, viscous liquids, and the glass transition in the                
              very high pressure regime.  This research will elucidate the                   
              behavior of a variety of important chemical systems and                        
              materials when subjected to conditions of extreme pressure.                    
                                                                                             
              The main thrust of this research concerns the extension of the                 
              study of liquid states and glass transition phenomenology to                   
              the very high pressure regime of 10 GPa where the product of                   
              the pressure and volume are comparable to the intermolecular                   
              potential.  A combination of experimental techniques will be                   
              used to characterize such systems including the use of                         
              ultra-high contrast Brillouin scattering in conjunction  with                  
              the use of a diamond anvil cell to maintain samples at ultra                   
              high pressures.  A subsidiary thrust of the proposal is to                     
              explore the use of pressure-induced vitrification by                           
              destabilization of crystal lattices.  Angell and co-workers                    
              conjecture that the pressure-induced vitrification phenomenon                  
              is a spinodal collapse similar in principle to that which                      
              terminates the liquid state at extreme negative pressures.
