Title       : Monte Carlo Simulation - Applications in Econometrics and Economic Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1990      
File        : a9012202

Award Number: 9012202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela J. Smith                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48707              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Marshall   (Principal Investigator current)
              David F. Hendry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Francois Richard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on two topics:  (1) Asymmetric bidders and               
              coalitions of bidders at first price auctions and, (2) Dynamic                 
              latent variables and disequilibrium models.  The topics share the              
              characteristic of being analytically intractable and, therefore,               
              requiring numerical techniques for investigation.  Hardware and                
              software methods have made a computational approach to these                   
              problems feasible.  One reason the first topic is important is                 
              that the federal government uses first price auctions extensively              
              for both the sale and procurement of commodities.  Nevertheless,               
              very little is understood about the feasibility of coalitions                  
              forming at these auctions.  If all bidders are identical and if                
              coalitions of bidders are possible, then their bids stem from a                
              source that is fundamentally different from the source for the                 
              bids of non-colluding bidders.  Consequently, a first step in                  
              analyzing bidder collusion is to understand the behavior of                    
              heterogeneous bidders who act non-cooperatively.  Solutions will               
              be obtained for first price auction models and the results                     
              utilized to understand and characterize the circumstances under                
              which bidders can profitably collude.                                          
                                                                                             
              One reason the second topic is important is because the latent                 
              variable technique can be used in estimating models of the U.S.                
              money demand where a number of important variables are inherently              
              latent (or unobserved) and dynamic.  Examples of these variables               
              are expected and permanent income and often the measure of money,              
              itself.  The investigators have developed a technique for                      
              numerically simulating the unobserved variables that permits                   
              inferences to be drawn without removing the latent variables.
