Title       : U.S. Japan Long-Term Research Visit: Diesel Combustion Modeling and Inlet Port
               Geometrical Effects on Flow and Combustion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1992  
File        : a9012744

Award Number: 9012744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice Cassidy                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85910              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay K. Martin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0207000   Transportation                          
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1407,
Abstract    :
              This award will facilitate cooperation between Professor Jay                   
              Martin of the University of Wisconsin, and Professors Tadashi                  
              Murayama and Takemi Chikahisa at Hokkaido University in                        
              Sapporo for one phase of the project.  The second phase                        
              involves collaboration between Professor Martin and Yasuv                      
              Takagi a senior researcher with the Central Engineering                        
              Laboratories of Nissan Motor Company, Ltd.  The computational                  
              research with Hokkaido University will focus on the development                
              of an improved diesel combustion model for use in the                          
              multidimensional fluid-mechanics code KIVA-II.  The experiment-                
              al research with Nissan Motor Company will involve the set                     
              up of a Particle-Image-Velocimetry (PIV) system for measuring                  
              the velocity fluid in the intake part of a reciprocating                       
              engine.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Both studies are likely to contribute substantially to the                     
              design of advanced combustion engines in important areas of                    
              modeling and incylinder flows.  All of the researchers                         
              involved are highly qualified in their areas of expertise.                     
              Professor Martin has extensive experience in laser velocimetry                 
              in engines and a solid base in engine modeling using KIVA                      
              which is the most widely used code for incylinder engine                       
              modeling.  Both the University of Wisconsin and Hokkaido                       
              University are two of the world centers of diesel combustion                   
              research.  In addition, both Hokkaido University and Nissan                    
              Motor Company have an international reputation for quality                     
              research. It is anticipated that the close ties developed                      
              between the researchers will continue long after the formal                    
              project has been completed.
