Title       : A Spectrophotometric Investigation of the Evolutionary History of the Inner
               Asteroid Belt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1990   
File        : a9012180

Award Number: 9012180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Gaffey gaffem@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1214      PLANETARY ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goals of this research by Dr. Gaffey are to improve our                    
              understanding of inner Solar System planetesimals by investigating:            
              (a) the evolutionary history of the inner belt asteroids; (b) the              
              nature of the early post-accretionary heating event which effected             
              these bodies as well as the meteorite parent bodies; (c) the                   
              collisional evolution of the inner belt; (d) the nature of magmatic            
              differentiation in small planetary objects; and (e) the nature of              
              the planetesimal population in the early inner Solar System which              
              accreted to form the large terrestrial planets.                                
                                                                                             
              The asteroids and the meteorites are the sole inner Solar System               
              remnants of the period during and just after the formation of the              
              Solar System.  Asteroids provide a "map" of the conditions and                 
              processes in the early inner Solar System while the meteorites                 
              provide a "calendar" of the events occurring during this period.               
              Earth-based telescopic observations can be used to determine the               
              surface mineralogies of these minor planets.  The mineralogical                
              composition records the conditions of formation of that asteroid               
              including its thermal evolution, metamorphism or magmatic                      
              differentiation, and collisional history.  Dr. Gaffey will derive              
              histories of individual asteroids to investigate the compositional             
              variations of the original solar nebula, the pattern of thermal and            
              collisional processes within the asteroid belt, the early evolution            
              of the Sun, and the nature of the early Earth which accreted from              
              a similar population of planetesimals.
