Title       : Estimating the Return to Education - Some Econometric Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1990       
File        : a9012149

Award Number: 9012149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela J. Smith                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71174              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Krueger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joshua Angrist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Economists have long speculated that the measured (income)                     
              returns to education may reflect the correlation of schooling                  
              levels with other variables related to earnings, such as ability.              
                                                                                             
              There have been many attempts over the years to estimate the                   
              return to education without bias from omitted variables that are               
              correlated with educational attainment and with earnings                       
              capacity. If education were randomly assigned, the returns to                  
              education would be consistently measured simply by comparing the               
              earnings of more and less educated individuals. In the absence of              
              random assignment, the omitted variable bias can be overcome by                
              using instrumental variables that are correlated with education                
              but have no other effect on earnings. This project uses Vietnam-               
              era draft lottery categories to derive an instrument for years of              
              education in a wage equation. As a consequence of the lottery,                 
              the risk of induction was randomly assigned on the basis of                    
              individuals' birthdays. Because it was necessary for young men                 
              seeking to avoid the draft to take draft avoidance measures                    
              (e.g. school attendance) before the cutoff lottery number for the              
              draft was actually known, the lottery has an influence on years                
              of schooling that differs from its influence on induction.                     
                                                                                             
              A second project uses variations in educational attainment by                  
              season of birth to estimate the returns to education. It is                    
              suggested that compulsory schooling laws -- which typically                    
              mandate school attendance until age 16 -- interact with age at                 
              school entry to produce a season of birth effect on education.                 
                                                                                             
              Resolution of this issue is of substantial importance for                      
              education policy and economic theory. As the average incomes of                
              high school and college graduates continues to diverge, it is                  
              vital to understand more about the relationship between schooling              
              and earnings.
