Title       : Organoboranes - New Chemistry and Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1992   
File        : a9012236

Award Number: 9012236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert C. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Organic Synthesis Program is funding the research of Dr.                   
              Herbert C. Brown to continue his pioneering development of new                 
              chiral chemistry based on organoboranes.  The work will lead to                
              the development of new methods for the stereospecific synthesis                
              of special groupings of atoms called functional groups.  These                 
              are important for the development of new efficient routes to                   
              the complex materials needed in our economy.                                   
                                                                                             
              Research on organoboranes has extended the applicability to the                
              synthesis of cyclic, polycyclic and various partially alkylated                
              organoboranes.  The reactions of organoboranes proceed                         
              predominantly with complete retention of configuration.  This                  
              development makes it highly desirable to discover new reactions                
              leading to other valuable compounds not now available from                     
              organoboranes.  The utility of various homologating agents                     
              generated in situ in the presence of an organoborane will be                   
              explored for the homologation of boracyclanes, vinyl-and                       
              alkynylboronate esters, bi- and polycyclic boracyclanes and                    
              tertiary alkylboronate esters.  The synthetic utility of a new                 
              three-carbon homologation procedure will be investigated for                   
              the preparation of alpha-vinyl boronate esters, medium- and                    
              large-ring boracyclanes and as well as their conversion to the                 
              corresponding medium- and large-ring ketones, amines and                       
              ethers.  New reactions will be sought that will lead to                        
              valuable compounds not now available from organoboranes, such                  
              as mercaptans, nitriles, organophosphorous compounds, etc.  The                
              synthesis of various stereodefined vinyl organoboranes and                     
              their utility in the synthesis of stereodefined dienes, enynes                 
              and gamma, delta-unsaturated ketones will also be investigated.
