Title       : Environmental, Economic and Cultural Change in the Khabur Basin, Syria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9012337

Award Number: 9012337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79122              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank A. Hole Frank.Hole@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 1391,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Near East has long served as a focus for archaeological                    
              investigation, because its prehistory documents two of the major               
              "revolutions" in human development.  At a time just prior to                   
              10,000 years ago small hunting and gathering bands began to                    
              develop a settled way of life.  Group size increased, ceramic                  
              vessels were first manufactured, and the gradual domestication of              
              both wild plants such as wheat and barley and animals such as                  
              goats and sheep occurred.  At a later time period, social units                
              grew larger and became organized on a hierarchical basis.                      
              Temples and large public buildings were constructed, and the                   
              hallmarks of "civilization" such as writing emerged.  In their                 
              speculations on how and why this process occurred, archaeologists              
              have realized that human societies interact closely with and are               
              influenced by the natural environment, and it has been implicitly              
              assumed that environmental change played a role.  However, just                
              how the environment changed over time and how populations were                 
              affected is unclear.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Dr. Frank Hole and his colleagues will conduct research to                     
              address this issue.  The team is experienced in collaborative,                 
              multi-disciplinary field and laboratory research and will acquire              
              data to assess environmental change over time.  They will conduct              
              field studies of the geomorphology and vegetation of the Khabur                
              drainage of northeastern Syria and establish a regional                        
              environmental context for interpretation.  They will also sample               
              sections from prior archaeological excavations to obtain data                  
              pertinent to local environments and economic adaptations across                
              the time sequence.  Because of extensive salvage archaeology in                
              this region, many sites of known age which contain relevant data               
              are available.  These settlements will yield both environmental                
              and economic information.                                                      
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              new insight into the processes which underlie the development of               
              complex society.  It will also yield information on long-term                  
              human-environment interactions in a ecologically sensitive part                
              of the world.
