Title       : Prospects for International Agreement on CO2 Containment Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1990    
File        : a9012507

Award Number: 9012507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Darmstadter   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Toman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter M. Morrisette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Resources For Future Inc
	      
	      Washington, DC  20036    /   -

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for a study to identify and                
              analyse obstacles to international cooperation in controlling                  
              growth in emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), one of the gases                  
              contributing to increased warming of the earth's surface.  The                 
              research will also explore possible means of overcoming these                  
              obstacles.  The study has five parts:  (1) assembling basic                    
              information and providing a broad perspective on the prevailing and            
              prospective CO2 problem, (2) reviewing actual or prospective                   
              international agreements for insights applicable to the formation              
              of an international CO2 accord, (3) identifying different                      
              perspectives, by reviewing relevant policy plans and pronouncements            
              of governments and private decision makers and by assessing actual             
              behavior with respect to greenhouse warming in different regions               
              of the world, (4) reviewing the comparative cost of achieving                  
              specified reductions in emissions and developing an approximate                
              rank-ordering of reduction costs in different regions, and (5)                 
              exploring and analysing a wide range of equity problems associated             
              with assumptions and choices about how to control these emissions.             
              Research findings will be published in a peer-reviewed volume;                 
              shorter papers will be distributed to scholars and general                     
              audiences; meetings and briefings will involve both public                     
              officials and private participants in discussion the implications              
              of the findings.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This research has an important and timely focus; its results will              
              be useful and accessible to a wide audience.  The qualifications               
              and track record of the investigators are excellent; institutional             
              support is very good; the research plan is sensible.  Support is               
              highly recommended.
