Title       : Political Pressure and Fiscal Federalism: A Model of State Mandates on Local
               Government Expenditures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9012791

Award Number: 9012791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25641              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugenia F. Toma   (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Hoyt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Studies in federalism have traditionally examined whether certain              
              goods or services are best provided at the local, state, or                    
              federal levels of government.  Inefficiencies in local provision               
              of goods and services can be addressed in a federalist system by               
              shifting either the production or financing of the local public                
              good to higher levels of government .  A much less discussed                   
              alternative is the imposition of mandates by higher levels of                  
              government on subordinate units.  Mandates are quantity                        
              constraints on the subordinate units of government that require                
              an increase or decrease in the provision of the good depending on              
              the direction of the spillover.  This research project develops a              
              political economy model of federalism that focuses on mandates.                
              For empirical purposes, the model emphasizes local and state                   
              government relationships but it could be easily extended to state              
              and federal relationships.  The model is empirically tested using              
              expenditure data for various categories of locally provided goods              
              and services.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The significance of this project lies in combining the political               
              process with the normative economic models of local public goods.              
              Attempts to analyze intergovernment policies cannot be successful              
              without a positive model of fiscal federalism.  This project                   
              takes a first step in answering very important policy questions                
              regarding the determinants of which levels of government provide               
              particular goods and analyzing the nature of the interaction                   
              between levels of government.
