Title       : Probabilistic System-Level Fault Diagnosis in Multiprocessor/Multicomputer
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1994   
File        : a9012549

Award Number: 9012549
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: J. Robert Jump                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159176             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kang G. Shin kgshin@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Due to their potential for high reliability and throughput via the             
              multiplicity of components, distributed computing systems are being            
              increasingly used for reliability- and time-critical applications.             
              However, the probability of having one or more component failures              
              in a distributed system increases with the number of components                
              used.  Thus, the ability of locating faulty components, isolating              
              them, reconfiguring the system, and resuming the computation is a              
              key to the success in realizing the potential of any distributed               
              system.  As part of the global goal of designing fault-tolerant                
              distributed systems, this project is concerned with system-level               
              fault diagnosis for large multiprocessor/multicomputer systems.                
              A thorough survey of the currently available methods for diagnosis             
              of large systems has led to a conclusion that a probabilistic                  
              approach is the most promising.  A probabilistic diagnosis approach            
              allows for the diagnosis of multiprocessor/multicomputer systems               
              with both intermittent and permanent faults, using high-level tests            
              which have imperfect fault coverage and/or are executed on-line.               
              The first step of this project is to develop optimal solutions to              
              the probabilistic diagnosis problem using single or multiple fault             
              syndromes.  The second step is to efficiently implement these                  
              solutions as distributed algorithms.  This task is non-trivial                 
              since the identity of faulty communication links and processing                
              nodes cannot be assumed to be known "a priori".  Finally, the                  
              probabilistic diagnosis will be implemented and their performance              
              will be measured on an experimental multicomputer system, called               
              HARTS, which is currently being built at the Real-Time Computing               
              Laboratory (RTCL), The University of Michigan.
