Title       : National Conference and Clearinghouse on Computer Ethics, New Haven, CT, August
               12-16, 1990
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1991    
File        : a9012492

Award Number: 9012492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135628             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrell W. Bynum 2033974423  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern CT State Univ
	      501 Crescent Street
	      New Haven, CT  065151330    203/397-4275

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              Major developments in science and technology often have important              
              social, legal and ethical implications.  This is clearly true of               
              new developments in computer science and technology.  Computer                 
              professionals, philosophers, social scientists and public policy               
              makers have responded to these issues in a variety of promising                
              ways.  Some professional organizations and governments, both state             
              and federal, have begun to address some of the problems.  This                 
              project will build on these efforts by sponsoring a national                   
              conference on computer ethics in the summer 1991.  This inter-                 
              professional, four day event will bring together persons from these            
              different disciplines and organizations, who generally have little             
              opportunity to interact.  They will hear cross-disciplinary                    
              perspectives in keynote addresses and participate in heterogeneous             
              working groups to discuss and explore six major themes: (1)                    
              privacy, (2) system security, (3) equity and access, (4) software              
              ownership, (5) values in the computer curriculum, and (6) values               
              in academic computing.                                                         
                                                                                             
              The conference is the initial event in the agenda of the Research              
              Center on Computing and Society at Southern Connecticut State                  
              University.  Much of the administrative framework for the center               
              is in place.  The center will help to provide long-term,                       
              institutional assistance for a cross-disciplinary network of                   
              people, organizations and materials on this topic.  The center will            
              support faculty development, research activity, publication and                
              distribution of materials, major international events, curriculum              
              development, case studies, training sessions and tutorials.  The               
              books, journals, reports, articles, data bases, software, films,               
              videos and other materials contributed to, or prepared for, the                
              conference will yield the core of a research library that the                  
              center will maintain and expand to provide a resource for studies              
              in computing and values.  The conference itself will generate model            
              curriculum materials, proceedings, reports, and a "Resource                    
              Directory on Computing and Values," all of which will be widely                
              available in paper and electronic form.                                        
                                                                                             
              This proposal grows from a successful EVS planning grant that                  
              brought together individuals representing the range of professions             
              and professional associations and journals involved in issues of               
              computer ethics.  It also generated press and policy interest.  The            
              conference is timely and appropriate; it is likely to be well                  
              attended; outcomes will be widely disseminated; evaluation and                 
              follow-up activities are planned.  Institutional support is very               
              good and the principal investigators and associates highly                     
              qualified.  The proposal is recommended for support with high                  
              priority.
