Title       : Computer Science Programs for the Nineties and Beyond
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1990      
File        : a9012483

Award Number: 9012483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly P Baker                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nagi Wakim nwakim@cs.bowiestate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan Langdon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Johnny Ponds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca A. Berg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Manjit S. Bhatia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowie State University
	      14000 Jericho Park Road
	      Bowie, MD  20715    301/860-3555

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2886,
Abstract    :
                   In this planning project Bowie State University will:                      
                  1) Restructure the computer science programs to provide                   
              smooth continuity from one degree to another.  Since their                     
              Master's program was designed with the objective of retraining                 
              mainly professionals of non-computer science backgrounds, and the              
              Bachelor's program lacks courses in the broad sub-disciplines of               
              the computing field, they will restructure both programs so that               
              (a) the undergraduate program will meet the curriculum guidelines              
              of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), (b) any overlap              
              in programs' course contents will be eliminated, and (c) their                 
              Master's program graduates can smoothly enroll into Doctorate's                
              programs of partner universities and continue their computer                   
              science education when so desired.                                             
                   2)  Establish a facility for student and faculty research in              
              computer science.                                                              
                   3)  Work on establishing an independent Computer and                      
              Information Sciences Department. They will accomplish their                    
              objectives by:                                                                 
                   1)  Restructuring the undergraduate program to meet ACM's                 
              computer science curriculum recommendations that they offer new                
              courses across the sub-disciplines of the field with emphasis on               
              problem solving in order for their senior students to perform at               
              a level that will meet national standard on the COSC Graduate                  
              Record Examination (GRE).                                                      
                   2)  Setting up partnerships with at least two Doctorate                   
              program offering universities in order to provided the graduates               
              of the Master's program with the opportunity to pursue further                 
              graduate studies leading to Ph.D degrees.                                      
                   3)  Increasing the number of faculty with terminal degrees                
              and/or strong research and development experience in computer                  
              science areas.                                                                 
                  4)  Establishing a Center for Research in Distributed                      
              Computing (CeRDIC) for consolidating the department's future,                  
              private and government, sponsored research activities in                       
              distributed computing.
