Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Wavelet Analysis: Numerical Algorithms and Turbulence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1992      
File        : a9012751

Award Number: 9012751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1599768            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Coifman coifman@math.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir Rokhlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katepalli R. Sreenivasan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1261,9218,9263,
Abstract    :
                   This project will focus on mathematical research into                     
              analysis-based algorithms for the compression and rapid                        
              manipulation of numerical data.  The work continues efforts to                 
              improve compression of acoustical and video data, to pattern and               
              structure detection and in the design of numerical algorithms for              
              the solution of differential and integral equations.                           
              Applications to the study of turbulent phenomena as well as                    
              forward and inverse scattering problems are also expected.                     
                   The primary tool of this work is the fast wavelet and wave                
              packet transformations.  Wavelet analysis has opened the way to                
              the design of classes of fast numerical algorithms similar in                  
              usage to the Fast Fourier Transform, but more versatile.  Its                  
              strength lies in its applicability to problems which do not have               
              translational invariance and for certain classes of nonlinear                  
              computations.  Recent progress in these areas has pointed to the               
              need for designing special purpose orthonormal bases.  In                      
              particular, it has become clear that the analysis of locally                   
              modulated signals, as well as the study of oscillatory integral                
              operators requires the introduction of bases capable of more                   
              precise frequency analysis and good space localization.                        
                   Various classes of bases have been designed to achieve both               
              numerical efficacy and specific features.  Present plans include               
              development of large-scale calculations which can be implemented               
              in two-dimensional structures (such as modeling radar scattering               
              by a whole aircraft including the multizone dielectrics and                    
              layered surface effects).  Work will also be done developing new               
              computational tools for the analysis of turbulence data in which               
              multiscale, multifrequencey and localization analysis will be                  
              provided by wavelet and wavepacket correlations aimed at                       
              identifying turbulence mechanisms.  Further work will also be                  
              carried out in developing modulated wave form libraries of                     
              orthonormal waveforms which permit high compression rates for                  
              voice transmission and analysis.
