Title       : The Geometrical Structure and Physics of Coronal Mass Ejections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9012779

Award Number: 9012779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherry O. Farwell                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard V. Jackson bvjackson@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Abstract                                                                        
                  Solar disturbances produce major effects on the corona, the               
              solar wind, the interplanetary medium, and the Earth along with                
              its magnetosphere.  New techniques have been developed for                     
              studying plasma disturbances in the inner heliosphere.  This                   
              research will continue to investigate the physics of these                     
              disturbances, using data from the HELIOS zodiacal-light                        
              photometers and a variety of other coronal instruments. The                    
              zodiacal-light photometers have already provided the first                     
              stereoscopic information about the heliospheric shape of these                 
              disturbances.  Modelling techniques will also be employed to                   
              interpret and fit the observed results.  The HELIOS imaging                    
              combined with other observations should provide a unique                       
              opportunity to determine coronal mass-ejection velocities,                     
              streamer material velocities, 3D structures, and total masses in               
              the interplanetary medium.  This can be done with fewer                        
              assumptions and more accuracy than previously possible.  Besides               
              mass ejections, solar disturbances which reach the                             
              interplanetary medium also include coronal streamers, shocks, and              
              co-rotating interaction regions,  It has been possible to view                 
              these features with the zodiacal-light photometers on board the                
              HELIOS spacecraft and these will be studied to determine how they              
              relate to near-surface solar structures and the heliospheric                   
              current sheet.  The study will be extended to include comparisons              
              of the HELIOS photometer observations with other remote sensing                
              observations including those of kilometric radio bursts and                    
              interplanetary scintillations provided by the Cambridge, England               
              scintillation array.  ***  //
