Title       : Contextual and Demographic Influences on Judicial Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9012192

Award Number: 9012192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lisa Martin                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lettie M. Wenner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              Background characteristics of judges at all levels of our                      
              judicial                                                                       
              system are often used to predict the kinds of decisions they will              
                                                                                             
              make on legal questions.  Two rival hypotheses compete to explain              
                                                                                             
              policy makers' decisions: (1) values absorbed throughout their                 
              lives as reflected in the demographic profiles of the individuals              
                                                                                             
              and (2) the immediate pressures placed upon them by the social-                
              political context in which they make their decisions.  A                       
              criticism                                                                      
              of traditional judicial behavioral research is that scholars                   
              often                                                                          
              focus on one type of causal variable to the exclusion of all                   
              others.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This Research Opportunities for Women Planning Grant will allow                
              the investigator to do preliminary research prior to submitting a              
                                                                                             
              request for a larger study that will both measure and                          
              differentiate                                                                  
              between demographic and contextual variables which influence                   
                                                                                             
              judges' decisions.  The research will use environmental and natural            
                                                                                             
              resource management cases which deal with economic regulation.                 
                                                                                             
              During this planning phase, a data base of court cases on                      
                                                                                             
              environmental policy will be developed and measures will be                    
                                                                                             
              created.  The bulk of the investigator's time during this phase                
                                                                                             
              will be devoted to various conceptual and measurement problems                 
                                                                                             
              which need to be resolved.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              Little is known about whether values accepted during the early                 
                                                                                             
              socialization process continue to dominate an individual's thinking            
                                                                                             
              or whether pressures from the immediate environment exert more                 
                                                                                             
              influence.  By beginning this investigation in the judicial arena,             
                                                                                             
              we may be able to expand general theory concerning the                         
                                                                                             
              socialization process.
