Title       : Concepts of Nature in Classical Political Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1990  
File        : a9012072

Award Number: 9012072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Schabas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The history of science has taught us always to remember that the               
              development of a field does not nor cannot occur within an                     
              intellectual vacuum.  Science by its very nature is a social                   
              pursuit practiced by men and women who interact not only with their            
              fellow specialists but with the events of society at large.  Dr.               
              Schabas is exploring the ways that economists were influenced by               
              other scientists in the development of their economic theories.                
              It is important to note, though this is not the subject of this                
              research, that the influence was not only one way.  Economists                 
              affected the development of other sciences--the most famous example            
              is the influence of the economist Malthus on the thought of Charles            
              Darwin.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The issues that Dr. Schabas is exploring under this grant are the              
              many different uses of concepts of nature in the major economic                
              texts from the Physiocrats of the mid-eighteenth century to John               
              Stuart Mill in the mid-nineteenth century.  More specifically, she             
              is tracing the gradual retreat from appeals to nature as economists            
              came to recognize the importance of social institutions in                     
              structuring the economy and as they came to set human nature apart             
              from physical nature.   This ongoing "denaturalization" of the                 
              conceptual foundations was part and parcel of the gradual                      
              secularization of science and the general transformation of                    
              economics into a science of the mind that came with the Marginal               
              Revolution of the 1870s.  To develop these themes, Dr. Schabas is              
              examining these specific topics:  1) John Stuart Mill on the                   
              natural/artificial distinction;  2) Concepts of nature in the                  
              economic writings of David Hume and Adam Smith; and 3) The                     
              privileging of physical nature in the Physiocratic corpus.
