Title       : Regional Development and Income Distribution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1990     
File        : a9012495

Award Number: 9012495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85075              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria J. Willumsen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Cruz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9135,
Abstract    :
                   The imbalances and regional disparities that persist in most              
              developing countries often compound problems of economic development           
              and income distribution.  Moreover, alternative development strategies         
              have different impacts on regional economies within a particular               
              country.  Understanding the problem of unequal development within              
              countries is of concern to regional scientists, economists, and other          
              scientists, but the paucity of multiregional social and economic data          
              limits empirical research on this problem.  The objectives of this             
              project are twofold:  (1) development of methods for constructing              
              multiregional social accounts data from limited and uncertain                  
              information and for applying these methods to the study of Brazil, and         
              (2) development of a multiregional, computable general equilibrium             
              model that provides a framework for analyzing unequal regional                 
              development.  The investigators will estimate the social accounts for          
              the Northeast region of Brazil and for the rest of the nation as whole.        
              These social accounts will also separate each region into urban and            
              rural sectors.  The methods will use partial data on regional                  
              transactions gathered from several surveys and will adapt Stone's              
              procedures for treating unknown or unbalanced economic data as a               
              restricted or constrained statistical estimation problem.                      
                   The study will contribute to our understanding of the                     
              multiregional development process in Brazil and in other developing            
              countries by providing an alternative method to sectoral analysis as a         
              means of explaining regional disparity in the development process.  The        
              results will serve as a guide to the construction of multiregional             
              social accounting matrices (SAMs) from limited and incomplete                  
              information.  The development of the proposed model, along with the            
              results of simulation exercises to probe the relationship between              
              macro-economic policy, regional development and income distribution,           
              will add to the empirical evidence on the impact of alternative                
              economic policies and changes in external economic factors on regional         
              growth in developing economies.  This research therefore will                  
              contribute to our broader understandings of the development process and        
              to the likely efficacy of various policies designed to stimulate               
              development.
