Title       : RUI: Old Industries, New Industries, and Regional Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1990    
File        : a9012175

Award Number: 9012175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129283             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia M. Flynn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bentley College
	      c/o Sponsored Programs,MOR 324
	      Waltham, MA  024524705    781/891-2000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   Dramatic changes in the industrial structure of many regions have         
              taken place in recent decades.  Older industries have declined or              
              departed from many regions, while newer firms have taken their places.         
              Research on the dynamics of industrial decline and growth generally has        
              focused on these processes independently; few attempts have been made          
              to link these processes, thereby determining the degree to which               
              abandonment of regions by certain manufacturers relates to the                 
              development of new industrial activities.  The first phase of this             
              project will examine case studies already completed by the                     
              investigators and by other scholars to enhance the conceptual framework        
              for the analysis of changing local and regional economies.  This               
              synthetic examination will expand models of production life cycles, and        
              it will clarify potential relationships among firms in local and               
              regional settings.  The second part of the research project will               
              consist of a detailed comparison of two industrial regions, one in the         
              northeastern U.S. and one in another part of the country.  Data on             
              economic, demographic, political, and other relevant factors will be           
              gathered, and corporate executives, civic, financial, and labor                
              leaders, and other knowledgeable individuals will be interviewed.              
              These case studies will permit validation of the general models of             
              industrial change and identification of the processes and factors that         
              link different firms moving in and out of industrial regions.                  
                   This research will gather and integrate conclusions drawn in a            
              large number of case studies on this important topic.  It will provide         
              a systematic, detailed analysis of the processes and factors that              
              influence the decisions of firms to leave or enter two specific                
              industrial areas, and it will offer a valuable assessment of more              
              general models of economic locational decision making.  This project           
              also will provide an excellent opportunity for an outstanding scholar          
              at a predominantly undergraduate institution to expand the level of her        
              research, thereby benefitting both the scholarly community at large and        
              the students who will work with her on this project.
