Title       : Conditions for Asymptotic Stability in OLG and Growth Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1992       
File        : a9012166

Award Number: 9012166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela J. Smith                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42921              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9135,
Abstract    :
              Economists have long used overlapping generations and                          
              neoclassical growth models to explore important empirical and                  
              theoretical issues in public finance, development, international               
              trade, savings and monetary policy. Recently, some researchers                 
              have attacked the way these models characterize the long run                   
              tendency of the economy. This project will study the                           
              mathematical equations which economists use to codify and apply                
              these models and investigate the relationship between the                      
              empirically determined parameters and the corresponding long run               
              properties of the models. Since the equations which codify the                 
              assumptions of the models can lead to bizarre behavior when these              
              models are used in practice, the models could give misleading                  
              forecasts of the behavior of the economy. By applying state of                 
              the art computer programming techniques, formulae for                          
              characterizing the plausible ranges of parameters of interest                  
              will be developed.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The concept of determinacy developed by Laitner and Anderson-                  
              Moore will be applied to identify fixed-point and limit cycles                 
              which possess stability properties that imply unique convergent                
              trajectories from nearby points. The project will focus on                     
              discrete time models. Analytic expressions for specific utility                
              and production functions will be developed when general formulae               
              are unattainable. The asymptotic stability of these models will                
              be investigated for empirically relevant ranges of model                       
              parameters in order to characterize the plausibility and                       
              relevance of the potentially complex asymptotic behavior when                  
              confronting real world data.  The project will begin an                        
              investigation of the global convergence properties of these                    
              models with the objective of developing "higher order" turnpike                
              theorems characterizing conditions guaranteeing convergence to                 
              limit cycles of a given periodicity.
