Title       : Patterns, Controls, and Ecosytem Consequences of Trophic Structure in a Stream
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1990      
File        : a9008114

Award Number: 9008114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Crystal Blackshear                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart G. Fisher s.fisher@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy B. Grimm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Dudley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will describe the spatial and temporal patterns of                
              trophic structure and the proportion of total biomass in primary               
              producer, primary consumer, and secondary consumer trophic levels              
              in a desert stream ecosystem. The spatial context for this                     
              description will be a hierarchical arrangement of patches from                 
              the relatively small scale of algal or macrophyte assemblages to               
              large scale run-riffle-pool habitats.  Temporal change will be                 
              assessed along successional trajectories associated with flooding              
              and drying.  Losses and gains of biomass at each trophic level                 
              will be evaluated both within and between patches to determine                 
              how patches are linked.                                                        
                   Experiments will identify mechanisms shaping trophic                      
              structure and causing observed temporal changes in trophic                     
              structure.  Mesocosm experiments will manipulate resources and                 
              consumers in 3-level systems, and a natural stream experiment                  
              will manipulate nutrients and top predators.  Descriptive and                  
              experimental results will be used to evaluate ecosystem-level                  
              consequences of specific trophic configurations; this evaluation               
              will indicate whether change in community-level properties drives              
              change in ecosystem structure and function.                                    
                   This research explores questions concerned with the relative              
              influence of top-down (propagated from the top to the bottom of                
              the food chain) and bottom-up (propagated from the base)                       
              processes in determining patterns observed in nature.  These are               
              important issues concerned with the responses of ecological                    
              systems to disturbance.  The facilities for this research are                  
              excellent; the investigators are productive and innovative                     
              experts in the area of stream ecology.
