Title       : Mitochondrial DNA Sequence Evolution in Humans and Other Animals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1994   
File        : a9008912

Award Number: 9008912
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce N. Ames   (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Patton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The laboratory will use improved methods for comparing genes                   
              from living specimens and also ancient remains in order to build               
              evolutionary trees and suggest time scales for organizing                      
              knowledge of biological diversity within and among animal                      
              species, including humans.  Specifically, this project will                    
              determine the sequence of bases present in pieces of genes from                
              the mitochondria of about 600 individuals and 110 species.                     
              Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is maternally inherited and evolves 5                
              to 10 times as fast as nuclear DNA.  Because different parts of                
              the mtDNA molecule evolves at different rates, mtDNA has proven                
              useful for studying a broad range of evolution relationships,                  
              from ones as close as among humans to ones as distant as between               
              fishes and humans.  Comparison of the sequences will also permit               
              testing ideas about what determines the rate of molecular                      
              evolution in such diverse animals as mammals, bird, insects, sea               
              urchins, and worms.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The genealogical framework to be provided for human mtDNA is                   
              likely to give new insights into human evolution and genetic                   
              diversity.  In particular, these studies are expected to augment               
              knowledge of the rime and place of human origin and enable the                 
              prehistoric processes of migration and population expansion                    
              across the Old World into Oceania and the New World to be                      
              examined in new ways.                                                          
                                                                                             
              The technique for obtaining each DNA sequence employs the                      
              polymerase chain reaction.  This method starts with the DNA in a               
              tiny amount of tissue and makes up to a million copies of a                    
              specific segment of this DNA, which can then be sequenced                      
              directly.  Because the method avoids the tedious steps of cloning              
              and searching for the desired clone among thousands of millions                
              of others, obtaining DNA sequences of hundreds of individuals                  
              (humans and animals) can be done after collection of a drop of                 
              blood or a few hairs.  In addition, this technique makes the                   
              world's storehouse of museum specimens, as well as other ancient               
              remains, accessible to molecular genetic analysis.  This project               
              will seek to improve further the methods of gathering DNA                      
              sequences, particularly with respect to retrieving sequences from              
              museum specimens and ancient remains.
