Title       : Cognitive Control of Movement Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1992      
File        : a9008665

Award Number: 9008665
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190475             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Rosenbaum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  How do people select patterns of movement for carrying out                
              everyday tasks?  Casual observation of people manipulating                     
              objects or walking in cluttered environments can obscure the fact              
              that a selection process is required, for under normal                         
              circumstances people select movements without conscious                        
              deliberation even though infinitely many movements are usually                 
              possible at any given time.                                                    
                   In approaching the problem of movement selection, a possible              
              theory is that the actor learns to perform specific movements in               
              specific contexts: "If the nail is so high, swing the hammer so                
              far," and so forth.  This theory is unappealing, however, because              
              memory might not be able to store all required condition-action                
              pairs and the actor might be unable to perform in novel                        
              situations.  A preferable theory says there are a small set of                 
              constraints which limit the number or types of movements that are              
              allowed.  Identifying the smallest and most powerful set of                    
              constraints is the aim of this research.  Finding such                         
              constraints will further the basic understanding of human                      
              performance and decision-making and also aid the design of                     
              robotic systems, the diagnosis of motor disorders, and the                     
              development of effective motor-skills training and retraining                  
              procedures.                                                                    
                   The research will involve two series of experiments.  One                 
              will test the hypothesis that the relative contribution of an                  
              individual limb segment to movement of an end-effector (for                    
              example, the fingertip) depends on the degree of match between                 
              the optimal movement characteristics of the segment and the                    
              required movement of the end-effector.  A virtue of this proposed              
              control strategy is that each limb segment can be independently                
              controlled.  Nevertheless the collective activations of the                    
              segments can still produce graceful, coordinated movement. The                 
              detailed assumptions and predictions of the model will be tested               
              in experiments where people will move the fingertip at varying                 
              rates over varying distances, where the relative contributions of              
              the forearm, hand, and finger will be analyzed.                                
                   Another series of experiments will be concerned with object               
              manipulation.  These experiments will identify the sources of                  
              three newly discovered phenomena concerning people's choices of                
              hand grips when taking hold of simple objects to be moved from                 
              one location to another: (1) A strong tendency to tolerate                     
              awkward postures when first taking hold of the object for the                  
              sake of comfort at the end of the task;  (2) An equally strong                 
              tendency to select movements that ensure the visibility of the                 
              target at the end of the task, even if this conflicts with the                 
              postural comfort criterion; and (3) The tendency to persist in                 
              using a particular movement pattern when that pattern has been                 
              used repeatedly in immediately preceding tasks.
