Title       : Clostridial Neurotoxin Binding Proteins in Exocytosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1992       
File        : a9008685

Award Number: 9008685
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246586             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary A. Bittner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1188      SYNAPTIC MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Cells secrete prepackaged hormones and neurotransmitters by a                  
              process known as exocytosis.  This process plays an important                  
              role in the function of most organ systems in the body.  For                   
              example, the pancreas secretes hormones that regulate blood                    
              sugar.  Secretion of neurotransmitters is the means by which the               
              nervous system controls a whole host of function, including heart              
              rate, blood pressure, breathing, and muscle movement.  Despite                 
              its obvious importance, exocytosis is poorly understood.  We know              
              a great deal about the signaling systems which initiate the                    
              process, but very little about what happens at the biochemical                 
              level once secretion is triggered.  In a resting secretory cell,               
              hormones or neurotransmitters are stored in small, membrane-                   
              covered vesicles, waiting for an appropriate signal.  During                   
              exocytosis, these vesicles make their way to the surface of the                
              cell, where they bind and fuse with the cell membrane, releasing               
              their contents outside the cell.  Although it seems likely that                
              one or more proteins participate in this process, it has proved                
              difficult to demonstrate this experimentally.  This proposal                   
              takes a new approach toward identifying such proteins.  It takes               
              advantage of the fact that certain bacterial toxins can partially              
              or totally block one of the later stages of the secretory                      
              process.  Although the exact mechanism by which the inhibition                 
              occurs is unknown, it almost certainly involves an interaction                 
              with the proteins which are of interest to us.  I plan to use                  
              radiolabeled toxin interact.  I will then purify these proteins                
              and determine their subcellular localization and functions will                
              markedly increase our understanding of, and thus our potential                 
              ability to control, the process of exocytosis.  Eventually, these              
              studies may lead to novel therapeutic approaches towards diseases              
              such as hypertension which have a prominent secretory component.
