Title       : ROW:Gender Differential Link Between Mathematics Achievementand Self-Concept:
               Effects of Puberty and School Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1990       
File        : a9008863

Award Number: 9008863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura R. Roberts   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                        ABSTRACT                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              Relative to their frequency in the population, women are                       
              underrepresented in occupations that call for expertise in                     
              complex mathematics.  Why?  The author of this proposal                        
              hypothesizes a complex interaction between developmental                       
              differences in the self-concept, differences that occur as a                   
              consequence of pubertal changes, and school context to explain                 
              the documented discontinuities between boys and girls in math                  
              ability.  This work has the potential to illuminate the reasons                
              for the apparent superiority of boys in mathematics, and to                    
              show how the social factors responsible for these differences                  
              might be offset.  The basic assumption of the work is that math                
              performance is more crucial to the self-concept of young and                   
              adolescent boys than it is to girls.  The discontinuity in                     
              perceived importance of math ability is assumed to accelerate                  
              during puberty.  Using sophisticated measurements, the research                
              will assess young students as they move from childhood to                      
              adolescence, to determine if the hypothesized changes in math                  
              self-concept occur as a function of developmental timing.  The                 
              outcome of this longitudinal study will have important                         
              scientific and social implications.  If the hypotheses prove                   
              tenable, we will have a much deeper understanding of the                       
              reasons that underlie the apparent loss of mathematical skill                  
              in females, and, perhaps more importantly, the means of                        
              preventing this needless decline.
