Title       : SGER: Research of an Image Acquisition and Processing System for Three
               Dimensional Spatial Analysis of Vegetation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1990      
File        : a9008886

Award Number: 9008886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Crystal Blackshear                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1990      
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32165              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Gosz jgosz@sevilleta.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Rasure  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   This project takes advantage of new developments in                       
              photography and image analysis software to advance field                       
              studies in environmental science.  The dynamics of ecological                  
              processes as well as impacts from disturbance often are                        
              measured by changes in vegetation.  Traditional methods of                     
              vegetation analysis are labor intensive, slow, and as a result,                
              they often are confined to small-scale measurements.  Many                     
              current research topics (i.e. climate change) require analysis                 
              over very large areas, and although remote sensing from space                  
              is providing unprecedented information, validation of satellite                
              imagery with large-scale vegetation analysis is lacking.                       
                   A new, ground-based methodology has been developed by an                  
              interdisciplinary group at the University of New Mexico that is                
              significantly increasing the ability of scientists to study                    
              environmental dynamics across a range of scales and allow                      
              integration with reflectance measurements from satellite                       
              instruments.  The new technology requires image analysis                       
              algorithm research and development and the integration of new                  
              image acquisition hardware.  The resulting system will provide                 
              near ground level acquisition of stereo images and detailed                    
              analysis of three dimensional information on a computer                        
              workstation.  Three dimensional information from reflectance                   
                                                                                             
              imagery is currently not available from any source, yet this                   
                                                                                             
              information can lead to improved species identification and                    
                                                                                             
              quantification of volumes (biomass) instead of just surface                    
                                                                                             
              areas.  It represents a major advance in image analysis                        
                                                                                             
              technology for ecological studies.                                             
                                                                                             
                   A highly qualified team of investigators will address the                 
                                                                                             
              problem.  Institutional facilities for image analysis and                      
                                                                                             
              remote sensing are excellent.  The new research is further                     
                                                                                             
              strengthened by association with the Long-Term Ecological                      
                                                                                             
              Research project centered on the Sevilleta National Wildlife                   
                                                                                             
              Refuge.
