Title       : Function and Regulation of Neuronal Calcium Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1992       
File        : a9008625

Award Number: 9008625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Strong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Calcium, an important substance for cell activity, is relatively               
              abundant outside cells, but is kept at low level inside cells.                 
              In nerve cells, the movement of calcium into the cell triggers a               
              number of important processes.  The most well known of these                   
              calcium-regulated processes is the release of neurotransmitters,               
              chemical messengers which allow nerve cells to communicate with                
              other nerve cells or to control muscle activity.  However,                     
              calcium entry may also play a role in the growth of nerve cells,               
              and may activate the types of long lasting changes in cell                     
              properties thought to underlie learning and memory.  Because of                
              its many important roles, calcium entry into the nerve cell is                 
              tightly regulated.  The goal of this research is to characterize               
              a novel mechanism for regulating calcium into nerve cells.  This               
              mechanism differs in important ways from previously described                  
              mechanisms of calcium entry, because it could allow calcium to                 
              enter nerve cells in the absence of nerve activity.  The study                 
              will investigate the possible role of this calcium entry                       
              mechanism in regulating the outgrowth of axons and dendrites,                  
              extensions from the nerve cell body.  A knowledge of this growth               
              process is important in understanding normal and abnormal brain                
              development and nerve regeneration following trauma.
