Title       : Cranial Blood Flow in Early Hominids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1991       
File        : a9008179

Award Number: 9008179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34286              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean Falk D.Falk@Albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The manner and mechanisms by which the human brain has                    
              developed its enormous relative size and intricate mode of                     
              patterning is one of the most fundamental questions in physical                
              anthropology.  Traditionally, the brain was thought to have first              
              enlarged in response to, and concomitantly with, earliest human                
              tool fabrication.  It is now known, however, that human tools                  
              show up in the fossil record long before brain enlargement, and                
              other theories have subsequently been offered to explain this                  
              uniquely human characteristic.  This investigator explains brain               
              enlargement as an indirect result of changes in cerebral blood                 
              flow and seeks to test two related hypotheses about the pattern                
              of blood flow in hominoids.  These hypotheses can be tested by                 
              examination of the interior of skulls, because the pattern of                  
              meningeal blood vessels provides an indelible imprint on the                   
              interior of the skull.  The first hypothesis is that the                       
              branching pattern of middle meningeal blood vessels distinguishes              
              between the two types of australopithecine fossil.  The second is              
              that a "strong" branching pattern correlates with larger cranial               
              capacity.  The latter hypothesis will be tested on a large number              
              of human and ape skulls to determine the nature of the                         
              correlation between cranial capacity and blood vessel branching                
              pattern in higher primates including humans.  The research will                
              provide further evidence regarding the "radiator" theory of brain              
              enlargement, whereby bigger brains are claimed to be                           
              characterized by a more complicated network of vessels than                    
              smaller brains.
