Title       : Thermohaline Fluxes within the Antarctic Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1990    
File        : a9008906

Award Number: 9008906
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223355             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold L. Gordon agordon@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Huber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia Lamont Earth Obs
	      Rt 9W
	      Palisades, NY  10964    914/359-2900

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project is a renewal of an investigation into the large-scale             
              and mesoscale dynamics of the eastern Weddell Gyre, dealing with               
              the analysis of a data set obtained on an extensive cruise to the              
              Weddell Sea in the austral winter 1989 in a cooperative program                
              with the West German Polar Institute, and the USSR Arctic and                  
              Antarctic Research Institute.  The cruise generated a substantial              
              body of data on the structure of the upper ocean in winter to                  
              complement the existing body of data on summer conditions.                     
                                                                                             
              Oceanographically the Weddell Gyre acts as a primary area of deep              
              water mass formation and ocean ventilation.  Maud Rise, a seamount             
              in the eastern Weddell Sea, introduces topographically determined              
              dynamics which appear to control the occasional formation of the               
              Weddell Polynya, a large area of open water where normally winter              
              sea ice is found.  An understanding of these effects is necessary              
              to determine the nature of such important phenomena as water mass              
              modification, maintenance of fronts, deep ocean ventilation, sea               
              ice distribution, and climate modification.                                    
                                                                                             
              This renewal phase of the project includes the completion of data              
              processing, and the synthesis of the data set which will provide               
              a basic description of the Southern Ocean thermohaline and chemical            
              stratification under the sea ice cover from its outer fringes to               
              the coast of Antarctica.                                                       
                                                                                             
              Several tasks will be undertaken: the mapping and description of               
              the full water column winter stratification of the Weddell Gyre,               
              the study of the entrainment of deep water into the winter mixed               
              layer in various sub-regions of the gyre, and the study of the                 
              oceanography associated with Maud Rise, specifically the initiating            
              of strong upwelling and its effect in producing the periodically               
              forming Weddell Polynya.
