Title       : Descriptive and Computational Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1990    
File        : a9008416

Award Number: 9008416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Krishna M. Kavi                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil Immerman immerman@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Computational complexity is a modern discipline which analyzes the             
              inherent difficulty of a given task.  A great deal of progress has             
              been made in classifying the time and space requirements of certain            
              combinatorial problems.  The complexity classes L, NL, P, NP -                 
              logarithmic space, nondeterministic logarithmic space, polynomial              
              time, nondeterministic polynomial time, respectively - have been               
              studied extensively.  Still little is known about the comparative              
              strengths of different resources - it is yet to be proved that the             
              above classes are not all identical.                                           
                                                                                             
              Previously these classes have been studied from a mathematical                 
              viewpoint.  The inherent difficulty of expressing conditions has               
              been studied and a robust alternate view of complexity ensues.  The            
              computational complexity of a property is closely tied to the                  
              complexity of expressing the property in first-order logic.  A series          
              of languages which express exactly those properties checkable in a             
              series of computational complexity classes has been introduced.  The           
              existence of such natural languages for each important complexity              
              class sheds a new light on complexity theory.  These languages                 
              reaffirm the importance of the complexity classes as much more than            
              machine dependent issues.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Quite recently this approach has lead to a proof that the class NL is          
              closed under complementation.  A corollary of this surprising result           
              is that the class of context-sensitive languages is closed under               
              comlementation, thus settling a long standing open question in                 
              complexity theory.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This project continues this line of research on complexity theory.             
              The main thrust is the investigation of parallel time/processor                
              trade-offs via the equivalent parameters from descriptive complexity.          
              Furthermore, the scope of the research will be broadened to include            
              the modelling of real-time and database computing.
