Title       : Control of mRNA Stability in Hormone Dependent Differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1992   
File        : a9008504

Award Number: 9008504
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Shapiro   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1141,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Each of the billions of cell of an animal contains a kind of genetic           
              encyclopedia of DNA which contains in small stories, or genes, the             
              information required to make the proteins which compose that cell.             
              What distinguishes one cell from another is how each cell reads a set          
              of instructions before each of these information units (called genes),         
              and uses those instructions to decide whether or not to make copy of           
              the unit of information.  These copies provide the instructions to tell        
              cells to make the proteins which distinguish say a skin cell from a            
              liver cell.  Until our studies it was generally thought that the               
              lifetime of each copy of an information unit in the cell was fixed.            
              Dr. Shapiro showed that the hormone estrogen both causes the cells to          
              copy the information units involved in the production of egg proteins          
              and greatly increases the time the copies are present in the cell              
              before being scrapped and destroyed.  Since only copies of the                 
              information involved in egg protein production are made more stable by         
              estrogen, a large part of our work is devoted to identifying the               
              instructions on the copies which tell the cell to make them stable             
              when estrogen is present.  In recent work he developed a system for            
              testing which parts of the copy are important in making them more              
              stable, and showed that the information used to make the protein does          
              not control the lifespan of the copy.  The present proposal aims to            
              identify more precisely the instructions in the copy which tell the            
              cell this copy is subject to stabilization by estrogen.  He will also          
              begin studies aimed at identifying the cell proteins which read this           
              information.  Finally the mechanism by which cells sense the presence          
              of estrogen and communicate this information to the places in the cell         
              where the copies reside will be identified.                                    
                                                                                             
              Regulation of the lifespan of copies of genetic information has emerged        
              as common control mechanism by hormones.  Faulty regulation of the             
              lifespan of copies has also been shown to be important in several              
              common types of cancer.  However, little is known about how the                
              lifespan of copies of genetic information is controlled.  The estrogen-        
              mediated increase in the stability of copies of genetic information            
              encoding egg proteins provides one of the best opportunities to learn          
              how this important process is controlled in many systems.
