Title       : Systematics and Evolutionary Biology of the Reef-Building Coral Genus Porites
               (Scleractinia)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9008225

Award Number: 9008225
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269906             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald C. Potts potts@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Garthwaite  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Porites is one of the most diverse and widely- distributed genera              
              of living corals.  It has dominated, ecologically and geologically,            
              most tropical reefs since the Eocene (55 Mya).  Porites has been               
              the primary frame-builder of many reefs; it helps create the                   
              habitats occupied by innumerable other organisms; and its skeletons            
              are a major constituent of some of the world's most productive                 
              Tertiary oil formations.  Porites also contains preserved in its               
              skeleton some of the most detailed paleoclimatic records available             
              from shallow tropical seas.                                                    
              In this study, Porites is used as a model system for investigating             
              the evolution of long-lived tropical marine organisms within the               
              context of the major geophysical processes (plate tectonics and                
              glacial sea-level fluctuations) that have shaped the world's oceans            
              during the Cenozoic.  Enzyme electrophoresis and three kinds of                
              morphological data will be used to describe at least 80% of Indo-              
              Pacific and Caribbean species.  The data will be used to: 1.                   
              estimate ages of species and dates of divergence from common                   
              ancestors; 2. construct and compare phylogenies based on genetic               
              and morphological similarities among the species; 3. test                      
              alternative hypotheses about the times and geological conditions               
              favoring coral speciation; 4. examine relationships between life               
              history characteristics, evolutionary rates and probabilities of               
              speciation.  The study is expected to resolve many chronic                     
              taxonomic problems within the genus by correlating genetic and                 
              morphological classifications, to describe previously unknown                  
              species, and to identify reliable diagnostic characters that can               
              be used by biologists and geologists working with living and fossil            
              material.
