Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Numerical Modelling of Titan Photochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1990 
File        : a9008060

Award Number: 9008060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul N. Romani, Sr.   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1214,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Numerical Modelling of Titan                      
              Photochemistry                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for                        
              Long & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.                  
              The program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers                      
              to conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions                  
              of proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                    
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or comple-                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions                      
              in foreign countries.                                                          
                                                                                             
              This award will support a three month visit by Dr. Paul N.                     
              Romani to France to work with Drs. Daniel Gautier and Rgis                    
              Courtin of the Dpartement de Recherches Spatiales in                          
              Meudon on "Numerical Modelling of Titan Photochemistry."                       
              The researchers will develop a photochemical model of                          
              Titan's atmosphere by modifying an existing methane                            
              photochemical model for the outer planets.  They will then                     
              use the resulting predicted mixing ratios of trace                             
              constituents (CH2, C2H2, C2H6, C2H4, C4H2, C4H3, C3H8,                         
              HCN, HC3N, and C2N2) to generate synthetic spectra and                         
              compare these against Voyager Infrared Interferometer                          
              Spectrometer and Radiometer (IRIS) observations.  These                        
              species are present in only trace amounts, yet they are                        
              important for an understanding of Titan's atmosphere for                       
              several reasons: these molecules affect the thermal                            
              structure of the atmosphere, many of them are potential                        
              condensates and precursors to other condensates, and they                      
              can be used as dynamical tracers.  This will be a significant                  
              improvement over the last major numerical modelling effort                     
              of Titan photochemistry because of 1) recent improved                          
              laboratory measurements necessary for photochemical                            
              modelling, and 2) the ability to directly test the model                       
              against the Voyager IRIS observations of Titan.  This model-                   
              observation interaction will allow for direct testing of the                   
              importance of various chemical reaction rates, of which many                   
              still have to be estimated in the temperature region of                        
              interest for Titan, and the strength of other model                            
              parameters, e.g. eddy transport.
