Title       : An Experimental and Numerical Investigation of Shellside Boiling in Horizontal
               Tube Bundles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1990 
File        : a9008435

Award Number: 9008435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199468             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael K. Jensen jensen@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research project proposes to investigate the thermal                      
              hydraulics of shellside boiling in a horizontal tube heat                      
              exchanger in a recirculating liquid pool as well as in a once-                 
              through feed system.  Experiments will be run in an existing                   
              flow loop using refrigerant R-113.  A model of half of a slice                 
              of a square, inline and an equilateral triangular horizontal                   
              tube bundle will be designed and constructed such that with an                 
              insert the shell/bundle geometry can be changed from that of a                 
              kettle reboiler to that of a once-through submerged                            
              evaporator.  The tubes in the bundle will be electrically                      
              heated and instrumented with thermocouples.  Measurements will                 
              include the pressure distribution, void fraction and mean                      
              liquid velocity throughout the bundle, liquid velocities in                    
              the space between the shell and the bundle when operating as a                 
              kettle reboiler, test section power and wall temperatures.  A                  
              two-dimensional, two-fluid numerical model of the thermal                      
              hydraulics will be developed to simulate the experimental                      
              setup.  Once this model has been verified by comparing the                     
              experimental and predicted data from this experiment and by                    
              comparing computer simulations against industry data from full                 
              scale bundles, then innovative fluid-to-fluid heat exchangers                  
              will be studied.  These latter speculative studies will                        
              investigate a variety of geometric and operating conditions.                   
                                                                                             
              This research is intended to develop new data on shellside                     
              boiling and two-phase flow and to integrate the results from                   
              two previous projects to obtain overall tube bundle                            
              performance.  It will pave the way for studying innovative                     
              designs unconstrained by past practice for heat exchangers                     
              with shellside boiling, and will demonstrate where future                      
              research activities should be directed.
