Title       : Microscopic Approaches to Kinetics of Nonequilibrium Processes:
               Diffusion-Limited Reactions and Heterogeneous Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1991     
File        : a9008033

Award Number: 9008033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Doering   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Daniel Ben-Avraham is supported by a grant from the Theoretical                
              and Computational Chemistry Program and the Materials Theory                   
              Program to study diffusion-limited reactions and heterogeneous                 
              catalysis.  This research will help to elucidate the mechanism                 
              of heterogeneous catalysis which is important in the                           
              manufacture of a variety of chemicals including fuels, plastics                
              and other synthetic materials.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Dr. Ben-Avraham will conduct a detailed theoretical and                        
              numerical study of the kinetics of nonequilibrium processes,                   
              namely, diffusion-limited reactions and heterogeneous                          
              catalysis.  Diffusion-limited reactions are the                                
              rate-determining step in heterogeneous catalysis, as well as in                
              several other important processes such as carrier-hole                         
              recombination in semiconductors, and the formation of colloids                 
              and aerosols.  The theoretical research to be performed by Dr.                 
              Ben-Avraham will focus on the kinetic effects of                               
              inhomogeneities on a microscopic scale as opposed to the                       
              traditional phenomonological approach which relies on rate                     
              equations that use system averages as variables.  The results                  
              of this research will yield a better theoretical understanding                 
              of nonequilibrium kinetics and heterogeneous catalysts.
