Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: X-ray Analysis of Thin Film Materials Including
               Wear Resistant Coatings and SuperlatticeStructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1990 
File        : a9008064

Award Number: 9008064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37270              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome B. Cohen j-cohen3@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carla J. Shute  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1773,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: X-ray Analysis of Thin Film                       
              Materials Including Wear Resistant Coatings and Superlattice                   
              Structure.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to                       
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or compli-                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                   
              foreign countries.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. Jerome Cohen is to                  
              support a 15 month visit by Dr. Carla J. Shute to Sweden to                    
              work with Professor Torsten Ericsson of the Institute of                       
              Technology in Linkping on "X-Ray Analysis of Thin Film                        
              Materials Including Wear Resistant Coatings and Superlattice                   
              Structure."  The properties of thin film materials are of                      
              considerable interest due to their enhanced mechanical                         
              behavior over bulk specimens of the same material.  The                        
              researchers will examine two types of thin film structures:                    
              TiN wear resistant coatings and Mo/V superlattice structures.                  
              They will examine the residual stresses in both of these                       
              materials by the sin.theta polycrystalline x-ray diffraction                   
              technique.  For the TiN films, the researchers will study the                  
              mechanism of compressive stress generation during growth                       
              under low energy ion bombardment.  For the Mo/V superlattices,                 
              they will examine the tetragonal strain distortion theories                    
              for the supermodulus effect.  The supermodulus effect is a                     
              two-three fold increase in the elastic modulus of thin film                    
              modulated structures observed for a small range of wavelengths                 
              of the composition modulation.  They will also make measure-                   
              ments of the tetragonal strain, gradient in strain near the                    
              interface, and strength and coherency of the interface as a                    
              function of the wavelength of the modulation to determine if                   
              coherency strains can explain this enhanced mechanical                         
              behavior.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as                           
              appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad,                        
              stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat                       
              administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
