Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Mathematical Modeling of Pair Formation and
               Fertility in an HIV Infected Population
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1990 
File        : a9008422

Award Number: 9008422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret I. Gradie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0511603   Societal Aspects                        
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 1310,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Mathematical Modeling of Pair                     
              Formation and Fertility in an HIV Infected Population                          
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to                       
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or compli-                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                   
              foreign countries.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award will support a 18 month visit by Dr. Margaret                       
              Gradie of the University of Massachusetts/Amherst to the                       
              United Kingdom, to work with Professor Roy M. Anderson at the                  
              Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine in                        
              London on "Mathematical Modeling of Pair Formation and                         
              Fertility in an HIV Infected Population."  The AIDS epidemic                   
              adds a new dimension to human population biology as the                        
              behaviors inherent in mate selection and reproduction are                      
              precisely the conditions for transmission of the virus                         
              causing AIDS.  This research will explore how mating structure                 
              and fertility relate in an HIV infected population by use of                   
              a mathematical model and computer simulation, and will ask:                    
              (1) What mating behaviors maximize fertility while minimizing                  
              risk of infection?; and (2) How will mortality associated                      
              with AIDS affect the ability of individuals to meet culturally                 
              defined mating preferences?  The model will define a pairing                   
              function dependent on the mating referent, which will be                       
              defined as a probability distribution of pairing between                       
              individuals dependent on their membership in categories                        
              defined by the mating structure.  The variables which establish                
              the mating structure reflect the risk structure of infection                   
              and include age, residence, infected or susceptible status, and                
              sexual activity class.  The populations of males and females                   
              can be represented as vectors, subdivided by the structure                     
              variables.  The contents of the matrix are defined by the                      
              rates of pair formation between subdivisions.  Since these                     
              values are products, the system is non-linear, and standard                    
              iterative procedures cannot be used.  Quasi-Newton methods                     
              will be used to look for solutions, and steepest descent                       
              techniques to look for values which maximize fertility while                   
              minimizing risk of infection.  A series of computer simulations                
              will vary the values assigned to the probability distributions                 
              defining mating referents, and vary assumptions on transmission                
              rates, fertility, sexual activity, and morality due to AIDS.                   
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as                           
              appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad,                        
              stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat                       
              administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
