Title       : RUI: Nuclear Cytology and Centrin in the Red Algae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1990 
File        : a9008078

Award Number: 9008078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227328             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Scott   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon T. Broadwater  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   Drs. Joseph Scott and Sharon Broadwater of the College of                 
              William and Mary are studying the details of cell division in                  
              groups of red algae (Rhodophyta) using scanning and transmisson                
              electron microscopy.  The number, kinds, and orientations of                   
              subcellular structures combine to create patterns of cell                      
              division that appear to be characteristic for major groups of red              
              algae at the ordinal or subclass taxonomic level.  Research is                 
              continuing on cell division patterns in groups of Corallinales                 
              and Batrachospermales, which at present are poorly known.                      
                   The investigators are also conducting a search in red algae               
              for the recently described protein centrin, which is a                         
              contractile protein thought to be present in all eukaryotic cells              
              and involved in chromosome movement.  In addition, the enigmatic               
              unicellular organism Glaucosphaera vacuolata is being studied                  
              through electron microscopy and molecular and immunocytochemical               
              methods.  One of the unique characters of Rhodophyta, alone among              
              the world's algae, is the lack of a flagellar apparatus, yet Drs.              
              Scott and Broadwater have preliminary data indicating that G.                  
              vacuolata possesses a non-emergent flagellum located within a                  
              red-algal cytoplasm.  Molecular and immunocytochemical tests are               
              being made with the help of collaborators, to confirm the                      
              presence of centrin and of a reduced flagellum.  The results will              
              provide new insights into phylogenetic relationships within the                
              red algae and with other groups of primitive organisms.
