Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Development of Stable Si and Ge Single Crystal
               Monochromators Under High Heat Loads
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1991   
File        : a9008189

Award Number: 9008189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32150              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Quintana jpq@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome B. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1772,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Development of Stable Si and Ge                   
              Single Crystal Monochromators Under High Heat Loads                            
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to                       
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or comple-                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                   
              foreign countries.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. Jerome B. Cohen                     
              will support a twelve month visit to the United Kingdom by                     
              Dr. John P. Quintana to work with Prof. Michael Hart of the                    
              University of Manchester on "Development of Stable Si and Ge                   
              Single Crystal Monochromators Under High Heat Loads."                          
              Synchrotron radiation has become an extremely important tool                   
              in material studies.  Insertion devices greatly increase the                   
              flux to the point where heat load induced physical distortions                 
              of the optical elements limit the flux and resolution of the                   
              final beam. The heat load problem will be more severe on the                   
              next generation synchrotrons such as the Advanced Photon                       
              Source (APS) and the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility                   
              (ESRF).  Consequently, new optics, including monochromator                     
              designs are necessary to fully exploit the capabilities of                     
              these high brightness sources.  The proposed study will                        
              develop stable monochromators for current high brightness                      
              synchrotron radiation sources as well as very high power                       
              sources (APS and ESRF).  The basic method will be to improve                   
              on the basic thin wall adding the capability to elastically                    
              distort the crystal to counter deformations at high heat loads.                
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as                           
              appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad,                        
              stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat                       
              administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
