Title       : Exploratory Visit to Yakut Science Center, Academy of Sciences of the USSR, to
               Discuss Joint Research on Tectonicsof Northeast Siberia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1990      
File        : a9008932

Award Number: 9008932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerson Sher                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 10,  1990      
Expires     : September 10,  1990  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Kazuya Fujita fujita@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5939      US/USSR ACTIVITIES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this travel award is to allow three American                    
              specialists in the tectonics of extreme northern regions -                     
              Dr. Kazuya Fujita of Michigan State University and Drs. John                   
              N. Davies and David B. Stone of the University of Alaska at                    
              Fairbanks - to visit the U.S.S.R. in July 1990 to determine                    
              the feasibility of conducting long-term U.S.-U.S.S.R. coopera-                 
              tive research on tectonic rifting and deformational processes                  
              in northeastern Siberia.  The lead Soviet institution, the                     
              Institute of Geology of the Siberian Division (Yakut Branch)                   
              of the Soviet Academy of Sciences in Yakutsk, has arranged                     
              for the American team to make a field trip to one of the                       
              potential research sites along the remote Indigirka river.  In                 
              addition to offering the opportunity of visiting previously                    
              inaccessible research sites, this study could result in                        
              seismological and paleomagnetic data that could be invaluable                  
              in supporting or invalidating current models of the tectonic                   
              evolution of the Arctic.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This project fulfills the program objective of advancing                       
              scientific knowledge by enabling leading researchers in the                    
              United States and the U.S.S.R. to combine complementary                        
              efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest                    
                                                                                             
              and competence in the field of basic scientific research on                    
                                                                                             
              the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.
