Title       : Assembly of Cytoskeletal Proteins into the Cleavage Furrow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1992   
File        : a9008704

Award Number: 9008704
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean M. Sanger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                 The focus of this project is on the contractile apparatus                   
              responsible for cytokinesis in animal cells.  The goals are to                 
              understand how actin and myosin are assembled into the                         
              contractile units that form the cleavage furrow, and to determine              
              how these units are attached to the cell membrane.  Fluorescent                
              analogues of actin, myosin, talin, and vinculin will be injected               
              into living cells and their incorporation into cleavage furrows                
              analyzed.  The kinetics of assembly and disassembly of actin and               
              myosin in the furrow will be measured and specific inhibitors                  
              introduced to test the hypothesis that the two proteins are                    
              recruited co-temporaneously but independently of one another.                  
              Short term incorporation of fluorescent actin and myosin                       
              analogues during mitosis will be measured to determine if actin                
              and myosin are incorporated preferentially into the equatorial                 
              cortex.  Inhibitors of talin and vinculin will be introduced into              
              mitotic cells to test the idea that these proteins play a role in              
              attaching actin filaments to the cleavage furrow membrane.                     
              Photoactivation and photobleaching of actin and myosin analogues               
              will be used to determine if there is a cortical flow of actin                 
              and myosin from the poles to the equatorial cortex to form the                 
              cleavage furrow.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The significance of the proposed experiments lies in their                     
              potential for describing how actin and myosin are assembled into               
              the contractile apparatus that is essential for one of the most                
              basic of biological processes:  cell division.
