Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Evolutionary Genetics of Host Plant Choice in a
               Willow Leaf Beetle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1990  
File        : a9008517

Award Number: 9008517
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40917              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan E. Rank   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1116,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Evolutionary Genetics of Host                     
              Plant Choice in a Willow Leaf Beetle.                                          
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to                       
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or compli-                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                   
              foreign countries.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month visit by Dr. Nathan                     
              Rank to both Belgium and Switzerland, to work with Dr.                         
              Jacques Pasteels, Universit Libre de Bruxelles, and Dr.                       
              Martine Rowell-Rahier, Zoologisches Institut der Universitaet                  
              Basel, on "Evolutionary Genetics of Host Plant Choice in a                     
              Willow Leaf Beetle."  In order better to understand the                        
              evolutionary consequences of host shifts in insects, the                       
              principal investigator proposes to complete a study of the                     
              relationship between regional variation in host use and                        
              genetic divergence in a willow leaf beetle, Phratora vitellinae                
              (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae), common throughout Eurasia, which                  
              is known to vary hosts regionally.  Willow beetles in general                  
              have a highly subdivided population structure, with measurable                 
              genetic differentiation at even small spatial scales.  Since                   
              P. vitellinae has the regional variation in preference and a                   
              subdivision population structure, it will provide an excellent                 
              model for this study.  Building on his previous work on the                    
              population structure of a North American willow leaf beetle                    
              and Prof. Rowell-Rahier's research on regional variation in                    
              P. vitellinae's host plant use, the principal investigator                     
              will ask: 1) How do insects evolve preferences for new host                    
              plant species?, and 2) Do insects form genetically differen-                   
              tiated host races when they accomplish a host shift?  To                       
              answer these, he will: 1) Use electrophoretic markers to                       
              measure P. vitellinae's population structure and to determine                  
              whether populations are differentiated along host species                      
              lines; and 2) Conduct a genetic analysis of host plant                         
              preferences.  The experimental protocol will include 1)                        
              quantification of genetic variation within populations in                      
              preference and 2) determination of the mode of inheritance of                  
              preference by crossing populations which show regional                         
              variation in preference.  Because the principal investigator                   
              will use the same P. vitellinae populations for the electrop-                  
              horetic study and the genetic analysis, he will be able to                     
              relate variations in host use directly with patterns of                        
              genetic differentiation.
