Title       : Formation of Specific Synaptic Connections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1992       
File        : a9008160

Award Number: 9008160
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239242             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Wigston   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1188      SYNAPTIC MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              How neurons make synaptic connections with the correct cells                   
              during the development of the nervous system is still largely a                
              mystery.  It is clear that the guidance of growing nerve cell                  
              processes (axons) to appropriate regions of the developing                     
              nervous system, where their future target cells reside, places                 
              constraints on which neurons can ultimately connect with each                  
              other.  However, even within a small region there exist neurons                
              with very different functions, and growing nerve axons must be                 
              able to recognize these different neuronal types and choose only               
              the ones appropriate for them to make connections with.  This                  
              project will examine the mechanisms by which neurons that                      
              normally innervate muscle fibers (motoneurons) discriminate                    
              between different muscles.  One possibility is that each muscle                
              is unique in some way that motoneurons axons can recognize.  A                 
              way to achieve this would be for muscle fibers to carry a                      
              molecular label of some kind that distinguishes them from muscle               
              fibers in other muscles.  Dr. Wigston will examine this                        
              possibility by searching for molecules unique to, or highly                    
              concentrated in, a particular muscle, by generating monoclonal                 
              antibody probes that bind selectively to particular muscles.                   
              Another possibility is that each muscle secretes its own                       
              diffusible factor that attracts the axons of only those                        
              motoneurons appropriate for that muscle.  This possibility will                
              be examined by culturing pieces of spinal cord and muscle near to              
              one another, and determining whether particular axons grow                     
              preferentially towards particular muscles.  Furthermore, using                 
              various experimental designs, isolated motoneurons will be grown               
              in tissue culture and their selectivity for different muscles                  
              examined.  If selective synapse formation occurs in such a                     
              system, it will provide tremendous opportunities for the                       
              elucidation of the mechanism by which selectivity is achieved.                 
              This work should help us to understand how the correct "wiring                 
              pattern" is laid down in the developing neurons system, and in                 
              particular how the right motoneurons connect with the right                    
              muscles during embryogenesis.  The normal functioning of the                   
              brain, and normal behavior of the organism, is critically                      
              dependent on the establishment of proper orderly neuronal                      
              connectivity.
