Title       : Computerization of Anthropology Collection Records at the Museum of Northern
               Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1991       
File        : a9008409

Award Number: 9008409
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123860             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Wilcox   (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda B. Eaton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dawn Greenwald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine R. Hughes  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : Museum of Northern Ariz
	      Route 4 Box 720
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860019302    602/774-5211

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Beginning in 1928, state, federal, and tribal agencies in                      
              northern Arizona began entrusting archaeological collections                   
              generated from lands under their jurisdiction to the Museum of                 
              Northern Arizona's care.  The result is an body of data on both                
              the prehistory and history of the Colorado Plateau region.                     
              Materials include almost 200,000 catalogued artifacts - almost                 
              all from provenienced contexts with accompanying documentation                 
              including culture, site, and time period.  Added to this are bulk              
              collections which also are accompanied by excavation information.              
              An extensive ethnographic collection which focusses primarily on               
              Hopi and Navaho materials numbers approximately 10,000 pieces.                 
              Both archaeological and ethnographic collections are of great                  
              research value and subject to intensive use.  However, the                     
              crucial documentation which accompanies them is not well                       
              organized.  It is deteriorating and because of its volume,                     
              difficult to organize and access.  With NSF support the Museum                 
              will computerize this material in order to cross reference                     
              individual records and provide greater accessibility.  This will               
              minimize direct use and, therefore, the deterioration of the                   
              paper records.  Dr. Wilcox and colleagues will purchase a                      
              Questor-Argus system which is specifically designed for museums                
              collection management.                                                         
                                                                                             
              This project is important because it will prevent the                          
              deterioration of significant scientific materials, many acquired               
              with federal funds.  It will increase the access of the Museum's               
              anthropological collections to researchers who wish to use them.               
              These materials are of importance not only to archaeologists and               
              ethnographers but also to local Native American groups interested              
              in their own traditions.
