Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Evolution and Reactions of NOxPrecursors from Coal
               Volatiles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1990 
File        : a9008510

Award Number: 9008510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35100              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
              0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1401,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: The Evolution and Reactions of                    
              NOx Precursors from Coal Volatiles                                             
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable US scientists and engineers to                         
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or compli-                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                   
              foreign countries.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award will support a 15 month visit by Dr. John C. Chen                   
              to go to Australia to work with Dr. Peter F. Nelson of CSIRO                   
              in North Ryde on "The Evolution and Reactions of NOx Precursors                
              from Coal Volatiles."  Coal combustion generates photochemical                 
              smog and pollutants causing acid rain.  Oxides of nitrogen                     
              (NOx) are among the most severe of these pollutants, primarily                 
              the result of oxidation of nitrogen bound in the coal matrix                   
              (fuel NOx).  This research seeks to clarify several aspects                    
              of NOx formation from coal volatiles.  The researchers will                    
              study the evolution of NOx precursors for a range of Australian                
              coals in a three-section reactor: the first generates the                      
              volatiles by rapid coal pyrolysis in a fluidized bed;  the                     
              second serves as a heated transport line and contains a                        
              sintered quartz frit to eliminate the char and ash residues                    
              from the gaseous product stream;  the final reactor is simply                  
              a tubular quartz furnace where the primary coal volatiles are                  
              subjected to secondary reactions at various furnace tempera-                   
              tures and residence times.  The NOx precursors and other                       
              reaction products will be measured with FTIR, GC, and GC/MS.                   
              The specific goals of the research are: (1) to measure and                     
              relate the rate formation of the precursors to forms of                        
              nitrogen in the tar and the parent coal; (2) to study the                      
              interactions of the precursors with other coal volatiles and                   
              with various gas species (including O2) introduced into the                    
              tubular furnace; and (3) to use these data as input to models                  
              for NOx formation.  The attainment of these goals will be a                    
              significant achievement in understanding and predicting NOx                    
              formation from Australian coals in practical combustion                        
              devices and the results may be extended to coals of any                        
              geographic origin.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as                           
              appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad,                        
              stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat                       
              administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
