Title       : Campaign Contributions as Investments: Theory and Evidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1990       
File        : a9008215

Award Number: 9008215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63067              (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Snyder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   It is widely believed that many contributions to political                
              campaigns view their contributions as a kind of investment,                    
              expecting some private benefit in return for their money. This                 
              benefit might be a special tax reduction, a profitable contract                
              to provide some goods or services to the government, or perhaps                
              an official position. The benefit need not be forthcoming or even              
              precisely defined at the time the contribution is made. Rather,                
              the contributor may  simply expect that , sometime in the future,              
              the recipient will be able and willing to provide some desired                 
              service.                                                                       
                   This project continues the development of a model of                      
              campaign funds in which the market for political "favors" is                   
              treated as an asset market. This model captures many of the                    
              essential features one would expect of a market for quid pro quo               
              contributions, and yields a number of interesting and strong                   
              hypotheses which are empirically testable about the pattern of                 
              contributions across elections. The extensions that are being                  
              developed for the current project include: (1) detailed                        
              investigation of races with incumbents, (2) explicit                           
              consideration of the dynamics involved in reaching an                          
              equilibrium, (3) allowing contributors to supply votes as well as              
              money in exchange for political favors, and (5) modelling small,               
              individual contributors, perhaps treating their contributions as               
              a kind of consumer good. Empirical tests involve data on                       
              campaigns for the U.S. Congress and the California Legislature.                
                  Campaign-financing issues are under continuous public policy               
              debate. A better understanding of the campaign-financing process               
              is essential for the construction of sensible public policy.
