Title       : Dynamics of Denominationalism in America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9008994

Award Number: 9008994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44995              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Sutton sutton@alishaw.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This study attempts to understand the evolution of organized              
              religion in America by focusing on the life-histories of                       
              mainstream Protestant denominations over nearly a century.  In                 
              particular, it analyzes the determinants of schisms, by which                  
              most new denominations have come into existence, and the demise                
              of existing denominations through merger.  The more conventional               
              approach focuses on doctrinal disputes as the major determinant                
              of denominational boundaries.  By contrast, this study follows                 
              Weber, Troeltsch, and Niebuhr in treating doctrinal disputes as                
              reflections of larger debates about the relationship between                   
              denominations and the wider social order, and about the nature of              
              authority within religious communities.  Schism and merger are                 
              treated as organizational processes.  Drawing on life-histories                
              of 175 mainstream Protestant denominations between 1890 and 1980,              
              the empirical analysis will be conducted in two parallel phases.               
              First, they plan to collect detailed qualitative data from                     
              archival sources on subsets of denominations that have                         
              experienced schisms and mergers.  The goal is to understand the                
              internal processes by which disputes become codified into                      
              ideologies that set the terms for insurgency and coalition-                    
              building.  In the second phase, they will use longitudinal data                
              from the entire sample of denominations to test hypotheses about               
              the propensity to schism and merger.  They will draw on                        
              organizational theory to develop three kinds of models:                        
              structural models that emphasize the internal characteristics of               
              denominations; ecological models that emphasize competition for                
              organizational resources; and institutional models that emphasize              
              shifts in the normative structure of society.  The potential                   
              contribution of the study to organizational theory arises from                 
              its attention to rates, types, and processes of birth and death.               
              By synthesizing micro- and macro-level analyses, this study                    
              promises to yield a comprehensive understanding of the process of              
              denominational reorganization in America.
