Title       : Towards a Study of Synchronization: Abstractions, Implementations, and
               Translations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1990      
File        : a9008628

Award Number: 9008628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ambuj Singh ambuj@cs.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 2875      SYSTEM SOFTWARE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              In spite of the wide variety of synchronization problems and their             
              broad-ranging solutions, some fundamental questions regarding the              
              nature and classification of synchronization have remained unanswered.         
              Led by the observation that any synchronization necessarily involves           
              some kind of arbitration among the participating processes.  The               
              notion of the "rank" of a process that serves as the basis for                 
              arbitration has been formulated, and an underlying mechanism, called           
              the "ranker", that computes the ranks for the processes has been               
              identified.  In order to carry out any kind of arbitration, the ranks          
              that are computed by the ranker module should satisfy certain                  
              requirements.  By identifying these properties, four different                 
              specifications are obtained for the ranker module; these four rankers          
              form a hierarchy.  Based on the correspondence between a                       
              synchronization problem and the weakest ranker that can be used to             
              solve it, a classificiation of synchronization problems is obtained.           
              This classification subsumes the other classification proposed in the          
              literature.  The problem of implementing rankers on various                    
              architectures will be considered and the project intends to devise             
              algorithms for translating programs across different architectures.
