Title       : CAREER: Efficient Communication Primatives and Realistic Models for Modern
               Multiprocessors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1997     
File        : a9502661

Award Number: 9502661
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anand R. Tripathi                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus Schauser schauser@cs.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 Efficient communication is central to parallel computing.  Modern 
              multiprocessors obtain high bandwidth, low latency user-level  communication
              through special hardware support, often implemented  as a  dedicated
              communications co-processor.  Future parallel  machines, including  high
              performance networks of workstations,  will be built using communications 
              co-processors.    The goal of this research is to study how the presence of a 
              dedicated co-processor affects the performance of interprocesor  communication 
              in modern parallel machines.  In particular, the  project focuses on two 
              aspects.    First, it studies the impact of communications co-processors on 
              the performance of various communication primitives and  determines the 
              architectural requirements for implementing  efficiently many-to-one 
              communication such as active messages.    Second, it studies how the 
              communications so-processor can be  captured by a theoretical performance
              model.  The goal is to  derive a performance model that is realistic enough to 
              characterize machines and accurately predict performance, but  still simple 
              enough to be used in designing and analyzing  parallel algorithms.    To study 
              these questions, the project takes a vertical approach,  spanning theory, 
              applications, languages, systems software, and  architecture.  The project 
              constructs a complete system which  allows taking an in-depth look at how 
              efficient communication  affects all of these layers.  The project leverages
              off  the work  on active messages, the parallel languages Split-C, and the LogP
               performance model, developed at UC Berkeley.  The main  experimental platform
              is  a 64-processor Meiko CS-2, which the  UCSB Computer Science Department
              acquired  through an NSF CISE  infrastructure grant.  The CS-2 reflects, a
              modern high-  performance network of workstation enthronement equipped with 
              communications  co-pocessors, making it extremely well suited for  the study.
              The principal  investigator has already implemented  active mess ages and
              Split-C on the CS-2.  The project develops a realistic model for parallel
              computation  which captures  the capabilities of communication co-processors. 
              To create a framework to  characterize communication and measure  its
              performance, the project implements  a simulator based on this  model as well
              as a Split-C profiler.  This framework  is used to  fine-tune applications and
              for architectural studies.  Besides  answering these important research
              questions, the work also  provides  infrastructure which is used for teaching
              purposes as  well as by other  researchers.    The principal investigator
              ismstriving for a well balanced  career  as a professor in computer science,
              combining teaching and  research.  His areas of interest are parallel
              computing, computer  architecture, languages,  and compilers.  His educational 
              objective is to teach students in these fields,  to get them  excited about
              computer science and engineering, and to prepare  them for a successful
              professional career.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
