Title       : Dissertation Enhancement in Japan: Fabrication and Characterization of a
               Lipid-Attracting Elastomeric Semi-IPN for Use in Physiologic Bearing
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1995        
File        : a9502870

Award Number: 9502870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward Murdy                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9100               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome A. Gilbert jgilbert@abe.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martine LaBerge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9502870  Gilbert    This dissertation enhancement award supports a 3-month 
              research visit in Japan for Philip Williams, a graduate  student at Mississippi
              State University, who works under the  direction of Professor Jerome A.
              Gilbert.  Mr. Williams'  three month stay in Japan will be hosted by the
              Professor  Kazuhiko Ishihara at the Tokyo Medical and Dental  University.  The
              collaborators seek to improve the lubricity  of weight-bearing prostheses via
              the fabrication of lipid-  attracting polyurethane materials.  The specific aim
              of the  research stay by Mr. Williams is the fabrication and  characterization
              of an elastomeric material whose surface  represents an interpenetrating
              polymer network with material  capable of attracting boundary lubricants.   
              This proposal brings together research scientists from two  countries working
              in the area of biomaterials/bioengineering. The  U. S. graduate student will
              have the opportunity to become  familiar with research techniques, data,
              equipment, and  facilities the Tokyo Medical and Dental University while 
              contributing to the overall research effort. The host laboratory  possesses the
              skills to fabricate polymers, developed for blood-  compatibility reasons,
              suitable for attracting boundary  lubricants.  The host will learn from Mr.
              Williams about  considerations associated with the alternate application of
              their  materials.  Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of  the
              Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge  through an
              international collaboration.  ***
