Title       : CAREER: Closed-Loop Augmented Environment Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1997      
File        : a9502830

Award Number: 9502830
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122888             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ulrich Neumann uneumann@graphics.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  Research Component:  Closing the loop in AE systems.      The project
              addresses augmented environment (AE) and virtual  environment (VE)  tracking
              system inadequacies through a new  `unified-system` approach to AE  system
              design. Even with the  best head-mounted displays (HMDs) and graphic  systems 
              available, the shortcomings of tracking systems hinder or  preclude the 
              usefulness of many AE/VE applications. Such applications,  including on-line
              surgical  visualization, assembly or  maintenance assistance, and interactive
              training  simulations, require robust solutions to the following  problems.    
                  1)  Achieving millimeter (position) and 0.1 degree  (orientation) accuracy.
                   2)  Readily achieving precise calibration of tracking  systems to the real
              world.  3)  Eliminating (or minimizing) latency in tracking (and  graphics)
              systems to  prevent gross misalignment during head  motion.    This project
              aims to develop  new technology and improved  methods for making video-based AE
              systems usable  and  productive for commercial and scientific applications. 
              The  long term  research goal is the accurate alignment of real  and virtual
              objects in an  augmented environment under all  conditions of user activity
              including rapid  head motion.  Achieving such performance required the
              integration of new  image  and tracking function components into an AE system. 
              A  2D alignment error  metric forms a basis for the compensation  of a variety
              of 3D tracking and  calibration errors.  Corrections are computed and applied
              at every frame creating a  closed loop system which compensated for both static
              and  dynamic  (latency-induced) misalignment.  The project will  produce
              increased  understanding of closed loop AR systems by      1)  implementing a
              software  simulator to facilitate rapid  exploration of closed loop AE system
              design  options for  feature detection error measurement, and error
              compensation,  2)  designing a new AE system architecture with  components
              which have simple,  well-defined interfaces to  other  co mpenents in the
              system, and     3)  developing a prototype of a complete closed-loop AE  system
              and quantifying its  performance characteristics.      Education Component: 
              Richer understanding through  experience.    Teaching responsibilities include
              at least one course during  each Fall and Spring semester.  A two-course
              Computer  Graphics sequence  for graduate students is under  development. 
              These courses build on the  introductory  undergraduate course and emphasize
              project creation.  Hands  on  system-building learning opportunities, at the 
              appropriate levels for students,  are a major focus of the  educational
              activities.  In addition to syllabus  design and  class teaching,
              directed-research and advising promotes  student-faculty interactions.  A
              CD-ROM with computer  graphics simulations of  graphics concepts will be
              developed  for both introductory and advanced levels.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
