Title       : CAREER: Research on input-output methods for nonlinear control design; Education
               into the next century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1995    
File        : a9502034

Award Number: 9502034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew R. Teel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9502034  Teel         The research objective of this proposal is to further the 
              understanding of the dynamics and control of highly nonlinear  systems.  The
              mathematical methods emphasized will be those that  seek to characterize
              nonlinear systems in terms of their input-  output behavior.  This viewpoint is
              flexible and can accommodate  real world uncertainties and complicated
              nonlinear behavior.   Recent breakthroughs regarding control of systems with
              hard  limits on the magnitude and permissible rates of control signals  have
              developed by taking this view.  Part of the research plan is  to show that the
              algorithms which have been developed for the  control saturation problem are
              applicable to a wide variety of  problems.  The significance of the control
              algorithms will be  enhanced by investigating optimization strategies and 
              rapprochement with more standard control algorithms.  Indeed,  these algorithms
              may provide a link between standard control and  more recent "intelligent"
              control.  The second part of the  research plan seeks to develop both
              conceptual insight into and  computational algorithms for nonlinear control by
              taking a  general input-output point of view.  It is believed that this  will
              lead to results analogous to many fundamental results that  are known for
              linear systems: a parameterization of stabilizing  compensators, optimization
              over such parameters, simultaneous  stabilization, etc.  Software development
              will be a means of  transporting the research developments of this proposal to
              the  industrial sector.         The educational objective of this research is
              to facilitate  a learning environment which is tailored to the unique aspects
              of  today's engineering student.  The premise is that today's  students are
              very different from those that preceded them, with  regard to perspectives,
              values and expectation.  Accordingly,  changes in teaching styles and
              perspectives must be investigated.   The educational plan calls for critical
              self-and outside-  examination of teachin g styles and methods.  Partially,
              this will  occur within the structure of a faculty development program at  the
              University.  In addition, the plan calls for a thorough re-  examination of
              laboratory teaching methods, especially in the  subfield of control.  A
              consideration of visualization techniques  as a teaching tool is emphasized. 
              Finally, a teaching approach  that motivates the student through the history of
              and vision for  electrical engineering and control is recommended.  In this 
              regard, mentoring is seen to be a crucial part of the education  process.  ***
