Title       : Molecular Orientation and Chemistry at Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9502557

Award Number: 9502557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathy L. Rowlen rowlen@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported  in the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focusses on the  development of a
              method for analyzing the structure and orientation  of molecular species at
              buried interfaces.  During the tenure of  this three-year continuing grant,
              Professor Rowlen and her students  at the University of Colorado will apply the
              newly developed  technique of angle-resolved photoacoustic spectroscopy (ARPAS)
              to  parallel studies of the relationship between the chemical nature of 
              molecules and their orientation at surfaces and in thin films.  In  the first,
              the orientation of a variety of phenylazo dyes within  zirconium phosphonate
              interlayers will be investigated and compared  with each layer's nonlinear
              optical characteristics.  Additionally,  the relatively slow kinetics of
              orientational relaxation will be  investigated for phenylazo dyes trapped
              within the transparent  polymer matrix of an optical waveguide.  In the second
              study, which  focusses on understanding retention in liquid chromatography, the
               question of phase transitions within covalently immobilized  alkylsilanes will
              be addressed by monitoring the degree of  orientation as a function of
              temperature and solvent overlayer.   Also during this grant period, Professor
              Rowlen will pursue an  educational development plan that includes course
              development,  acquisition of equipment for teaching laboratories, increased 
              opportunities for undergraduate research participation, and  introduction of
              industrial research internships for both  undergraduate and graduate students. 
                A method for analyzing the structure and orientation of molecular  species at
              buried interfaces is of considerable technological  importance.  In this CAREER
              research project, angle-resolved  photoacoustic spectroscopy will be used to
              develop new insights  into  molecular structure and orientation of phenylazo
              dyes and  alkylsilane thin films that could lead to improved design of 
              organic-based optical waveguides and  also to an improved  understanding of
              retention in liquid chromatography.  The  educational development aspects of
              this CAREER project should  enrich and broaden the chemistry educational
              experience of  University of Colorado students.
