Title       : CAREER: Modeling and Control of Chaotic Chemical Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9502327

Award Number: 9502327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen K. Qammar hqammar@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1045,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Qammar    9502327    This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant
              which includes both a research as well as an educational component.   
              Research:  The objectives of this research are to investigate how improved
              controller designs may allow a process to operate in a chaotic region which
              could correspond to the economic optimum, thus limiting overdesign and
              inefficient operation.  Numerical simulations using ideal chaotic systems where
              the underlying properties of the chaos are known will be performed on
              conventional feedback controllers to identify the effect of chaos on controller
              performance.  One measure of the performance will be the basin of attraction
              for the desired reference state.  A realistic model of an industrial-scale,
              chaotic polymerization reaction and another model of chemical passivation of
              metals in solution will be applied to a number of existing control algorithms
              including PID, exact-linearization, dynamic matrix control, an adaptive
              nonlinear predictive controller, and nonlinear inferential control.  In
              addition, an extensive study of nonlinear model predictive control will be
              performed to determine whether models, horizon times, or observers developed
              from chaos theory perform better than the generic choices.  Research will be
              performed on the applicability of NARMAX models and an ODE synchronization
              modeling technique to noisy, experimental data sets and a data-set describing a
              non-stationary process.  This work will be done in collaboration with
              researchers at Oak Ridge National Laboratory and NASA Lewis Research Center. 
              The usefulness of the resulting models for process control will also be
              investigated.    Education:  High student attrition is a problem at many
              universities, especially for women and minorities in engineering.  As part of
              her educational career plan, the PI intends to develop and implement a number
              of new courses.  A multi-level design course for undergraduate chemical
              engineers will be developed.  A typical design group will consist of st udents
              from freshmen to seniors.  Each level will be responsible for that aspect of
              the project in which they have completed coursework.  The objective of the
              course is to minimize student attrition, especially women and minority
              students.  She also plans to develop a senior level project in advanced
              computational methods.  There are three main objectives in the course, to
              encourage computationally adept ChE students to pursue an advanced degree, to
              provide these students some experience in teaching via example problem
              development, and to reinforce the relationship between computational techniques
              and their application to fundamental chemical engineering concepts.  To support
              her research efforts, graduate courses in advanced process control, advanced
              computational methods, and the analysis, identification, and modeling of
              chaotic data will also be developed.
