Title       : Faculty Early Development (CAREER)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9502059

Award Number: 9502059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125444             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Almgren almgren@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9161,9178,9263,AMPP,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Almgren  9502059  This work is supported by a National Science Foundation
              Faculty Early Career Development Award.  The National Science Foundation
              strongly encourages the early development of academic faculty as both educators
              and researchers.  The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program is a
              Foundation-wide program that provides for the support of junior faculty within
              the context of their overall career development.  It combines in a single
              program the support of quality research and education in the broadest sense and
              the full participating of those traditionally underrepresented in science and
              engineering.  This program enhances and emphasizes the importance the
              Foundation places on the development of full, balanced academic careers that
              include both research and education.  The research will focus on the
              development of computational techniques for dendritic solidification in three
              dimensions using two methods.  The first method is implementation of adaptive
              mesh refinement to simulate the phase field model of dendritic growth, which
              models the solid/liquid interface by a  thinviscous layer.  In addition to the
              coding complexity, the central issues are construction of stable and accurate
              time discretization formulas, specification of accurate criteria to guide the
              automatic refinement strategy, and possible permiting the interface thickness
              to depend on local velocity.  The second, more speculative, method is a
              lattice-based variational method, using an Ising-type model and simulated
              annealing to minimize a combination of bulk and surface energy at each time
              step.  The first approach is expected to be effective at large undercoolings or
              supersaturations, where kinetic effects are important; the second approach will
              be more efficient at small undercoolings, near local equilibrium.    The
              overall purpose of this project is to develop effective computational tools for
              predicting and controlling the microstructure  which develops almost every time
              a metal or other substance solidifies  from its melt, that is, in almost every
              casting process from horseshoes to jet turbine blades.  The details of this
              microstructure have a tremendous influence on the mechanical, thermal, and
              electrical properties of the resulting material piece; if the processes which
              produce them could be understood and controlled, then dramatic improvements
              might be possible.  The teaching side of this project is construction of an
              applied mathematics component for the University of Chicago's SESAME program,
              which teaches mathematics to elementary teachers from the Chicago Public
              Schools.  The investigator will develop classroom and computer material
              focusing on the questions of how and why objects in Nature assume the shapes
              they do in response to their physical environment; he will consider trees and
              tree leaves, soap films, crystals, seashells, and square-cube scaling laws.
