Title       : Mechanistic and Kinetic Studies of Electrooxidation of Methanol and Formic Acid
               on Well-Defined Platinum Electrodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1997     
File        : a9502971

Award Number: 9502971
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286604             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric M. Stuve stuve@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9502971    This project addresses a number of fundamental issues
              regarding the kinetics and mechanism of methanol electrocatalysis on
              platinum-based electrodes as well as the behavior of surface oxygen species in
              this same reaction.  Specifically, it seeks to identify whether carbon
              monoxide, widely accepted as the poisoning species, is a necessary intermediate
              in the reaction pathway of methanol electrooxidation.  Sufficient evidence
              already exists for another, hydrogen containing intermediate that may signify a
              separate reaction pathway free of carbon monoxide.  This project attempts to
              isolate and identify this hydrogen containing  intermediate and systematically
              quantify its presence as a function of the controlling variables:  potential,
              temperature, electrolyte nature and concentration, and surface morphology. 
              Particular attention is paid to electrode potential as reaction at the low
              potentials required of a technical fuel cell may have an entirely different
              mechanism than at the high potential required for oxidation and removal of  the
              carbon monoxide poisoning species.  Variation of electrode surface morphology
              through preadsorbed probe adlayers of graphitic or atomic carbon, ethlidyne,
              isotopically labelled  carbon monoxide, and sulfur helps to identify,
              respectively, ensemble requirements, the influence of coabsored hydrocarbon
              species, the behavior of carbon monoxide, and the influence of electronic
              interactions in electrooxidation.  Kinetic measurements  supply complementary
              information to help discrimination between competing reaction mechanisms and
              identify particularly favorable reaction conditions.  The nature of surface
              oxygen is examined with kinetic measurements of electrodes "seeded" with
              preadsorbed oxygen and by spectroscopic analysis of the surface of quenched
              electrodes.  These studies are conducted according to the ex-situ methodology
              involving a directly coupled electrochemical cell and ultrahigh vacuum surface
              analysis system.  This combination of  facil ities allows preparation of clean
              electrode surfaces or those precisely modified with a reaction promoter
              (ruthenium or tin), one of the probe adlayers mentioned above, or preadsorded 
              oxygen.  Cyclic voltammetry and potential step experiments are used for
              electrochemical studies, whereas thermal desorption spectroscopy, Auger
              electron spectroscopy, low energy electron diffraction, work function
              measurements, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and secondary ion mass
              spectrometry are conducted in the vacuum system.  Thermal desorption
              measurements following electrooxidation identify the nature and extent of the
              hydrogen-containing intermediate through the relative amounts of hydrogen and
              carbon monoxide desorption.  The other surface analysis methods provide the
              necessary controls for preparing well defined electrocatalysts, document any
              changes that occur upon their removal from the electrolyte, and
              spectroscopically characterize their surfaces following  reaction.   
              Electrochemical fuel cells  offer one of the most efficient means of energy
              conversion possible, and allow substantial reductions in fuel consumption and
              emissions of the pollutants and greenhouse gases associated with energy
              production.  Especially attractive for portable power generation,
              transportation, and leisure/domestic applications, the direct methanol fuel
              cell, which combines methanol and oxygen directly to produce electrical energy,
              has limited technical feasibility because of poor methanol electrooxidation
              kinetics and a tendency to self-poisoning.  This presents a problem in
              electrocatalysis, where the goal is to find the proper electrocatalyst and
              operating conditions that maximize reaction rate (and hence minimize
              overpotential) while avoiding the conditions for  self-poisoning.     ***
