Title       : CAREER: Low Energy Ion Beam Modification of Magnetic Film Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1998      
File        : a9502413

Award Number: 9502413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos J. Gutierrez cg08@swt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1045,1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9502413  Gutierrez    This CAREER project will explore the influence of
              impinging low-energy  ion  beams (down to ~50 electron-volts) on various
              polycrystalline and  single-crystalline  transition metal magnetic film 
              structures  (iron,  cobalt,  nickel  and their various alloys and nitrides) 
              deposited  on  silicon and gallium-arsenide substrates. Different ion beam
              sputtering  parameters  such as substrate temperature, processing gas
              environment,  ion beam angle of incidence, and ion beam energy will be varied
              in  an  effort to determine their influences on magnetic film characteristics. 
              The  physics  of the ion beam-induced property modifications  will  be 
              investigated,  and  this  knowledge  will  be  applied   towards   the 
              controlled   modification   of  technologically   important   magnetic 
              properties  such as saturation magnetization, coercivity,  anisotropy,  and 
              magnetoresistance  in  more  complicated  layered  magnetic  film  structures. 
              The  research  program  includes  relevant  collaborative  efforts   with 
              Southwest  Research  Institute,  the  Naval   Research  Laboratory,  the
              University of Texas at Austin, and the University  of  Missouri (Neutron
              Reactor Facility), and Commonwealth Scientific, Inc.  %%%  Magnetic   film  
              materials  are  lucrative  structures   for   device  implementation   in   the
                magnetic   sensor,   microwave/fiber-optic  communication  and magnetic
              storage industries. These  materials  have  helped  spur  the rapid growth of
              the magnetic technology industry  to  its  present  ~$80 billion market. This
              CAREER research  project  will  explore  the  influence of impinging low-energy
              ion beams  on  various  transition  metal  ferromagnetic materials (iron,
              cobalt,  nickel  and  their  various  alloys  and  nitrides)  during  film 
              deposition.   In  particular,  the  ion beam-controlled modification of film 
              saturation  magnetization,    magnetic   anisotropy,   coercivity,    and   
              giant  magnetoresistance  will be investigated. All film  materi als  will  be 
              processed  on semiconductor substrates (silicon and gallium  arsenide)  to 
              promote  their possible implementation in devices.  This  research  project 
              will  be  operated in close cooperation with  the  innovative  Materials
              Physics undergraduate curriculum program at Southwest  Texas  State University.
               ***
