Title       : GEM: The Time Sequence of Substorms in GEM Campaigns: A Comparison of Individual
               Events to Statistical Averages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1997       
File        : a9502124

Award Number: 9502124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206362             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. McPherron rmcpherr@igpp.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9169,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  A magnetospheric substorms is the collection of processes by which  energy
              is extracted from the solar wind and deposited in the  magnetosphere,
              ionosphere and earth's atmosphere.  Substorms have  significant effects on the
              near-earth environment and affect many  of man's systems.  The represent a
              natural hazard to human  activities that is becoming more important. 
              Unfortunately, the  cause of substorms, particularly of the most destructive
              phase, the  expansion phase, is not known.  For may years the most popular 
              physical model explaining substorms has been the near-earth neutral  line
              (NENL) model.  This model has been remarkably successful in  organizing
              numerous observations in the near-earth plasma sheet and  successful predicted
              the existence and properties of the  magnetotail plasmoid, a bubble of plasma
              and magnetic field that  the earth releases to the solar wind during substorms.
               A number of  new observations have not been incorporated in the NENL model,
              and  it appears difficult to do so.  It seems that the substorms  expansion
              begins at local midnight very close to synchronous orbit  (6.6 Re) and
              propagates outward into the tail.  This expansion  begins on closed,
              quasi-dipolar field lines at the inner edge of  the cross-tail current sheet. 
              Subsequently it moves tailward by  disrupting the tail current, diverting it
              along magnetic field  lines to the auroral ionosphere.    A new model called
              the current disruption (CD) model is being  developed to explain these
              observations.  Some versions of this  model predict dynamics of the tail plasma
              sheet and magnetic field  that are diametrically opposite to the predictions of
              the NENL  model, and the observations on which it is based.  Such a fortunate 
              circumstance should be easy to resolve.  The model either agrees or  disagrees
              with observations and we should be able to decide between  them.      It is
              proposed to re-examine the observations in the near-earth  plasma sheet and
              place them on a firmer footing so that it will be  pos sible to develop a
              reasonable physical model of the substorm  expansion phase.  To this end, data
              already at UCLA, and additional  data from other investigators will be used to
              study the problems of  frequency of occurrence and time delay of phenomena
              relative to  substorms onset.  Other ground indicators of substorm onset will
              be  used including brightenings in satellite auroral images,  midlatitude
              positive bays, Pi 2 pulsation bursts, maxima in  inclination of synchronous
              magnetic field, and dispersionless  plasma injection at synchronous orbit. 
              Features to be examined  include changes in magnetic field, particle fluxes,
              plasma  pressure, plasma flow and temperature.  Based on these results, the 
              different models and their success in explaining the observations  will be
              considered.
