Title       : Static and Dynamic Properties of Polyelectrolyte Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1998       
File        : a9502320

Award Number: 9502320
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arun Yethiraj yethiraj@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9163,9179,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Arun Yethiraj is supported by a CAREER grant from the Theoretical and  
              Computational Chemistry Program to perform theoretical studies of the   static
              and dynamic properties of polyelectrolyte solutions.  The   conformational
              properties of the polyelectrolyte molecules in dilute   solution will be
              investigated as a function of ionic strength.  The   predictions of the theory
              will first be tested against molecular   simulations for a simple model.  The
              theory will then be used to   investigate the conformational behavior of a
              chemically realistic model   for polyacrylic acid.  Simulations of two-molecule
              systems that   incorporate the rest of the solution via site-site solvation
              potentials   will be performed in order to estimate the importance of
              intermolecular   interactions in polyelectrolyte solutions.  These simulations
              will also   be used to interpret light scattering experiments on
              polyelectrolyte   solutions.  Finally, single chain and two-molecule Brownian
              dynamics   simulations will be performed in order to investigate the viscosity
              and   self-diffusion coefficient as a function of ionic strength.  Yethiraj's  
              teaching goals at the undergraduate level  include: 1) promoting in-class  
              discussions; 2) promoting group learning; and 3) computer aided   instruction. 
              In graduate level courses he will introduce computational   techniques ranging
              from ab initio and semi-empirical methods in quantum   chemistry to Monte Carlo
              and molecular dynamics simulations of classical   systems.  Polyelectrolytes
              are charged macromolecules.  They display a richer   variety of properties than
              neutral polymers, and they have a wide range   of technological uses, for
              example: as flocculants, dewatering agents,   demulsifiers, and drag reduction
              agents; as additives in detergents and   cosmetics; and in the manufacture of
              membranes, ion-exchange resins, gels   and modified plastics.  The behavior of
              polyelectrolytes, however, is far   from well understood, and there has
              recently been an increased interest   in obtaining a better molecular level
              understanding of these systems.    Yethiraj's research will help to elucidate
              those molecular properties   which are important in achieving desired materials
              properties for   polyelectrolyte systems.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
