Title       : Luminescent Probes of DNA and Semiconductor Surface Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a9502929

Award Number: 9502929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine J. Murphy murphy@mail.chem.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9161,9178,9183,AMPP,BIOT,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Catherine J. Murphy, of the University of South Carolina, is  supported by
              the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic  Chemistry Program under a
              Faculty Early Career Advancement Award  for the study of uses of luminescence
              as a probe of surface  structure.  Three areas are targeted:  (1) Trisdiimine 
              ruthenium(II) complexes will be designed such that luminescence  will be
              observed only when one of the diimine ligands is of the  appropriate length to
              fit a cavity in a large molecule such as DNA  that is formed as a result of
              tertiary structure.  (2) The known  sensitivity of the luminescence of "quantum
              dots" of cadmium  sulfide to the nature and amount of surface adsorbate will be
               investigated as a means of determining the nature of the  interaction of DNA
              with these particles.  It is hypothesized that  DNA that can bend will adsorb
              to particles that are of the  appropriate diameter and that this adsorption can
              be monitored by  changes in the luminescence of the particles.  Distances
              between  the ends of DNA molecules wrapped about suitably sized particles  may
              be further investigated by the extent to which energy transfer  between
              molecular tags on the two ends of the duplex (fluorescein  and rhodamine)
              occurs.  (3)  Synthesis of hollow "quantum dot"  cadmium sulfide particles will
              be attempted in an effort to model  the luminescence reported for porous
              semiconductor particles.   Optical/structure relationships for these particles
              will be used to  develop a model for the electronic structure of porous 
              semiconductors.  The teaching plan outlines several ways in which  materials
              chemistry will be introduced into the undergraduate and  graduate curricula
              through formal course work and  through both  undergraduate and graduate
              research.  Also detailed are plans to  foster the development of female
              scientists through interactions  with women's organizations on campus and in
              local high schools and  middle schools.    Luminescence is a unique property of
              certain classes of molecules  in whic h the absorption of light results in
              emission of light,  usually of a longer wavelength.  The wavelength and
              intensity of  such luminescence is generally very sensitive to the environment 
              about the absorbing molecule.  This research aims to utilize the  luminescence
              of several materials to probe the structures of their  environments.  These
              applications may provide unique information  about the structure of certain
              types of DNA that is not readily  determined by other techniques.  The teaching
              program is designed  to increase the exposure of undergraduate and graduate
              students to  materials chemistry and to foster the development of female 
              scientists.
