Title       : SuperDARN: Global-Scale Observations of the High-Latitude Ionosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1998    
File        : a9502993

Award Number: 9502993
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $641140             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond A. Greenwald   (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Bristow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Michael Ruohoniemi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kile B. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 4202      UPPER ATMOSPHERIC FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,5219,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project involved the operation and maintenance of a radar at  Goose Bay,
              Labrador.  Over the past several years, a global-scale  network of
              high-latitude HF radars has been developed to probe some  of the critical
              questions in solar-terrestrial research.  The  network is known by the acronym
              SuperDARN (Super Dual Auroral Radar  Network) and the radars within it are
              based upon the design and  operation of the radar located at Goose Bay.  These
              HF radars sense  ionospheric plasma motions from Doppler measurements of
              signals  backscattered from small-scale ionospheric irregularities.  The new 
              radars are funded by Britain, Canada, Finland, France and  Antarctica; four
              remain to be completed within the next 16 months.   In addition to operation
              and maintenance, the investigators will  insure that the software controlling
              the radars is maintained and  updated, and that data from all of the radars are
              collected onto  common data bases that are available to interested scientists
              from  all participating countries, including the U.S.  They will also  assist
              U.S. scientists in the acquisition and use of HF radar data,  and continue
              their own research activities that are associated with  the SuperDARN data. 
              These include studies of the global-scale  structure and dynamics of
              high-latitude convection under changing  interplanetary magnetic field and
              solar-wind pressure, studies of  transient magnetospheric boundary processes as
              imaged in the high-  latitude ionosphere, studies of the detailed relationships
              that  exist in the high-latitude E-region between electric fields,  currents
              and conductivities, studies of large scale MHD resonances,  and studies of
              small-scale irregularity generation in the high-  latitude ionosphere.***
