Title       : Uncovering the Chemistry of ansa-Chromocene and ansa-Vanadocene
               Complexes/Innovations to Teaching Inorganic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9502739

Award Number: 9502739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela Shapiro shapiro@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9146,9179,MANU,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Pamela Shapiro, Chemistry Department, University of Idaho, is   supported by
              the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry   Program of the
              Chemistry Division under a Faculty Early Career   Advancement Award to develop
              the chemistry of bent-sandwich   ansa-chromocene and vanadocene complexes in
              order to uncover novel   reaction chemistry, discover new homogeneous
              catalysts, and further the   understanding of the dependence of electronic
              structure and reactivity on   metallocene geometry. Heteroannular bridges will
              permit a bent ring   configuration to be tailored in the bis-cyclopentadiene
              vanadium and   chromium complexes and this will allow an open site to be
              generated in   the equatorial plane of the complexes. The chemistry of these
              species   will be explored and the properties of the compounds will be tuned by
                adjusting the bridging groups which join the two rings. Also part of this  
              project will be a restructuring of an inorganic chemistry teaching   laboratory
              to emphasize the use of modern techniques and the introduction   of computer
              generated teaching aids to several undergraduate lecture   courses.  Catalysts
              are used to improve the rate or efficiency of a chemical   reaction. Thus, the
              search for new, more effective catalysts is an   important area of contemporary
              chemistry. In the research portion of this   project a series of vanadium and
              chromium compounds, which are surrounded   by non reactive groups in  such a
              way as to leave a wedged shaped cavity   into which small reactants can easily
              fit, will be prepared. By tailoring   the size of this wedge, the ability of
              the compounds to effect   transformations of the molecules with which they
              interact can be tailored   to maximize the catalytic properties of the metals.
              The educational   portion will modernize and improve the chemistry curriculum
              at the   University of Idaho.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
