Title       : CAREER: Fundamental Problems in Parallel Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1997       
File        : a9502889

Award Number: 9502889
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anand R. Tripathi                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133336             (Estimated)
Investigator: Weijia Shang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Clara University
	      500 El Camino Real
	      Santa Clara, CA  950530250    408/554-4764

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  Parallel computers are difficult to program.  Often,  users have to specify
              the parallel execution, i.e., to specify  data  distributions to different
              local memory modules (as in High  Performance  Fortran), data communications
              between processors, and  processor  synchronizations.  The insufficient
              programming support  limits the  applicability and further development of
              parallel  systems.  The objectives of  this research are (1) to search and 
              find solutions (optimal or feasible) for  those fundamental  problems in
              programming parallel systems such as how to  distribute/replicate input data to
              different local memories in  the system to  minimize inter-processor
              communications, how to  schedule and partition the  computations to minimize
              the overall  running time, how many processors should  be used and how to 
              choose the right message size for a message vector; (2) to  develop new
              techniques for data alignment, scheduling  partitioning and  estimating the
              number of processors to be used  for optimal execution of  algorithms with
              nested loops; and (3) to  implement these techniques and add  them to some
              existing software  tools such as PVM and MPI.    Education:  The  education
              plans are as follows:  (1)  Undergraduate computer architecture lab at  Santa
              Clara University  has not been changed for six years and is obsolete.  It  is 
              planned to update the lab and syllabi and redesign the students'  projects to 
              include recent advances in computer design, technology  and debugging software 
              to have students more motivated and  prepared when they graduate.  (2) Develop 
              new parallel processing  lab projects.  One project is to have students run 
              parallel  programs in PVM environment so students can see and think those 
              fundamental problems in parallel programming.  (3)  Be involved  in mentoring 
              women and underrepresented undergraduates and  graduate students.  (4)  Do 
              research projects with several senior  undergraduate students, especially women
               engineering students to  motivate them to pursue graduate studies  in computer
               engineering at SCU                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
