Title       : Ideas, Inventions, and Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1997     
File        : a9502968

Award Number: 9502968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174500             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Adams   (Principal Investigator current)
              Adam B. Jaffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Fogarty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 Decision makers whose work it is to allocate resources to industrial R&D and
              academic research have a vital interest in measuring the importance of patents.
               If for example, the patents of today were fewer but better than the patent of
              yesterday, then the observed decline in the rate of patenting would signify
              little for the future of technical change and economic growth.  This research
              sets out (1) to measure the significance of patents in order to better gauge
              their quality, and (2) to supplement the evidence on importance with better
              information on networks of technology, including any limitations imposed by
              localization phenomena that inhibit these flows. By carrying out tests that
              provides (3) better evidence than before to bear on issues of increasing
              returns to scale at the firm, regional, and national levels. These matters of
              the returns to scale are central to modern economic analysis and to prospects
              for growth.   The research includes a series of tests of importance of patents
              using two distinct cuts of the evidence:  a national cut drawn from a variety
              of technology-based industries that uses previously collected evidence and
              original data; and an overlapping, largely regional cut that will collect
              original, and, in our view, deeper evidence. The previously collected evidence
              draws on received measures of the importance of patents such as citations, size
              of citing firm, and number of claims, in order to assess the importance of
              patents for productivity and profitability. The original, evidence, which
              includes an overlapping set of firms to verify the results, cross-checks the
              national sample by collecting the firms evaluations of significant patents for
              progress of that firm. These measures compare to the measures used in the
              national sample, including tests on a common subsample of firms. The regional
              sample will include universities and government labs, enabling an (5)
              assessment of the importance of these nonprofit entities to the firm's
              productivity with the importance of R&D conducted by other firms.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
