Title       : Scanning Tunneling Microscopy and Ultralow Temperature Transport Measurements on
               Quench Condensed Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9502920

Award Number: 9502920
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Valles valles@physics.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9502920  Valles    This experimental project involves low  temperature scanning 
              tunneling microscopy and electron magneto-transport and tunneling  measurements
              on strongly disordered ultrathin films.  The  experiments will investigate the
              physical effects behind the  profound and sometimes  spectacular changes
              (e.g.,the  superconductor to insulator transition) that occur in electronic 
              systems in the strongly disordered limit in two dimensions.  The  ultra-thin
              metal films are fabricated in situ by thermal  evaporation of the constituent
              metals onto substrates held at  temperatures near 4 K. Experiments with the
              scanning tunneling  microscope will measure the atomic surface structure as
              well as  variations in their local tunneling density of states.  The 
              experiments are of interest from fundamental viewpoints, as well  as technical
              viewpoints, as the results will increase our  understanding of electronic
              conduction processes in metals.  %%%  This experimental project involves low
              temperature scanning  tunneling microscopy and electron magneto-transport and
              tunneling  measurements on  strongly disordered ultrathin films.  The 
              experiments will investigate the physical effects behind the  profound and
              sometimes  spectacular changes (e.g., the  superconductor to insulator
              transition) that occur in electronic  systems in the strongly disordered limit
              in two dimensions.  The  ultra-thin metal films are fabricated in situ by
              thermal  evaporation of the constituent metals onto substrates held at 
              temperatures near 4 K. Experiments with the scanning tunneling  microscope will
              measure the atomic surface structure as well as  variations in their  local
              tunneling density of states.  The  experiments are of interest from fundamental
              viewpoints, as well  as technical viewpoints, as the results will increase our 
              understanding of electronic conduction processes in metals.  ***
