Title       : CAREER: Specification and Verification of Compiler Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1997      
File        : a9502356

Award Number: 9502356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Hannan hannan@cse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 The research goal of this CAREER project is the formal  specification and
              verification of algorithms that support the  implementation of  programming
              languages.  Such formal systems  can aid the development of new  languages and
              efficient  implementation of these languages.  This support arises  from both 
              the verification of algorithms, which increases confidence in the  correctness
              of a compiler, and from the improved understanding of  compilation  techniques
              allowed by formal specification.  Recent  work has focused on using  logical
              frameworks and mechanized proof  assistants to specify deductive systems 
              representing aspects of  compilation and to verify the correctness of these 
              specifications.  This research project extends these results  by considering 
              advanced, state-of-the-art algorithms found in  current compilers, formalizing 
              theories for these algorithms, and  verifying the correctness of these 
              algorithms.  One specific  problem area to be addressed involves closure 
              conversion  algorithms and the concept of `safe-for-space complexity.`  An 
              important aspect of this project is extending the use of  mechanized proof 
              assistants to support the verification of  complex flow analyses and 
              optimizations of programs.    The goal of the education plan is to provide both
               a general, but  rigorous, introduction to the study of programming languages
              at  the undergraduate level and  would  introduce, at both the undergraduate
              and graduate  level, the  recently emerging field of logic and computation
              which studies  the  relationship between constructive logics and typed lambda 
              calculi.  Although  this is typically considered advanced material  and not
              suitable for  undergraduates, it can be made accessible to  students.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
