Title       : Faculty Early Career Development: Methods for Large-Scale Network Design and
               Education Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1996        
File        : a9502502

Award Number: 9502502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela H. Vance   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1045,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9502502   The objective of the research is to develop efficient solution
              procedures for large-scale capacitated instances of Fixed Charge Network Design
              (FCND) problems.  The research focus is on the development of new and stronger
              formulations that provide a tighter linear programming (LP) bound.  Alternate
              formulations of the problem will be investigated, including the node-arc and
              path-flow formulations.  To support the new formulations, new solution
              algorithms will be developed to solve the models.  The techniques to be
              explored in developing the algorithms will have a strong emphasis on
              branch-and-price approaches (i.e., column generation techniques for solving LP
              relaxations embedded in a branch-and-bound approach), Lagrangian relaxation,
              and Benders decomposition.  While emphasis will be on exact solution, the
              insights gained from the exact solution procedures will be used to develop
              heuristic algorithms.  On the educational side, experiences from this research
              will be used to restructure the current approach to teaching operations
              research to integrate modeling and algorithms with applications.  The
              restructuring will be carried out with an overhaul of the industrial
              engineering undergraduate curriculum at the host university.  The restructuring
              will also involve developing a new elective course on mathematical programming
              for undergraduates to provide a forum for teaching advance modeling and
              algorithmic issues. A sequence of core courses in optimization will also be
              developed at the graduate level.   The research problem is significant since
              the models to be developed are applicable to a broad range of industrial
              problems, including transportation, telecommunications, logistics, and
              production.  Most existing solution techniques for these classes of problems
              are effective only for small size problems.  Because the emphasis on this
              research is on moderate to large size problems, many industries stand to
              realize financial benefits if this research produces meaningful solution
              algorithms  for reasonable size problems.  Furthermore, existing solution
              techniques are directed mostly to uncapacitated problems.  The current project
              is aimed at extending the research to the more general capacitated problem.
