Title       : CAREER: Adaptive and Robust Automatic Speech Recognition inHuman-Computer
               Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1998   
File        : a9502074

Award Number: 9502074
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149547             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yunxin Zhao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1045,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This application has violated system integrity and will be terminated.    Quit
              all applications, quit  Windows, and then restart your computer. This
              application has violated system integrity due to  execution of a privileged
              instruct.  This research is aimed at developing highly effective adaptation 
              mechanisms for speaker-independent continuous speech recognition so as to
              enhance its robustness under  a wide range of speaker and environment
              conditions. The adaptation is based on the modeling of speech  spectral
              variation smurces, and is via sequential and iterative unsupervised learning of
              speech model  parameters from on-line speech data. The adaptation further
              handles interference sound signals  including `cocktail party` speech via
              two-channel speech/sound acquisition, and via estimation of the  cross-talk
              channel characteristics. The speech modeling and adaptation are within the
              statistical  framework of the hidden Markov models and other statistical
              algorithms.  The convergence condition and  fast implementation of the
              adaptation algorithms are addressed.  Adaptive speaker-independent,  continuous
              speech recognition systems are to be studied in human-computer interaction
              contexts such as  virtual renvironments and interactive three-dimensional
              visual computing at the Beckman Institute of  the University of Illinois. The
              funding will be  used to support two PhD students.  This research is  expected
              to contribute new knowledge to robust speech modeling in the presence of
              multiple speech  variation sources and interference sounds, to significantly
              advance the robustness of speaker-  independent, continuous speech recognition
              systems, and to facilitate a much wider scope of  applications for
              speaker-independent, continuous speech recognition systemsin human-computer 
              interaction.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
