Title       : CAREER: Control of Dynamical Systems with Reduced Control Authority and
               Application to Autonomous Underwater Vehicles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2000      
File        : a9502477

Award Number: 9502477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228596             (Estimated)
Investigator: Naomi E. Leonard naomi@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1045,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9502477  Leonard  This grant supports a program for integrated research and 
              education activities that address important and challenging  engineering
              problems while at the same time foster a dynamic  learning environment in which
              research motivates and  vitalizes education, and education inspires fresh ideas
              for  research and nurtures future leaders.  The research centers  on nonlinear
              control of dynamical systems with reduced  control authority and application to
              autonomous underwater  vehicles (AUV).  The results of the research will have a
               significant impact on the efficiency and reliability of  AUV's which are
              increasingly in demand as they are expected  to play a central role in
              scientific, environmental,  industrial and military underwater missions.  At
              the same  time, control of dynamical systems such as AUV's provides an 
              exciting new topic of research that attracts the interest of  students and can
              be used inside and outside the classroom to  motivate fundamental learning and
              to introduce undergraduate  and graduate students to innovative research.   
              The goal of the proposed research is to develop a framework  for synthesizing
              control laws to govern the motion of  dynamical systems which have a reduced
              number of independent  control inputs as compared to typical usage (also
              referred  to as under-actuated dynamical systems).  The reduction in  control
              authority may be the inadvertent result of an  actuator failure or the
              deliberate result of an economic  design choice.  Accordingly, this research
              will provide  solutions for (1) improving system fault tolerance by  exploiting
              built-in system redundancy and enabling systems  to adapt to changes in control
              authority such as an actuator  failure and (2) choosing the number and types of
              control  actuators and actuator configurations in control system  designs to
              best achieve desired performance results.  The  research is applicable to AUV's
              as well as to other systems  including spacecraft, mobile robots and vibratory
              actuators.  ***
