Title       : SBIR Phase II: Computer-Aided Braille Music Transcription System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9502434

Award Number: 9502434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel O. Flores   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Opus Technologies
	      13333 Thunderhead Street
	      San Diego, CA  921292329    619/538-9401

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9502434  Flores   Computer-assisted transcription provides a means of responding
              to the challenge presented by the large increase in printed materials requiring
              human interpretation.  The process of transcribing printed sheet music into
              Braille music is currently a tedious manual process that can be performed only
              by specially trained Braille music transcribers.  In addition, the
              certification process for music transcribers is long--two and a half to three
              years--and arduous; one must take the correspondence course offered by the
              National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped of the
              Library of Congress, which entails one year to learn literary Braille and then
              another 18 months to two years to learn music Braille.  As a consequence of the
              extensive training required and the small number of individuals who complete it
              and stay in the field, thousands of blind musicians in this country alone are
              severely limited in their access to Braille music.  This Small Business
              Innovation Research Phase II project from Opus Technologies will develop
              prototype software for a computer-aided (PC Windows environment) Braille music
              transcription system which allows individuals with no training in the Braille
              music code to transcribe printed music into Braille.  The system interfaces to
              a scanner which captures an image of the sheet music for display on the screen.
               A sighted user uses this image as a template for accurately entering musical
              symbols into a graphical music notation editor.  The entered music is then
              translated into Braille.  A built-in Optical Character Reader (OCR) in
              combination with a literary Braille translator recognizes scanned lyrics and
              other textual elements and translates them into literary Braille.  A Braille
              editor displays the resulting Braille code for editing and output.  A reverse
              translator allows a blind musician to enter Braille music code and produce
              printed sheet music for use by sighted musicians.   Results of this research
              will lead to the development and co mmercialization of a complete Braille music
              transcription system for the U.S. and international markets and will improve
              blind musicians' access to printed music.  Building on the concept that the
              user will hear the graphics that represent the Braille music characters spoken;
              in the future, the next step will be to make the graphics that represent the
              print music symbols and their position also spoken.  Thus ultimately, the whole
              process could be accomplished without the intervention of a sighted person.  In
              addition, these same techniques have potential applications to other Braille
              codes including mathematics and graphics data.
