Title       : A Protein Analog Approach to Biomimetic Studies of Metalloenzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9502421

Award Number: 9502421
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yi Lu yi-lu@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9179,9183,BIOT,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Yi Lu, of the University of Illinois,  is supported by the Inorganic,
              Bioinorganic and  Organometallic Chemistry Program under a Faculty Early Career
              Advancement Award for   biomimetic studies of enzyme function.  Site directed
              mutagenesis will be used to alter the protein  environments of small
              metalloproteins such as azurin and cyctochrome c peroxidase in an effort to 
              induce them to become functional mimics of cyctochrome c oxidase and lignin
              peroxidase,  respectively.  The primary objective of this work is to obtain
              structural and mechanistic  information about the function of the active site
              that is difficult or impossible to obtain for the  larger, more complex
              proteins.  A variety of techniques will be used to study the genetically 
              engineered proteins including UV-VIS, EPR, MCD, NMR, ENDOR and EXAFS
              spectroscopies.   When possible x-ray structures on the modified proteins will
              be obtained.  The teaching plan  outlines methods for introducing modern
              research methodology into undergraduate laboratories  with emphasis on the
              first year advanced chemistry laboratory.  Also detailed are plans for training
               graduate research students in the recently developed Biomolecular Chemistry
              program at the  university, which aims to foster interdisciplinary research at
              the interface of chemistry and  biology.    A major challenge for the chemical
              industry, which continues to enjoy a favorable trade balance, is  to develop
              new processes that are still low-cost and high yielding, but are
              environmentally benign.   Small, properly designed proteins may serve as
              catalysts for certain processes, which would be   entirely nonpolluting since
              the reagents, catalyst and products (new proteins) would be  biodegradable. 
              The studies to be conducted in this project will support the ultimate design of
               such small proteins.  For the chemical industry to convert to such
              manufacturing processes will  require scientists who are skilled in several
              areas besides chemistry.  Interdisciplinary research  training such as  that
              envisioned by Dr. Lu for graduate students in the Biomolecular Chemistry 
              program is crucial to the development of such highly skilled scientists.
