Title       : Synthesis and Characterization of Boron Containing Amino Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1997     
File        : a9502406

Award Number: 9502406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Quintana wquintan@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. William  Quintana, Chemistry Department, New Mexico State University,   is
              supported by the Inorganic,  Bioinorganic, and Organometallic   Chemistry
              Program of the Chemistry Division under a Faculty Early Career   Advancement
              Award to synthesize amino acids that  contain boron polyhedra   and to develop
              educational activities that directly involve students,   thus making them more
              responsible for their own development. By expanding   known amino acid
              preparations, derivatives of alpha-amino acids in which   the alkyl group is
              substituted by a boron containing group will be   synthesized. Likewise, the
              alpha-carbon atom of the amino acid will be   replaced by a boron atom to
              produce boronated amino acids. These   compounds then will be characterized by
              a variety of physical and   spectroscopic methods. The educational component
              emphasizes course   development at both the lower and upper undergraduate
              levels and will   include the incorporation of demonstrations, the
              establishment of study   groups, and the initiation of outcomes assessments.  
              Amino acids which are modified to be slightly different from the   naturally
              occurring amino acids have numerous potential applications.   Because  the
              modified amino acids resemble the natural ones, they may   enter into
              biological systems but, because of the differences, they will   not function
              exactly as their natural analogs. Consequently, modified   amino acids can be
              used to probe or change biochemical processes. The   purpose of the research
              portion of this project is to develop methods to   produce new amino acids that
              contain boron instead of the usual carbon   atoms. These have potential
              applications as enzyme inhibitors and in   Boron Capture Neutron Therapy, a
              treatment being developed for some   cancers. Both the research and the
              educational portions of this project   are designed to serve the significant
              population of minority students   enrolled at New Mexico State University.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
