Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Measures, Dynamics and Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1997     
File        : a9502952

Award Number: 9502952
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121500             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Daniel Mauldin mauldin@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mariusz Urbanski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Mauldin  9502952        Our project consists of three sections. In the first
              section we propose to    deal with infinite systems of conformal maps,
              investigating the topological and    geometric structure of the corresponding
              limit set. We intend to study and to    compare conformal, invariant, harmonic,
              Hausdorff and packing measures in a    general setting as well as in the case
              of some special systems primarily given    by irregular systems, continued
              fractions with restricted entries and    apollonian packings. We also plan to
              explore the problem of conjugacies of such    systems, to study random systems
              and invariant continua for attractors and    repellors. In the second section
              we plan to deal with the phase transitions of    pressure on Julia sets and
              integral means of Riemann maps of a simply connected    basin of attraction to
              a periodic stable point or rationally indifferent    periodic point. We intend
              to provide appropriate definitions of pressure, to    establish relations
              between pressure and integral means and to investigate the    phenomenon of
              phase transitions by means of dynamical systems and thermodynamic    formalism.
              We also want to explore the geometry and dynamics of equilibrium    states of
              Holder continuous functions. In particular we are interested in the   
              asymptotic behavior of of iterates of the Perron-Frobenius operator and the   
              sequence of random variables generated by Holder continuous functions.    In
              the last section we propose to deal with geometry and dynamics of   rational
              functions with no recurrent critical points in the Julia sets       and
              Collet-Eckmann maps, exploring the problems of Hausdorff and box        
              dimension and the influence of critical points on finiteness of             
              sigma-finite invariant measures. We also plan to study harmonic measures,   
              beginning with Holder continuity of their Jacobians.        We propose research
              involving measures and dimensions of various         kinds, for example
              Hausdorff, packing, conformal, and ha rmonic. These        measures are natural
              notions of "volume" in the spaces and objects we        study. Such spaces and
              objects may be given by some algorithm which   allows us to approximate the
              final object and volume step by step. These   spaces also have some natural
              "motion" or dynamics acting on them. Our   research involves developing
              techniques which allow us to study both   geometric and dynamic features of our
              system. The specific problems of   this proposal arise from many contexts and
              their solutions will involve a   mixture of techniques from various areas:
              complex analysis, continua   theory, dynamics, functional analysis-theory of
              positive operators of the   Perron-Frobenius type, measure theory and
              probability, statistical   physics-equilibrium states, phase transitions and
              thermodynamic formalism.  ***
