Title       : CAREER: Development and Implementation of Antenna Array Processing Techniques
               for Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9502695

Award Number: 9502695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180346             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guanghan Xu xu@ece.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Array signal processing techniques were traditionally limited to  military
              applications. Researchers recently found that these  techniques could be
              applied to significantly expand channel  capacity and improve quality of
              wireless communication systems  through exploitation of spatial diversity. 
              Despite significant  research activities in array processing during the last
              decade,  conversion of such military technology to cost sensitive commercial 
              technology is not trivial. A significant amount of research and  development
              effort is required to realize these techniques in a  wireless communication
              system. This research is developing  innovative antenna array processing
              techniques and fast  implementation schemes for various wireless communication
              systems.  The program scope is not limited to algorithm development, 
              theoretical analysis, and simulation studies; our ultimate  objective is to
              implement the resulting algorithms in real  hardware.    Industry specializing
              in digital signal processing and its  applications in telecommunications has
              experienced rapid growth in  this world due to high demand for information
              access and  processing. To respond to such a growth, new courses in these areas
               and innovative teaching methodology must be developed so that  students can
              quickly adapt to various challenges. During the  proposed period, the principal
              investigator plans to develop  several new courses in these areas including
              undergraduate lab  courses, continue involving undergraduates in industry
              sponsored  projects, design more computer projects, create opportunities for 
              minority students and students with disabilities, and, what is more  important,
              develop a multimedia teaching method drawing on advanced  technology, e.g.,
              live audio, video, and graphical illustrations  and real hardware
              demonstrations.
