Title       : Binary Nucleation Along Thermodynamically Unfavored Paths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9502604

Award Number: 9502604
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135870             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara E. Wyslouzil barbaraw@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9146,9179,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Barbara Wyslouzil is supported by a CAREER grant from the Theoretical and  
              Computational Chemistry Program to perform experimental studies of binary  
              nucleation along thermodynamically unfavored paths.  The   thermodynamically
              favored path for nucleation crosses the free energy   surface through the
              saddle region with the lowest free energy.  However,   the combined effect of
              the monomer impingement rates and the shape of the   free energy surface can
              drive the flux over a ridge in a miscible binary   system.  The flux can also
              be driven through the saddle with the higher   free energy in a partially
              miscible system.  In both cases, the   analytical theories based on a saddle
              crossing will not predict the   correct nucleation rate behavior.  The proposed
              work has two goals: 1) to   identify real chemical systems and conditions where
              binary nucleation   proceeds primarily along a thermodynamically unfavored
              path; and 2) to   design and conduct experiments that clearly demonstrate
              binary nucleation   can occur in this manner.  The experimental part of this
              project will use   a two pulse expansion cloud chamber to conduct nucleation
              rate   measurements.  Careful modeling of particle formation processes in the  
              chamber, together with knowledge of the composition of the critical   nucleus,
              should make it possible to distinguish whether nucleation has   followed the
              thermodynamically favored path.  The deliberate enhancement or suppression of
              the formation of a   thermodynamically favored phase is important in many
              fields of   engineering.  In material science for example, processes which
              produce   submicron ceramic particles by vapor phase nucleation from a volatile
                precursor can lead to materials with lower sintering temperatures over  
              conventionally produced ceramic powders.  In the chemical processing   industry
              the rates of nucleation, growth and recrystallization affect the   purity,
              quality, and sales value of bulk products such as common as sugar   and salt as
              well as specialty products such as zeolites.  In metallurgy,   different and
              potentially useful forms of metals may be produced if large   undercoolings are
              achieved without nucleation of a crystal phase.  A   better molecular level
              understanding of the nucleation could have a   potentially large impact on
              chemical processing in a large number of   manufacturing areas.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
