Title       : CAREER: Robust Design of Adaptive Nonlinear Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9502945

Award Number: 9502945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ioannis Kanellakopoulos ioannis@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9502945  Kanellakopoulos  Since most physical systems contain nonlinearities and
              unknown  parameters, adaptive control of nonlinear systems is directly 
              relevant to practical applications.  The Principal Investigator's  previous
              research resulted in several new systematic design  procedures which deliver
              high performance over large operating  regions without an increase in control
              effort and without  requiring full-state measurements.      The proposed
              research plan will continue the development of a new  generation of adaptive
              systems, in which the nonadaptive part of  the controller is capable of
              guaranteeing boundedness, while  adaption is used only for the improvement of
              transient an  asymptotic performance.  Additional design tools will be 
              developed that not only result in even stronger stability and  performance
              properties, but are also applicable to larger classes  of nonlinear systems,
              and characterize those classes via  geometric conditions.  The new tools will
              be applied to problems  which are of importance to commercial applications such
              as  induction motors, the automated operation of heavy-duty vehicles  on
              intelligent highways and semiconductor manufacturing  processes, and will
              develop cooperative research efforts with  interested industrial sponsors.   
              The proposed education plan will develop several new  undergraduate and
              graduate courses on linear, nonlinear and  adaptive control, as well as an
              undergraduate laboratory control  course.  Furthermore, it will enhance the
              teaching effectiveness  of control systems through the early introduction on
              nonlinear  examples and concepts in order to stimulate student interest and 
              ensure their understanding of the fact that linear control theory  can only
              yield regional results for most physical systems.  In  addition, the education
              plan includes graphical and symbolic  software into the undergraduate and
              graduate control curriculum,  so that students can spend less time deriving
              complicated  expressions and coding them into a simulatio n package, and more 
              time exploring design options, comparing different approaches,  and watching
              the results of their efforts come alive through  animation and visual
              simulation.    ***
