Title       : Mathematical Sciences: New Numerical Methods for Conservation Laws. Application
               to Non-Standard Shocks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1996       
File        : a9502766

Award Number: 9502766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philippe Le Floch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9502766   LeFloch      This work is supported by a National Science Foundation  
              Faculty Early    Career Development Award.  The research component will focus  
              on the    study of nonlinear hyperbolic conservation laws; these laws   are
              essential to    the description of a large number of problems in continuum  
              mechanics,    from fluid dynamics to material science (e.g., multiphase  
              flows, propagation    of interfaces).  The plan will have two major goals: (1)
              to   provide new    insight on the nonlinear stability of entropy discontinuous
                solutions and on    the design and nonlinear analysis of shock-capturing  
              numerical methods    and (2) to contribute to better understanding of several  
              applied problems    from physical sciences admitting non-standard shock waves. 
                The education    component will include curriculum development at the  
              graduate level,    disseminating the research into the scientific community,  
              including    industrial laboratories, and directing the work of students,  
              emphasizing    collaborative activities with engineers and researchers in   the
              physical    sciences.      The National Science Foundation strongly encourages
              the   early    development of academic faculty as both educators and  
              researchers.  The    Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program is a  
              Foundation-   wide  program that provides for the support of junior   faculty
              within the    context of their overall career development.  It combines in   a
              single    program the support of quality research and education in the  
              broadest sense    and the full participation of those traditionally  
              underrepresented in science    and engineering.  This program enhances and
              emphasizes the   importance    the Foundation places on the development of
              full, balanced   academic    careers which include both research and education.
