Title       : Theory and Application of Dispersive Multirate Filterbacks and Wavelets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9502885

Award Number: 9502885
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Wornell gww@allegro.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research component of this faculty early career development  proposal is
              aimed at developing a large, important, and  fundamentally new class of
              multirate filter banks, systems and  wavelets.  Traditional developments of
              this topic within the signal  processing community have been strongly motivated
              by applications  involving signal analysis.  In strong contrast, the research
              in  this proposal is motivated by some important contemporary  applications
              involving signal synthesis.  In particular, multirate  filterbank theory,
              wavelet theory have a potentially important and  largely unexplored role to
              play in the synthesis of waveforms for  a wide variety of broadband
              communications and remove sensing  applications.    In these applications,
              fundamentally different types of design  criteria and constraints come into
              play in developing suitable  multirate structures.  Foremost among the
              important differences is  that while for most applications involving signal
              analysis strong  localization in time and frequency is emphasized, the kinds of
               applications that will be the focus of this work will require  filterbanks and
              wavelets whose energy is widely dispersed in both  time and frequency.  We
              propose to explore several classes of  orthogonal and biorthogonal dispersive,
              "pseudorandom" filterbanks  and wavelet bases.    Several specific application
              areas are to be pursued under the  proposed research.  One that will be
              emphasized will be digital  wireless communications.  Here dispersive
              filterbanks and wavelets  are expected to lead to new code-division
              multiplexing systems that  more efficiently combat fading, jamming, and other
              forms of  multiple-access interference.  Furthermore, we plan to implement  the
              new wireless modems we develop in a DSP-based, real-time 900 Mz  indoor
              wireless system testbed recently developed by the principal  investigator as
              part of his wireless communications laboratory.    The educational component of
              the proposal encompasses significant  curriculum development at b oth the
              undergraduate and graduate  levels, and a strong investment in the mentoring of
              graduate  students.  One teaching initiative involves the development of a 
              recently introduced unified new undergraduate subject.  This  subject
              introduces undergraduate students, for the first time, to  the fundamentals of
              communications, control and signal processing  from a common perspective and
              which builds on a foundation of basic  signals, systems, and probability.   
              The second major teaching initiative involves the re-engineering of  the
              fundamental graduate subject on stochastic processes, detection  and estimation
              at MIT.  In this subject, the object is to redevelop  a syllabus, course notes,
              Matlab computer exercises, and homework  problems that emphasize modern,
              unified perspective to random and  deterministic signals and the associated
              signal processing  algorithms.  These curricular changes will also allow a
              number of  advanced topics, including multiscale and nonlinear signal 
              processing, to be incorporated.    A final component of the education plan
              involves continued active  mentoring of a diverse group of graduate students
              and nurturing  their intellectual, professional, and personal growth. 
              Ultimately,  of course, this interaction is one of the most gratifying and 
              important aspects of a academic career.
