Title       : U.S.-Germany Program: Dissertation Research in Industrial Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1995     
File        : a9502868

Award Number: 9502868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Young young@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 5936,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Ronald Giachetti, a graduate student of Professor Robert
              Young at North Carolina State University (NCSU), to spend six months carrying
              out research at the Laboratory for Machine Tools and Production Engineering of
              the Technical University of Aachen, Germany, where the expertise and facilities
              will greatly enhance his doctoral dissertation work.  The goal of Mr. Young's
              research (and that of the participating U.S. and German research groups) is to
              design an approach to satisfy the huge information management requirements of
              concurrent engineering.  In particular, he is focusing on an approach for
              uniting two different types of data management systems: the object-oriented
              database and the constraint-based processing system.  The Technical University
              of Aachen is in the process of developing a large system to implement such an
              approach, building on the German research group's expertise in object-oriented
              databases and their application to the challenge of concurrent engineering. 
              The research group at NCSU headed by Professor Paul Young has developed
              substantial expertise in constraint technology.  Professor Young is currently
              spending a sabbatical visit working with the German group.  This award will
              enable   Mr. Giachetti, a very promising U.S. graduate student, to join him and
              gain valuable professional and international experience.  Concurrent
              engineering involves the simultaneous consideration of the `life-cycle
              functions` of a product during the design phase.  The goal is to improve the
              design, reduce the cost of the product and shorten the time to market.  Each of
              these stages involves tremendous amounts of information and, often, different
              or even conflicting goals.  Managing this enormous amount and variety of
              information is one of  the main problems in implementing concurrent
              engineering.  This proposal addresses these information requirements with an
              approach that combines state-of-the-art expertise from the U.S. and Germany.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
