Title       : CAREER: An Integrated Approach for Improving the Performance, Programmability,
               and Portability of Shared Memory Multiprocessors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9502500

Award Number: 9502500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarita V. Adve   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              While shared-memory multiprocessors simplify many  aspects of programming, it is
              widely believed that naive shared-  momory  programs are not likely to result
              in high performance on  most shared-memory  systems.  The broad objective is to
              develop  and evaluate techniques for  improving the performance of shared- 
              memory systems while simultaneously  enhancing programmability and 
              portability.    A key problem that inhibited  performance in shared-memory
              systems  is that, unlike message passing programs,  the exact communication 
              requirements of shared-memory programs are not obvious.  Therefore, compilers,
              runtime systems, and hardware typically  need to make  conservative
              assumptions, resulting in excessive  communication and  synchronization
              primitives provided on a  particular machine (e.g., locks and  barriers), the
              intended  sharing behavior is obscured by these details.  Furthermore, the 
              low-level primitives that must be used to obtain good  performance  vary from
              platform to platform, thus inhibiting program  portability.    This research
              takes an integrated approach to improving the  performance, and portability of
              systems.  The approach broadly  is:  (1) to  identify common
              implementation-independent  communication patterns along with  primitive to
              express those  patterns in a programming language, (2) to develop  heuristics 
              that can be used by the compiler, runtime systems, hardware or  some 
              combination thereof to map these high-level primitives to  the appropriate 
              low-level primitives supported by the particular  target system, and (3) to 
              evaluate the resulting performance  benefits on the system.  By exposing the 
              intended sharing  behavior, many instances of unnecessary communication should 
              be  avoided, thus achieving higher performance.  Furthermore, despite  the 
              larger variety of synchronization patterns that a programmer  must choose from 
              his or her task is simplified because details of  implementing the patterns are
               left to the programming support  system (note tha t the sharing patterns 
              themselves must be  understood by the programmer anyway).  Finally, in 
              combination  with other projects within the overall research program, this 
              research should demonstrate that these common, high-level  synchronization 
              patterns can be efficiently supported on a  variety of platforms, thus
              enhancing  the portability of the  program.    This part of the research
              program is focused  on investigating a  specific kind of target system - a
              hardware distributed  shared-  memory multiprocessor that provides software
              control for  protocols and  efficient active message support (e.g., Stanford 
              Flash and Wisconsin Typhoon)-  using execution-driven simulation.  Other 
              projects in this research program are  already exploring  similar issues on
              other types of target systems.  Education:  The educational objectives fall
              within three broad  areas:  curriculm development, teaching methods, and
              education  outside the classroom.  The objectives of the curriculm  development
              part are (1) to introduce a course  in parallel  computing involving
              computational scientists and engineers along  with computer scientists (both in
              terms of students attending and  faculty  teaching the course), (2)  to
              introduce hands-on parallel  programming  experience as part of currently
              existing  undergraduate computer architecture  course, (3) to impart a sound 
              education on performance analysis techniques, and  (4) to impart a  research
              experience  to undergraduates by having a modest  research project as part of
              the senior level architecture course  and by  actively recruiting
              undergraduates in the proposed  research program through the  Rice senior
              honor's thesis program.    The teaching methods part of the  education plan
              address growth as  an effective teacher by exposure to research  in teaching
              methods.  The final part seeks to (1) encourage women and other  under- 
              represented groups to pursue computer science by actively  interacting  with
              such groups informally and through formal  workshops, and (2) encourage an  ex
              change between industry and  academia through tutorials and short courses.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
