Title       : CAREER: Optical Component Technologies Based on Ultraviolet Photosensitivity in
               Glass
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9502670

Award Number: 9502670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309826             (Estimated)
Investigator: Turan Erdogan turan@optics.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9502670  Erdogan           Glass optical components based on ultraviolet
              photosensitivity have tremendous technological potential.  In particular,
              ultraviolet-induced fiber gratings have charged the fields of optical
              communications and fiber-based sensors.  A significant component of the
              research proposed here will impact the fiber-granting field.  Novel devices
              based on asymmetric gratings will be investigated to provide new functionality
              to fiber-optic systems.  Along the way certain f fundamental fabrication issues
              that should impact feasibility of manufacturing this technology will be
              explored.  The research will tackle issues pertaining to sources based on fiber
              gratings, including hybrid semiconductor-fiber lasers, in which stability of
              these sources is a limiting problem, and all-fiber grating-based lasers for
              which polarization problems presently limit applicability.  The intention of
              the proposed research program is to significantly increase the domestic
              research effort on this important technology, as the majority or work in this
              area is currently conducted outside of the U.S.   Another major component of
              the research program will emphasize translating the technology of glass
              ultraviolet photosensitivity to non-fiber applications. Certain optical
              components will be investigated toward this end, including diffractive optics,
              tailored mirrors, and ultra-narrowband filters.   The education aspect of  the
              proposed project will be directed both toward teaching and academic enrichment.
               Both graduate and undergraduate teaching in the area of optics are planned.  A
              new graduate-level course is already being developed that covers optoelectronic
              device technologies.  The course is directed toward graduate students
              conducting research in this area, an is intended to strengthen more applied
              research efforts at The Institute of Optics.  A significant portion of the
              educational effort will be expended  on the improvement of the undergraduate
              degree program in optics at the University of Rochester.
