Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Second International Workshop on Bayesian Robustness;
               May, 1995; Rimini, Italy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9502157

Award Number: 9502157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry A. Wasserman larry@stat.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this conference is to bring together experts in the area of
              robust Bayesian inference to discuss applications, recent methodological
              developments and theory. Of particular interest are practical methods for
              implementing the theory such as those that exploit recent advances in
              statistical computing. Among the topics to be discussed at the workshop are:
              robust Bayesian methods in biostatistics, local sensitivity, hierarchical
              models, dynamic graphics, Bayes factros, density estimation and time series. 
              The term ``Bayesian statistics'' refers to a class of data analysis techniques
              based on probability theory .  These techniques are very general and have been
              successfully used in such diverse areas as quality  control, engineering,
              psychology, medicine, environmental sciences and astrophysics. But applications
               of Bayesian methods to science and technology have been hindered since
              Bayesian analysis often  requires the use  of certain simplifying assumptions.
              ``Bayesian robustness'' is concerned with  developing techniques for
              understanding how scientific conclusions depend on the assumptions that are 
              used by statisticians when analyzing the data. Bayesian robustness is crucial
              for the successful  development of practical Bayesian data analysis methods. It
              is a relatively new, quickly growing area  and hence it difficult for
              researchers -- especially young researchers -- to meet and stay in touch  with
              the latest ideas. The objective of the  workshop is to draw together
              researchers to discuss the  latest advances in this field.       LEVEL OF
              EFFORT STATEMENT  The recommended level of support for this conference, though
              slightly lower than what we had hoped for, is still substantial and, together 
              with the funds provided by the Italian government, we expect to produce a high
              quality workshop.  Indeed, preparations for the conference are in progress and
              many top researchers have already  indicated their intention to participate.
              Furthermore, the Institute of Mathematical Statistics has  indicated that it is
              likely they will publish the proceedings in their Lecture Note series. We will 
              make every effort to ensure a successful conference.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
