Title       : NMR Spectroscopic Investigation of Peptide Aggregation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1997   
File        : a9502389

Award Number: 9502389
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred M. Hawkridge                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia K. Larive   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              0203000   Health                                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is in the  general area
              of analytical and surface chemistry and in the  subfield of bioanalytical
              chemistry.  During the tenure of this  three-year continuing grant, Professor
              Larive and her students at  the University of Kansas will pursue research
              designed to provide  a detailed understanding of the relationships between
              peptide  primary structure, three-dimensional conformation, and aggregation.  
              These studies will involve five specific aims, namely (1) to  understand the
              importance of primary structure in aggregation; (2)  to perform peptide
              conformation analysis; (3) to measure peptide  diffusion coefficients; (4) to
              develop an aggregation model; and  (5) to test the model by examining
              aggregation under various  conditions of solvent, temperature, pH, and ionic
              strength.  A  family of synthetic peptides based on systematic alteration of 
              primary structure of a sixteen-residue sequence will be examined  using a suite
              of experimental techniques featuring nuclear magnetic  resonance (NMR) and
              circular dichroism (CD).  The results of these  studies should indicate the
              relative contributions of hydrogen  bonding, dipolar interactions, and
              hydrophobic contacts to the  stabilization of aggregates of these peptides. 
              Also during this  grant period, Professor Larive will pursue an educational 
              development plan that includes the reorganization and  revitalization of the
              undergraduate analytical chemistry  laboratory, introduction of an
              environmental option for chemistry  majors, and increasing the involvement of
              undergraduates in  research.    Peptide and protein aggregation is a
              fundamentally and practically  important problem.  By exploring the effects of
              solution conditions  such as solvent, pH, and ionic strength, this CAREER
              research  project will produce a foundation of experimental results which  will
              be useful in controlling aggregation of proteins expressed for  research,
              therapeutic, or commercial purposes.  The educational  developmen t aspects of
              this CAREER project will enrich and broaden  the undergraduate analytical
              chemistry curriculum at the University  of Kansas.
