Title       : CAREER: Modules for Fiber Optic Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2000  
File        : a9502491

Award Number: 9502491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keren Bergman bergman@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9102,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9502491  Bergman  Optical fibers are essential to many emerging optical
              technologies, including communication systems, data processing, video
              transmission, and  computing.  The  bandwidths and data rates achievable using
              guided photons are several orders of magnitude greater than comparable systems
              using electronic or microwave technologies.  Fibers are inexpensive low-loss
              waveguides, and exhibit the type of nonlinearities which can be exploited in
              making ultrafast all-optical switching devices, pulsed fiber lasers,
              multiplexers and demultiplexers, as well as various timing control modules for
              fiber optic communication systems.  Long-haul and local area fiber optic
              communication networks as multigigabit-rates will inevitably be done by a
              combination of time domain multiplexing (TDM) and wavelength (frequency)
              division multiplexing (WDM) techniques.  TDM can be used to reduce the number
              of  frequency  channels  allowing the WDM channels broader tolerances in
              carrier frequency placement and filter requisites.  Our objective is to
              investigate novel fiber optic modules that incorporate ultrafast time domain
              techniques with WDM functions.  We propose to build ultrahigh bit-rate
              femtosecond fiber lasers in both the soliton and zero dispersion regimes.  The
              method is based on the nonlinear properties of pulse formation including
              frequency selection and shifting, as well as TDM applications such as
              ultra-high bit-rate demultiplexing and data retrieval.    A new technique we
              propose to use has been shown to generate considerable pulse shortening in
              actively modelocked lasers beyond the predicted pulsewidths from active
              modelocking theory.  The method is based on the nonlinear properties on pulse
              formation and propagation in the soliton or negative dispersion regime, and has
              the great advantage of simplicity over previous modelocked lasers and switching
              devices that were designed based on fast fiber nonlinearities concepts.  The
              initial work will focus on developing novel fiber optic laser sources for hi gh
              bit-rate pulses at both 1.5p.m and 1.3p.m.  The lasers will then be modified to
              produce carrier frequency tunable pulse trains for WDM applications.  We will
              use the pulse streams to test a frequency shifting module operating on similar
              mechanisms.  Next, a TDM demultliplexer and a ultrafast data retriever will be
              demonstated.  Finally, a complete system prototype implementation that
              integrates the fiber laser source, WDM and TDM devices will be demonstrated. 
              The successful completion of the proposed research will have significant impact
              on research and development efforts in fiber optic communication technology. 
              This proposed research program addresses the issue of integrating WDM
              capabilities with high bit-rate soliton sources and switches, and will be
              unquestionable value to future high capacity optical communication networks. 
              Two particularly important fields positioned to gain from our research efforts
              are long-haul communication systems and terrestrial fiber loop networks.  In
              conjuction with our proposed development of soliton devices for long-haul
              communication, we will apply the same nonlinear modelocking principles to the
              construction of high bit-rate short pules with Pr-doped fiber amplifiers at the
              zero dispersion wavelength  wavelength near 1.3p.m      The teaching and
              educational plans proposed will enter about the following objectives: (1)
              develop a new optoelectronic engineering curriculum, incorporating into both,
              the undergraduate and graduate courses, new knowledge gained from the explosive
              recent advancements in fiber optics research, (2) increase involvement of
              undergraduate  students in current research efforts to build a foundation for
              independent thinking and excitement for new discovery, (3) facilitate
              participation of women in engineering research activities, with particular
              encouragement  for students at the secondary school and freshman year levels,
              and (4) train graduate students in broader experimental techniques that the
              normal confined experience dictated by  a specific thesis research topic:   
              Research opportunities for undergraduates will  be provided in the n new fiber
              optic laboratory facilities through supervision of theses and independent
              projects.  Increased participation of women in engineering research will be
              accomplished by a special summer program aimed at offering laboratory
              experience to senior high school and college freshman students.  The students
              will be exposed to a scientific research environment and obtain a first hand
              view of what a career in engineering research entails.  Mentor support will be
              included to follow  progress  of individual female students through their
              university curriculum.  The increasing complexity of technology necessitates
              further specialization by graduate students who desire to contribute to the
              field's advancement .  This loop deprives graduate students from gaining the
              important broad range of experiences that are required for successful careers
              in today's rapidly changing high tech economy.  To enhance the graduate
              students experience and better prepare them to identify and solve future
              research problems, a research "rotation" system will be implemented.           
                                    ***
