Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Perturbation Theory for Near-Integrable Equations and Its
               Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1999     
File        : a9502142

Award Number: 9502142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234088             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregor Kovacic kovacg@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OSIE,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9502142  Kovacic    This work is supported  by a National Science Foundation
              Faculty Early   Career Development Award.  The research will focus on the
              theory of near-  integrable systems. These systems are small perturbations of
              completely   integrable ordinary and partial differential equations or
              integro-differential   equations. Two areas will be addressed: multi-pulse
              homoclinic orbits in   low-dimensional systems, and regular and irregular
              dynamics of the   Maxwell-Bloch integro-partial differential equations that
              describe ring-  cavity laser optics. The proposed research in the area of
              multi-pulse   homoclinic orbits is a  continuation of the author's previous
              work on   unstable resonant systems. It will exhibit several new classes of
              multi-pulse   orbits in a large family of near-integrable systems, and thus
              reveal the   intricate phase-space structure of the systems in this family. 
              This research   will also provide computable methods for verifying the presence
              of these   complicated homoclinic orbits, and therefore irregular dynamics, in
              specific   examples.  Applications of these methods in mechanics, fluid and
              solid   dynamics, and nonlinear optics are also proposed. In the area of the  
              Maxwell-Bloch equations, the proposed research contains a broad array of  
              theoretical, computational, and applied questions.  These questions include  
              finding new explicit solutions of the integrable Maxwell-Bloch equations,  
              homoclinic orbits and chaotic dynamics, finite-dimensional attractors,  
              stabilization of the excited states of lasers, numerical simulations of  
              solutions, and mathematical descriptions of fiber lasers and diode lasers.  
              Comparisons with realistic physical and engineering applications and  
              experiments are also proposed.  The education component involves   translating 
              the author's research experience into a geometric and   dynamical-systems
              oriented approach to teaching courses in differential   equations on the
              sophomore, junior-senior, and graduate levels, and   advising  students and
              involving them in research collaborations with Los   Alamos National
              Laboratory.    The National Science Foundation strongly encourages the early  
              development of academic faculty as both educators and researchers.  The  
              Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program is a Foundation-  wide
              program that provides for the support of junior faculty within the   context of
              their overall career development.  It combines in a single   program the
              support of quality research and education in the broadest sense   and the full
              participation of those traditionally underrepresented in science   and
              engineering.  This program enhances and emphasizes the importance   the
              Foundation places on the development of full, balanced academic   careers that
              include both research and education.  The research component   of this project
              involves intended research that addresses both regular,   mainly time-periodic,
              and irregular, or chaotic, behavior in two classes of   physical systems in
              mechanics and laser optics.  The work will focus on   mathematical models that
              are near-integrable, that is, models whose degree   of approximation is a small
              step away from making them explicitly   solvable.  By neglecting certain small
              quantities, these models do become   explicitly solvable, or integrable.  The
              explicit solutions obtained in this   way may be used to approximate the
              solutions of the more complicated   near-integrable systems.  The proposed work
              will thus develop a   mathematical description of the mechanisms behind certain
              types of   behavior of the physical systems under investigation, such as the
              irregular   beats in the amplitudes of coupled pendula, and some of the regular
              and   chaotic  operation regimes of lasers.  Numerical computations will be
              used   to motivate the  analytical investigations and confirm their findings,
              as well   as to extend their results to mathematical models that are less
              simplified and   thus not amenable to either explicit or approximate solution,
              but are more   phys ically accurate.  Comparisons with realistic physical and
              engineering   applications and experiments are also proposed. The  mathematical
                techniques discovered in the course of this investigation should be general  
              enough to apply to similar problems in other areas of physics, such as  
              nonlinear fiber optics, solid, and fluid mechanics.  The education   component
              will involve incorporating the author's research experience into   classroom
              work on the sophomore, junior-senior, and graduate levels and   advising
              students and involving them in research collaborations with Los   Alamos
              National Laboratory.
