Title       : GEM: MHD Mesoscale Transport at the Magnetopause
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1997      
File        : a9502907

Award Number: 9502907
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241828             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yan Song yan@aurora.space.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Lysak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    The transport of mass, momentum and energy at the magnetopause  often
              occurs in a patchy and time-dependent manner, where MHD  mesoscale physics is
              important.  The proposed research is to study  the MHD mesoscale physical
              processes using a recently developed  macroparticle concept.  In particular,
              the theory of driven  reconnection as a process which occurs due to the dynamic
               interaction of the solar wind and the magnetosheath with the  mangetosphere
              will be developed.  This model will be used to  quantitatively determine the
              threshold for the onset of  reconnection, the statistical distribution of
              mesoscale events, and  the solar wind-magnetosphere coupling parameters.  When
              the inhomogeneities of the plasma density, velocity and  magnetic field are
              taken into account, the interaction of  magnetofluids can be described as the
              interaction of a number of  localized filaments having a relative velocity and
              carrying  different magnetic fields.  The interactions between these  filaments
              and between the filaments and the ambient magnetic field  play a key role in
              the transport processes.  A macro-particle  description involving compressional
              and shear Alfvenons in cold  plasma limit has been introduced to describe these
              localized  filaments (Song and Lysak, 1994a).  The properties of these 
              Alfvenons, such as their magnetic dipole moment and polarization,  have been
              described and it has been shown that their interaction  can lead to an onset of
              reconnection depending on the IMF as well  as on the dynamic pressure impinging
              on the magnetopause.  The objective of this proposed research is to extend the
              concept of  Alfvenons, which provides a theoretical basis for patchy and time- 
              dependent driven reconnection, and to pursue further the  quantitative
              evaluation of the solar wind-magnetosphere coupling  parameter and the
              statistical prediction of the transient magnetic  field events.
