Title       : Polarizations and Symmetries in Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1997   
File        : a9502825

Award Number: 9502825
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228256             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Rosenblatt cxr@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9502825  Rosenblatt    The purpose of the proposed work is to investigate
              symmetry-  related behavior of liquid crystals. Specifically, the 
              investigations are designed to increase the understanding of  how chirality and
              symmetry affect liquid crystalline  behavior. A variety of phenomena related to
              ferroelectric  and antiferroelectric liquid crystals will be studied  including
              the dynamics of the electroclinic effect, low  frequency second harmonic
              generation in ferroelectric liquid  crystals, spatially periodic polarizations,
              the behavior of  the antiferroelectric -"disordered" phase transition, and  the
              antiferroelectric - ferroelectric phase transition. The  effects of
              symmetry-breaking surfaces as they relate to  liquid crystalline polarizations
              will be probed. Related  investigations on ferroelectric liquid crystals will
              also be  performed, including studies of ionic adsorption and  enantiomeric
              concentration fluctuations. Finally, a new  thrust area involving liquid
              crystals in confined geometries  will be explored, with special attention paid
              to the role of  the large surface-to-volume ratio of the host matrix as it 
              relates to chiral liquid crystals. A battery of experimental  tools will be
              used, including static and dynamic light  scattering, dielectric relaxation,
              magnetic and electric  birefringence and other electrooptic measurements,
              magnetic  susceptometry, and Freedericksz techniques.  %%%  This research is
              designed to increase the understanding of  how chirality and symmetry affect
              liquid crystalline  behavior. Symmetry plays an important role in liquid 
              crystalline behavior. In a smectic C phase composed of  chiral molecules, for
              example, one finds a macroscopic  polarization in the plane of the smectic
              layers. At a  symmetry-breaking interface there exists a polarization  normal
              to the surface; if the molecules are chiral, lack  inversion symmetry, and are
              tilted with respect to the  interface, an additional component of polarization
              may  reside at and parallel to the interfac e. Chirality may also  affect the
              nature of a phase transition, or introduce  entirely new phases such as the
              blue phases. The proposed  research will provide a deeper fundamental
              understanding of  these phenomena, and it may also impact the technological 
              infrastructure as well. Work under the prior grant led to a  new display
              technology; the results of work to be performed  under the proposed research
              have the potential to affect  current scientific and technological thinking,
              and possibly  have impact on the display industry as well.
