Title       : Faculty Early Career Development: Resampling Approaches to Neural Model
               Validation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1998  
File        : a9502134

Award Number: 9502134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349574             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice E. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1045,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9502134   The focus of this research is the improvement of the validation of
              neural network models by developing neuro-adaptations and hybrids of
              statistical resampling methodologies for model validation.  The field of
              statistics has matured several approaches to statistical model validation which
              use the available data for both model construction and validation.  Resampling
              approaches have the drawback that they require the construction of multiple
              models.  The construction of several models is computationally intensive,
              unlike their deterministic statistical counterparts.  Furthermore, there are
              stochastic aspects to neural network model construction that are not present in
              statistical modeling.  This research is aimed at developing neuro-adaptations
              of resampling approaches by investigating the trade-offs between precision,
              bias, and variance of the validation procedure with the computational
              requirements for each of the three major resampling techniques - cross
              validation, jackknife, and bootstrap - along with the two most commonly used
              neural network validation techniques - resubstitution and train-and-test. 
              Other research issues to be investigated and resolved are alternative error
              metrics, initialization of neural network weights, hybrid resampling
              methodologies, neural network training termination criteria, and reuse of
              multiple neural network models through the committee network approach.  The
              methodologies developed will be demonstrated on typical manufacturing problems
              such as wave soldering of circuit boards, process planning for job shop metal
              forming, and other applications where data is sparse.   The improvement of
              validation techniques for neural networks is essential for furthering research
              and implementation of complex systems modeling and optimization.  The research
              has the potential to impact several disciplines currently involved in neural
              network modeling where data is sparse and model validation is crucial.  These
              areas include precision manufacturing, robotic control, me dical diagnosis, and
              defense pattern classification and control applications.  The methods to be
              developed can be generalized to other empirical modeling techniques where the
              construction of the model is computational intensive.
