Title       : CAREER: Enhancement Plan - Research on Blue Semiconductor Lasers and Early
               Motivation of Electrical Engineering Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9502888

Award Number: 9502888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen S. Menoni carmen@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9502888  Menoni  A four year career development program that combines a research
               plan in the technological important area of blue semiconductor  lasers and
              educational activities centered in the development of a  freshmen course
              "Introduction to Electrical Engineering" designed  to motivate students early
              on in their career, is proposed.    A research plan is proposed to study the
              optical and electronic  properties of the II-VI quaternary ZnMgSSe which have
              significant  potential for the development of short wavelength semiconductor 
              lasers.  Short wavelength semiconductor lasers will greatly impact  high
              density optical memories, laser printing and other important  technological
              applications, whose capabilities are presently  limited by the use of infrared
              laser sources.  Blue-green laser  have been demonstrated.  However, their
              output characteristics are  still far from being ideal for most of these
              applications.   Improved characteristics will arise from a detailed
              understanding  of the material properties and device structure dependent
              processes  which control the laser operation.  I propose to study carrier 
              confinement, the mechanisms of carrier capture and escape and  recombination in
              ZnMgSSe MQWs.  The results of these studies will  be first applied to the
              development of edge emitting lasers which  will be characterized from threshold
              current and gain and loss  measurements.  The knowledge gained in the study of
              edge emitters  will be applied to the design of vertical cavity surface
              emitting  lasers.    The main focus of the proposed educational activities lie
              in the  development of a freshmen course "Introduction to Electrical 
              Engineering."  This course is designed to captivate the interest of  the
              students into the different areas of Electrical Engineering at  an early stage
              on their career, and thus reduce the drop-out rate.   I also envision this
              class as an avenue to teach them different  tools they will use throughout
              their career and to show them how  fun and challenging this pr ofession can be.
               ***
