Title       : Career: Type Theory and Operational Semantics for Programming Languages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1997     
File        : a9502674

Award Number: 9502674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Harper rwh@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This CAREER award supports an investigation into the use of  type  theory and
              operational semantics in the design and implementation  of  programming
              languages.  Type theory has proved to be an  important organizing  principle in
              programming language design.  This is well exemplified by the use  of type
              theory in the design  of modularity and abstraction constructs.  This
              investigation seeks to consolidate  advances in type theory into the design of
              the ML2000 programming language.    Type theory  has proved important for the
              implementation of  programming languages.  Conventional syntax-directed
              compilation  methods are generalized to  type-directed compilation, allowing 
              type information to be exploited during  compilation.  Sophisticated type
              systems such as those derived from the Girard-  Reynolds polymorphic
              lambda-calculus suggest new implementation  strategies  based on passing type
              information at link- and run-  time.  This research  investigates the use of
              type-based  compilation techniques.  Operational  semantics provides a 
              suitable framework for addressing issues of compiler  correctness  and proving
              properties of programs.  Typed programming  languages such as  Standard ML
              provide a rich setting in which to discuss  high-level  programming techniques
              such as data abstraction, modularity, and  separate compilation.  Types are
              essential for reasoning about  programs.  A procedure can in general be deemed
              to have certain  input/output properties only  under the assumption that its 
              arguments have suitable types.  Operational  semantics is a useful pedagogical
              tool for  teaching undergraduate   programming, both as an explanatory device 
              and as  the basis for proving properties of programs and  languages.   
              Important  advantages are expected through the interplay between  research and
              education.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
