Title       : CAREER: High Performance Storage Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1997      
File        : a9502156

Award Number: 9502156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anand R. Tripathi                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131975             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margo I. Seltzer margo@das.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The demand for network services is growing at an exceptional  rate.  This
              growing demand requires that the necessary  infrastructure be  developed to
              facilitate rapid and easy  access to vast, distributed information  stores. The
              focus of  this research is the essential base technologies required  to  make
              distributed information systems  generally useful.  Specifically, this 
              research includes:         high performance file system design and analysis, 
              rotationally optimal disk scheduling, and         distributed caching data. 
              The research will result in a high-performance, distributed  information
              server,  utilizing new file system techniques,  advanced disk scheduling
              algorithms, and  caching based upon  network topological location (geographical
              push-caching).  The file system design borrows the essential characteristics 
              of today's  log-structured and journaling file systems,  combining them with
              adaptive,  rotationally optimized disk  scheduling techniques. New caching
              techniques  designed for  scalability enhance the file system's feasibility by 
              reducing  user-perceived latency for distributed requests.          The
              teaching component  emphasizes curriculum development for  both computer
              science concentrators and  non-concentrators  and training programs for
              undergraduate and graduate  teaching assistants.  For concentrators, the focus
              on  undergraduate curriculum  complements Harvard's commitment to  the
              establishment of a strong computer  systems research  group.  Undergraduate
              courses have been and will continue to  be modified to incorporate the
              fundamental concepts in an  area, the classic  literature, and research
              activities. This  combination of class activities is  the cornerstone for 
              producing undergraduates who can fully participate in  ongoing research
              projects.  For non-concentrators, the  introductory computer  science sequence
              has been modified to  emphasize design and problem solving  skills over
              programming  mechanics.  Future developments will extend this  idea  still 
              further with the development of an introductory design  course.  The  course is
              intended to serve both as a common  ground for computer science and 
              engineering concentrators as  well as a broad introduction for 
              non-concentrators.          The focus of the graduate curriculum development is
               on the  application of the scientific method to systems research.  Students
              are  asked to critique published work, design  experimental evaluation
              platforms,  analyze and critique data  sets, and produce quality research.     
                  The last  aspect of the teaching proposal is the development  of teaching
              assistant  training seminars.  Professor Seltzer  has been working closely with
              the Derek  Bok Center for  Teaching and Learning, participating in their
              workshops and  presenting panels and seminars with her teaching assistants. 
              The orientation  procedure she has developed will be enhanced  so that it will
              be suitable for  teaching assistants in all  compute science classes, and
              potentially other  fields.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
