Title       : RUI: Molecular Dynamics of Rough Surfaces in Adsorbed Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9502726

Award Number: 9502726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Pettersen MPettersen@Otterbein.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Otterbein College
	      
	      Westerville, OH  43081    614/890-3000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,9176,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9502726  Petterson    This is a Research at an Undergraduate Institution project
               that will investigate the dynamics of rough or surface-  melted surfaces.  The
              project is intended to provide  educational opportunities to students, as well
              as address  questions of scientific importance.  The initial experiments  will
              be focused on the behavior of methane adsorbed on a  magnesium oxide surface. 
              The methane will be probed via its  nuclear magnetism.  The nuclear magnetic
              resonance response  of carbon atoms in the methane molecule can report on the 
              surface motion of the methane, and also provide information  on the surface
              structure of the methane.  The experiments  will contribute to the basic
              understanding of the nature of  roughening of a surface, and the process of
              surface melting.  Undergraduates will be involved in this project.  They will 
              acquire valuable laboratory skills, and be exposed to topics  of current
              scientific and technological importance.  %%%  This is a Research at an
              Undergraduate Institution project  that will investigate the dynamics of rough
              or surface-  melted surfaces.  The project is intended to provide  educational
              opportunities to students, as well as address  questions of scientific
              importance.  The initial experiments  will be focused on the behavior of
              methane adsorbed on a  magnesium oxide surface.  The methane will be probed via
              its  nuclear magnetism.  The nuclear magnetic resonance response  of carbon
              atoms in the methane molecule can report on the  surface motion of the methane,
              and also provide information  on the surface structure of the methane.  The
              experiments  will contribute to the basic understanding of the nature of 
              roughening of a surface, and the process of surface melting.  Undergraduates
              will be involved in this project.  They will  acquire valuable laboratory
              skills, and be exposed to topics  of current scientific and technological
              importance.  ***
