Title       : CAREER: Toward a Scientific Basis for the design of Integrated Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9502029

Award Number: 9502029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin J. Sullivan sullivan@cs.virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 The broad objective of this CAREER project is to help cement the status  of
              software engineering as a discipline that uses models, methods, and  mechanisms
              based on generalizable scientific knowledge.  The research component of this
              project addresses three important  problems in software design. The mediator
              method is an approach to   design in which the behavioral relationships needed
              to integrate   independent behaviors are separately identified and represented 
               as objects external to the objects representing those behaviors.   
              Externalizing relationships as mediators depends in turn   on a careful
              application of both explicit and implicit invocation   mechanisms.   The first
              research focus is an attempt to improve scientific  foundations for software
              design, scientifically testing the claim  that common methods for designing
              integrated systems are poorer than  the mediator method with respect to ease of
              evolution of integration  requirements.  Second is the exploration, through
              pilot projects,   of using the mediator method to aid the design of distributed
              systems.      Third is the investigation of a new approach to helping 
              designers balance multiple objectives as software designs evolve. An  
              environment that reflects how well a design meets each of several   objectives
              by depicting divergences of  the design from each of several a models, where
              each model is defined  by the designer as good with respect to one particular
              objective.  The teaching focus is intended to develop engineers who understand 
              software design to be a multi-objective, risky activity, done with  incomplete
              information and thus demanding creativity and reflective,  rigorous,
              risk-reducing methods.  To help students understand how to  manage the
              complexity and risk of real software systems, courses  focus on realistic
              development projects, such as a mobile  robot system.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
