Title       : Positron Annihilation Induced Auger Electron Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9502459

Award Number: 9502459
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277945             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander H. Weiss weiss@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9502459  Weiss  Positron  annihilation  induced  Auger  Electron  Spectroscopy 
              (PAES)  utilizes   a  fundamentally  new  process  in  which  the  excitations 
              necessary for Auger spectroscopy are created by positrons annihilating  core 
              electrons  and  not,  as  in  conventional  Auger  methods,   by  collisional 
              ionization. PAES is uniquely sensitive  to  the  critical  topmost atomic layer
              of solids due to the trapping of positrons in  an  image  potential  well  just
              outside the surface before  annihilation.  Experiments are proposed which will
              capitalize on this ability of PAES  to  determine  the elemental content of the
              topmost  atomic  layer  in  achieving an understanding of catalytically
              important ultrathin  metal  fillm systems, including neodynium on copper, and
              copper on palladium,  as  well  as to study surface segregation in alloys such
              as  platinum-  nickle  and platinum-gold. The fact that PAES measurements can
              be made  using  energy  doses many orders of magnitude less than  those  needed
               with  conventional Auger techniques will be utilized to study  fragile 
              adsorbed layers and chemically unstable systems including hydrogen and  organic
              molecules on metal surfaces.  %%%  Positron  annihilation  induced  Auger 
              Electron  Spectroscopy  (PAES)  utilizes  a  fundamentally  new process  in 
              which  the  input  energy  required  for the emission of so-called Auger
              electrons from  a  solid  results from the annihilation of positive electrons
              (antimatter)  with  negative  electrols  in atomic cores rather than  from 
              collisions  of  energetic   incident  electrons  with  the  core  electrons,  
              as   in  conventional  Auger  methods.   PAES  is  uniquely  sensitive  to  the
               composition of the critical topmost atomic layer of solids due to  the 
              trapping  of  positrons just outside the surface before  annihilation.  The 
              proposed experiments will capitalize on this sensitivity of  PAES  to 
              determine  the elemental content of the topmost  atomic  layer  to  advance  
              undertanding  of   catalytically  important  ultrathin   film  materials,  such
               as  copper on palladium, and to  study  the  surface  segregation of
              constituent elements in alloys such as platinum-nickel.  In  addition, the fact
              that PAES measurements can be made using energy  doses  hundereds  of times
              weaker than those needed with  conventional  Auger  methods will be utilized to
              study fragile adsorbed  layers  and  chemically  unstable coverings such as
              hydrogen and organic  molecules  on metal surfaces.  ***
