Title       : Faculty Early Career Development: SiC-Al-Si Composites by Rapid and Pressureless
               Infiltration in Air
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9502335

Award Number: 9502335
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiao F. Yang xfyang@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1045,9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9502335  Yang   Silicon Carbide (SiC)-reinforced Aluminum (Al) alloys are
              attracting considerable attentions from many industries including automotive
              and electronic industries.  However, their widespread applications are limited
              by their high cost.  The objective of this proposed research is to study a
              potentially low-cost fabrication method recently invented in the Principal
              Investigator's (PI) laboratory.  Using this method, a near-net-shape composite
              of SiC-Al-Si can be produced by simply dipping a porous SiC preform into an
              Al-Si alloy in an open-air atmosphere, without needing vacuum or external
              pressure.  To understand the infiltration mechanism, a systematic study of the
              infiltration conditions will be conducted.  These conditions include the
              infiltration temperature, alloy compositions, atmospheres inside the SiC
              preform and outside the aluminum alloy bath, the binders, and structures of the
              SiC preforms.  Specific experiments will be carried out to study the
              infiltration mechanisms.  The structures and properties of the composites and
              their relationships with the infiltration conditions will be studied. 
              Mathematical and computer modeling of the thermodynamics and kinetics of
              infiltration's will also be conducted.  Finally the infiltration conditions
              will be optimized.  Completion of this research project should provide valuable
              information for understanding this unique infiltration phenomenon.  It will
              also improve our understanding of the general phenomenon of pressureless
              infiltration of molten metals into porous ceramic preforms.  At the education
              front, one problem facing our classroom instruction is that the students are
              not offered enough opportunities to relate the basic theories from the
              textbooks to the real problems encountered in the industries.  To remedy this
              problem,  more real problems related to materials manufacturing and processing
              will be taken into the classrooms.  A cross-disciplinary course on materials
              manufacturing and processing for undergraduate students from  various
              engineering programs is the expected contribution to education innovation.  
              Integrating industrial problems into manufacturing education can prepare the
              students for a better understanding of the relevance of their basic science and
              engineering courses.  Consequently, these future manufacturing engineers gain
              the practical knowledge necessary to effectively contribute to engineering
              solutions to real world problems in their future jobs.  The research results of
              a simple, innovative process to infiltrate aluminum alloy into Silicon Carbide
              preform has the potential to bring down the manufacturing cost of this metal
              matrix composite significantly.  As a result, cast iron may be replaced by a
              stronger and lighter composite (especially important for transportation
              industry) heralding an era of a much broader application of composites.
