Title       : SBIR Phase II: A Diffusion Gradient System for Studying Process and Behavior in
               Microbial and Cellular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1997   
File        : a9502872

Award Number: 9502872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John K. Koh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Koh Development Inc
	      2275 S. State Street
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481046107    313/663-2007

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9502872  Koh   This project is designed to further develop, and test the
              diffusion gradient system   constructed during Phase I research.  The system
              consists of a diffusion gradient chamber   (DGC) for culturing microorganisms
              in multiple, continuous diffusion gradients of small   soluble molecules.  In
              addition, there is an effluent chamber for consolidating effluent   flow from
              the DGCs, a transilluminator that provides back lighting to visualize microbial
                growth, and a camera system to monitor and quantify microbial growth and
              movement.    This phase of the research will focus on refining and reducing the
              cost of the system, and   demonstrating its versatility for studying a variety
              of problems in microbial and cellular   biology.  The feasibility of
              constructing the DGC by injection molding will be   investigated.  This would
              improve its quality and reduce its cost.  An automated tracking   camera system
              will be designed and tested that will enhance the quantitative power of the  
              system.  A temperature control unit that encloses the entire system and
              maintains a stable   temperature will be tested.  The system s capability to
              establish gradients will be tested in   collaboration with Michigan State
              University (MSU).  A number of solutes will be tested   in the DGC and the
              empirical results will be compared with results predicted by a   mathematical
              model Scientist at MSU will also evaluate the system  s ability to track  
              population changes in a detoxifying bacterial community exposed to multiple
              gradients,   and they will study the role of chemotaxis in competition between
              defined mixed cultures   of bacteria.  In addition, they will use the DGC to
              elucidate patterns of gene expression in   response to environmental stimulus
              using reporter genes in Rhizobium meliloti.  A   University of Michigan
              scientist will also study the growth and response of a tissue   culture line of
              osteoblast cells to imposed gradients in the DGC.
