Title       : CAREER: Probing and Fault Injection of Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1996       
File        : a9502341

Award Number: 9502341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mukesh Singhal                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133299             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farnam Jahanian farnam@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9148,9216,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
                 This research will investigate fault injection techniques  for the evaluation
              and validation of dependable protocols.  The project will  focus on techniques
              that can be used to  demonstrate three aspects of a target  protocol: (i)
              detection  of design or implementation errors, (ii) identification of 
              violations of protocol specifications, and (iii) insight into  design decisions
               made by the implementors.    The end goal of the project is the investigation
              of  techniques for testing the fault-tolerance capabilities of  dependable
              protocols  and the development of a tool for the  experimental evaluation of
              commercial and  prototype  protocols.  The approach will center around a 
              technique  called`script-driven probing and fault injection.`  A distributed
              protocol can  be  viewed as an abstraction through which a collection of 
              participants  communicate by exchanging a set of messages.  Hence, no
              distinction is made  between application-level  protocols, communication
              protocols, or device layer  protocols.  A probe/fault injection (PFI) layer is
              inserted  below a target  protocol to filter and to manipulate the  messages 
              that are exchanged between  participants.  The fault  injection layer supports
              the execution of  deterministic or  randomly-generated test scripts to probe
              the participants  and  inject various faults into the system.  In particular, 
              by intercepting messages  between two layers in a protocol  stack, the fault
              injection layer can delay,  drop, reorder,  duplicate, and modify messages.
              Furthermore, it can  introduce  spontaneous messages into the system to probe 
              the participants and to  orchestrate the system execution  into a particular
              path.  Since timing  constraints are often  an important component of the
              dependability requirements  on  a system, the intrusiveness of a fault
              injection mechanism  on a target  system is a key issue which will be addressed
              by  this research.    The  educational component of this CAREER project will 
              include `undergraduate  mentoring` and `learning via  experimentation.` 
              Mentoring exposes students to  one-on-one  technical interactions with
              instructors and more senior  students.  Learning via experimentation has a two
              pronged  effect.  It allows students to  `practice` how to apply  knowledge and
              to`learn` how to obtain new information.  These  two aspects of the plan will
              be formalized into the  curriculum with  the  following educational activities:
               (1)  Refocus the Undergraduate  Directed Study  to involve junior  and
              senior-level students in some of the  ongoing  prototyping activities in
              research projects and in various  laboratories  on  campus;  (2) Develop a
              curriculum track that emphasizes  experimentation to  enhance  learning of
              software systems concepts.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
