Title       : CAREER: Advanced Control Stategies For Microelectronics Manufacturing Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9502936

Award Number: 9502936
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oscar D. Crisalle crisalle@che.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1045,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant which includes both a
              research as well as an educational component.  Research:  The microelectronics
              industry is  constantly challenged to improve the performance of the
              manufacturing processes to respond to the  high-performance expectations of a
              competitive international market.  Advanced process control  technologies hold
              great promise for rising to the challenge and delivering tight process control.
               The  objective of this research is to develop and evaluate advanced process
              control strategies useful for  the control of processes of relevance to the
              fabrication of microelectronics devices.  The research  addresses three
              fundamental issues, namely, (1) the characterization of uncertainties that may
              corrupt  the accuracy of process models, (2) the design of robust model-based
              controllers, and (3) the  application of the control strategies to specific
              processing operations, including plasma etching and  metal-organic chemical
              vapor deposition.  An international collaborative research effort will be 
              established with the Ins titut d'Automatique of the Swiss Federal Institute of
              Technology in Lausanne,  Switzerland.  Education:  The objective of the
              teaching plan is to enhance the quality of control-  engineering education at
              the University of Florida through (1) the introduction of computer-aided 
              control design tools in the undergraduate process control course, (2) the
              design of new experiments in  the undergraduate process control laboratory,
              including experiments with an industrial process control  computer connected to
              a 24-tray distillation column, (3) the development of computer modules for a 
              multidisciplinary Virtual Control Laboratory for control engineering education,
              and (4) the  development of projects for advanced process control design for a
              graduate control course for chemical  engineers.  These activities will be
              supported by computer tools such as multimedia presentations,  in-class
              development of simulations, and the use of projection panels for in-class
              demonstrations.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
