Title       : Analog VLSI Sensory Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  1996   
File        : a9502307

Award Number: 9502307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112887             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Harris harris@cnel.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1045,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research deals with the implementation of continuous-time  analog VLSI
              chaps for processing of sensory signals.  Two specific  analog sensors are
              being developed: 1) a single-chip visual time-  to-contact sensor that reports
              the amount of time until the chip  collides with an oncoming obstacle (assuming
              constant relative  motion), and, 2) a sound localization chip that computes the
               direction (in two-dimensions) of a sound source using signals from  two
              microphones.  Though these projects may appear to be unrelated,  the proposed
              solutions using adaptive analog computation in CMOS  hardware lead to many
              common problems that must be solved.  By  providing a cross-fertilization
              between auditory and visual  processing, it is hoped that the underlying
              biological  computational primitives and neuronal representations will be 
              discovered.  The resulting low-power analog devices have obvious  applications
              in such areas as collision warning sensors for  intelligent automobiles and
              improved, low-power hearing aids.    The educational plan at both the
              undergraduate and graduate level  has a strong interdisciplinary emphasis.  Too
              often students are  taught to specialize in a narrow area and are consequently
              unable  to relate their work to an overall system objective.  Teaching 
              objectives are: 1) to stress the interdisciplinary nature of real-  world
              systems, and 2) to introduce students to problem solving  techniques for
              real-world signal-processing applications.  In  existing classes, the use of
              laboratories and computer experiments  where students can do hands-on
              experimentation with concepts is  emphasized.  New courses at the undergraduate
              and graduate levels  that give students more exposure to real-world
              experimentation in  laboratories will be designed.
