Title       : The Role of Polymeric Adhesive Films in Corrosion Processes at the
               Solid/Solution Interface: A Surface Plasmon Resonance Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9502757

Award Number: 9502757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred M. Hawkridge                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosina M. Georgiadis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1037,1045,9161,9178,AMPP,CVIS,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported  in the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, addresses the role  of adhesive
              exopolymer films in biocorrosion processes at  metal/solution interfaces. 
              During the tenure of this three-year  continuing grant, Professor Georgiadis
              and her students at the  George Washington University will apply a suite of
              surface plasmon  assisted spectroscopies and complementary optical
              spectroscopic and  electrochemical techniques to the characterization of the 
              adsorption and surface reactions of model species relevant to the  initial
              stages of exopolymer mediated corrosion of metals,  particularly copper, under
              ecologically relevant conditions.  This  research is designed to address three
              broad goals: (1) to  understand the physics and chemistry of the metal/solution
               interface in the initial stages of biocorrosion; (2) to describe  the
              mechanisms of the surface corrosion reactions; and (3) to  explore the role of
              surface energy, surface composition, and  surface roughness on exopolymer
              adsorption, exopolymer adhesion,  and metal corrosion rate.  Also during this
              grant period, Professor  Georgiadis will implement an interdisciplinary
              educational  development plan that includes relevant new and revised course 
              offerings, an increased role for research in undergraduate  education, and a
              focus on increased broad awareness of the central  importance of chemistry and
              chemical concepts.    An understanding of the molecular basis of biocorrosion
              of metals  is critical to technologically important areas such as materials, 
              manufacturing, and civil infrastructure.  In this CAREER research  project,
              surface plasmon assisted spectroscopies and complementary  experimental
              techniques will be used to gain molecular level  insights into this
              scientifically complex and economically  important area.  The education
              development aspects of this CAREER  project should enrich and broaden
              significantly the chemistry  educational experience of George Washington Un
              iversity  undergraduate and graduate students.
