Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems with Symmetry: Applications to Physical
               Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9502266

Award Number: 9502266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137488             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Silber m-silber@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9502266     Silber          This work is supported by a National Science
              Foundation     Faculty Early      Career Development Award.  The research
              component will focus     on the      further development of mathematical
              methods of equivariant     dynamical      systems for application to specific
              physical problems.      These include      hydrodynamic models of rotating
              convection and of     magnetoconvection,      models of Josephson junction
              arrays, and models applicable     to combustion      or solidification problems
              in various two- and three-    dimensional      geometries.  In each case, the
              focus is on instabilities for     which there is      clear evidence that
              symmetry plays a central role.  An     essential component      of the proposed
              research is to compare theoretical results,     based on model-     independent
              group theoretic/dynamical systems methods, with     those      obtained by
              direct numerical simulation of the governing     differential      equations. 
              The education component will include course     development in      applied
              dynamical systems at the undergraduate level,     curriculum      development
              at the graduate level, graduate student     advising, mentoring,      and
              organizing graduate seminars.          The National Science Foundation strongly
              encourages the     early      development of academic faculty as both educators
              and     researchers.  The      Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
              Program is a     Foundation-     wide  program that provides for the support of
              junior     faculty within the      context of their overall career development.
               It combines in     a single      program the support of quality research and
              education in the     broadest sense      and the full participation of those
              traditionally     underrepresented in science      and engineering.  This
              program enhances and emphasizes the     importance      the Foundation places
              on the development of full, balanced     academic      careers which include
              both research and education.
