Title       : CAREER: Property Tailoring and Reliability in Ferroic Film Actuators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9502431

Award Number: 9502431
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $381500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Trolier-McKinstry stm1@alpha.mrl.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1045,1374,1774,1775,9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                 9502431 Trolier-McKinstry  This research addresses unresolved fundamental
              issues in the behavior of ferroic films, including the manner in which domain
              walls contribute to film properties, correlation between microstructure and
              electromechanical anisotropy, the role of thin film stress states, and the
              reliability of actuator devices.  Laser ablation will be utilized to prepare
              modified lead zirconate and lead titanium zirconate films in the range of 0.1 -
              10 micrometer thickness.  Initial emphasis will be placed on developing
              deposition conditions for thick films on planar and non-planar substrates. Of
              especial interest in the research is the development of understanding how film
              microstructure and stress distribution modulate the electromechanical
              anisotropy of ferroelectric films.  The influence on the material properties of
              temperature, bias electric field, film stress, and stress in the underlying
              electrode material will be evaluated and utilized to develop a model for the
              way in which ferroelastic domains interact with two-dimensional stresses. 
              These studies will be coupled with a determination of the principal degradation
              and failure mechanisms in thin and thick film actuators.  Special emphasis will
              be placed on determining the role of device geometry in stress concentration
              and crack generation.  Finite element modeling will be used to calculate the
              stresses present in several different actuator structures.  Guidelines for
              acceptable stress concentrations in film-based actuators will be developed.  As
              a subsidiary component of this research, functionally graded films will be
              investigated.  %%% The understanding of fundamental features of thin film
              ferroelectric materials will be of scientific and technological significance. 
              Additionally, there is a strong educational segment to this project which
              stresses development of new courses and a focus on mentoring graduate,
              undergraduate, and pre-college students.  The principal investigator will
              develop two new courses in ''Optical Propert ies and Optical Characterization
              of Materials" and ''Properties of Electronic and Photonic Materials."  The
              cornerstone of the proposed mentoring program for undergraduate and pre-college
              students is integration of participants into ongoing research projects.  The
              educational activities planned also include course materials development for
              faculty at four year colleges currently without materials science courses. ***
