Title       : CAREER: Improvement, Simplification, and Clustering in Polygonal Datasets for
               Virtual Reality Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9502239

Award Number: 9502239
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120493             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amitabh Varshney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 The objective of the research being done if to devise a set  of  techniques
              and tools that will allow improvement, simplification,  and  clustering of
              polygonal datasets within a unified framework.  This is an  important first
              step towards the long-term objective  of formulating techniques  to enable
              interactive visualization of  complex virtual environments.    The  techniques
              being used to solve the above problems are al  based on the notion of  `rolling
              a sphere`, formalized by the  concept of a-hulls.  For improving the  existing
              polygonal  datasets that have cracks and small missing polygons the  intuitive
              idea is to roll a sphere that will fill-up these minor  holes.Such  flaws are
              common in present-day datasets and no  general techniques are  currently known
              that will handle them in a  unified manner.    Simplification of  polygonal
              objects will be achieved through  simplifying the genus of the  objects.  This
              provides a natural  extension to, and is orthogonal to, the  existing
              techniques for  creating topology-preserving multiresolution  hierarchies.  The
               research being done will remove topological features that are  less than a
              user-specificable size.    Clustering of polygonal datasets is of  considerable
              use in  devising efficient methods for solving global illumination  and 
              visibility preprocessing for interactive walkthroughs of  synthetic 
              environments.  This research will accomplish clustering  of polygons in a 
              dataset by using sufficiently large rolling  spheres.    The goal of the 
              educational activities being done is to expand  the current 
              entertainment-oriented view of virtual reality by  presenting it as a useful 
              tool for serious tasks in engineering,  science, and medicine.  The activities 
              include attempts to reach  out to the high-school students, undergraduates, and
               the  community at large through slide-and-video shows and hands-on 
              demonstrations of the scientific applications of virtual  environments.  The 
              activities also include the creation and  development of a  new graduate-level 
              course on virtual  environments.  The tools and techniques developed for the 
              research component of this project will be used to impart a hands-on education 
              to inculcate a feel for application-oriented  research and development work in 
              virtual environments.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
