Title       : Adaptive Compression Techniques for Digital Video Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1995       
File        : a9502227

Award Number: 9502227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio Ortega ortega@sipi.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The area of digital image and video compression and communications  has seen
              growing activity in recent years, including  standardization efforts such as
              JPEG and MPEG, and an increased  number of current or proposed applications
              from Cable or Satellite  TV to videoconferencing and future multimedia
              services. This trend  will continue to create an incentive for new compression
              techniques  that are more efficient as well as better adapted to the particular
               transmission environments. The main thrust of this research is to  provide
              adaptive compression techniques for video communications.    Adaptive
              techniques are those where encoders are capable of  matching their encoding
              procedure to the local characteristics of  the source or the  channel.
              Rate-distortion optimal solutions and  fast heuristic approximations are being
              obtained for some of the  problems of interest in video communications, such as
              bit  allocation and rate control. A novel scalar adaptive quantizer,  close in
              spirit to arithmetic coding, is being investigated. This  new technique,
              combined with such popular quantization techniques  as trellis coded
              quantization, will be used in real encoding  situations. Convergence and
              asymptotic properties of this scheme  are also being studied. For variable
              channel situations where  transmission resources are shared, as in ATM networks
              for instance,  rate constraints for each video connection are being designed to
               enable good individual video quality as well as efficient overall  network
              utilization.    This research is being carried out in the Digital Video 
              Communications research laboratory that is currently being set up  within the
              Signal and Image Processing Institute. Our main  education goal is to provide
              teaching in the area of signal, image  and video processing. We will introduce
              a digital video  communications course, designed to cover material that is
              specific  of video compression including the relevant communications aspects, 
              and to provide hands-on experience for the students .
