Title       : CAREER: High-Performance Computing for Computational Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1998        
File        : a9502710

Award Number: 9502710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118249             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Lumsdaine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               The primary emphasis of this Career Development Plan is   the  coordinated 
              development  of research and education programs in   high-performance computing
               for computational science and  engineering.  Research Plan: The main goals of 
              high-performance computing are high-performance,    scalability, and
              portability.  To attain these objectives for modern scientific and  
              engineering  applications,  new hardware paradigms, new software methodologies,
              and new   numerical algorithms  are  needed.  Moreover, the interdependencies
              between   hardware, software,  algorithm, and application have  an essential
              bearing on   performance,  scalability, and portability and must also be well  
              understood.  This work is an  inclusive effort to create a substantial, unified
              base of   understanding about  high-performance computing for scientific and
              engineering   applications that  can be broadly applied. The  specific
              objectives of this work   are to: (1) Develop  and analyze high-performance,
              portable,  computational     kernels and numerical  libraries that are capable
              of exploiting   modern computing    architectures and  operating systems, such
              as   symmetric multiprocessors,   operating  systems,  and gigabit networks;
              (2) Develop and   analyze prototype  object-based and object-oriented  
              scalable software   libraries for  high-performance computing and  for
              computational  scientific   and engineering  applications; (3) Develop and
              analyze new algorithms for   maximizing the  scalability of stationary and
              time-dependent problems; (4)   Apply the new  algorithms and software 
              libraries to real,   substantial,   computational science  and engineering  
              applications.  Education  Plan:  Because of the increasing  importance of
              computational science and engineering, it is   important  that  computer
              scientists (and indeed, scientists and engineers in   general) understand  the
              intricacies  and inter-relationships inherent to   high-performance computing. 
              A graduate course in numerical  computing has already  been developed and
              incorporated into   the graduate core  curriculum in the  Computer Science and
              Engineering program at the University of   Notre Dame.  Building  on this
              course, new graduate-level  courses in high-performance computing  will
              continue to be   introduced.  At the  undergraduate level, a senior elective in
              high-performance    computing is being  introduced, and there will be continued
              effort to support and   direct undergraduate  research.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
