Title       : Residual Stress in Thermal Spray Coatings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1997     
File        : a9414537

Award Number: 9414537
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140153             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda S. Schadler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Knight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9414537  Schadler   Thermal spray coatings, an important "enabling" technology, 
               are widely used to enhance the performance of materials in a   diverse range
              of applications, including space vehicles, gas   turbines, chemical reactors,
              mills and rolls, bridges and medical   prostheses.  Metal, cermet, and ceramic
              coatings provide  protection against wear, corrosion and thermal degradation. 
              A  major limitation in thermal spray processing is the residual  stresses which
              develop in coatings during processing due to rapid   solidification and
              coefficient of thermal expansion mismatches.    Residual stresses generally
              increase as a function of coating   thickness.  When the magnitude of these
              stresses exceeds the   adhesive or cohesive strength of the coatings, the
              latter fails,   either by debonding from the substrate, spalling or cracking.  
               There is, however, an incomplete understanding of how to control   and
              minimize these residual stresses.  In order to deposit  thicker coatings and
              improve their corrosion and wear resistance,   therefore, a fundamental
              understanding of the effect of key   processing parameters and constituent
              phases on the residual   stresses must be obtained.  The project has three
              goals, all of   which will result in increased knowledge and understanding of
              the   processing science in thermal spray technology:   1) To calibrate  a
              nondestructive, but relatively simple, "Almen" bend test to  known absolute
              values of stress using x-ray stress analysis and  x-ray tensile testing
              techniques.   2) To determile the effect of  key process parameters (such as 
              particle velocity) on residual  stresses in coatings.  3) To understand the
              role of material  system and reinforcing phases, including their composition
              and  volume fraction, on residual stresses.  Both High Velocity  Oxy-Fuel
              (HVOF) combustion spray and plasma spray coatings will  be analyzed; analysis
              methods will include x-ray stress analysis  for residual stress measurements;
              optical microscopy,  microhardness and  x-ra y diffraction for coating  
              characterization; and sliding wear testing of the final coatings  to attempt to
              relate residual stress to coating performance.   The work promises to develop a
              non-destructive means for   directly measuring residual stresses in thermal
              spray coatings   which will be an effective tool for evaluating coating quality
               and performance.  The work will also expand the thermal spray   processing
              science base by providing a better understanding of  the roles which processing
              parameters and second phase particles  play in generating and/or retaining
              residual stresses in  coatings.  Optimizing these conditions will eventually
              allow  thicker coatings, with improved properties, to be deposited, thus 
              overcoming a major barrier to expansion of thermal spray coatings  to many more
              potential applications.
