Title       : Replacement and Renovation of Computer Science Research and Research Training
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1999   
File        : a9414948

Award Number: 9414948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145204             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry N. Reinking larry.reinking@millersville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert C. Hoffman  (Principal Investigator former)
              Paul W. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger W. Webster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Hutchens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur C. Dickinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald A. Stollenwerk  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3024

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Millersville University, located in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, is one of
              the 14 state owned institutions of higher education that comprise the
              Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education.  The mission of the institution,
              inclusive of the sciences, is to provide excellent programs conforming to the
              higher standards of a traditional liberal arts education.  To emphasize its
              commitment to science, the University and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania are
              providing the resources required to construct a new science building, the
              centerpiece of a science complex that includes the existing science facility,
              Roddy Hall.  Obsolete space vacated by the Chemistry Department in Roddy will
              be available for the Computer Science Department, currently residing in
              Wickersham Hall.  Relocating Computer Science to the 30 year old building, will
              allow all the science departments to be in close proximity physically, as well
              as establishing collaborative efforts between scientific disciplines.  It is
              for this purpose, that funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program
              have been awarded to Millersville University.  A former chemistry laboratory
              and support space will be renovated and remodeled to accommodate the needs of
              the research and research training program of the Computer Science Department .
              Space will be reconfigured by the removal of existing walls and equipment such
              as workbenches and fume hoods. The improved space will provide modern research
              facilities for faculty engaged in Robotics, Computer Vision, Artificial
              Intelligence, Software Engineering, Scientific Visualization, and Real-Time
              Systems Engineering.  Scientific Visualization research will focus on
              high-performance 3D computer graphics for scientific modeling, vitural world
              modeling, and virtual reality simulations for research training and
              experimentation in the natural and physical sciences.  All science students
              will benefit from this project, giving them opportunities to engage in research
              and learn high performance computer visualization techniques at the
              undergraduate level.  With the improved facility there will be increased
              student involvement in collaborative, scientific investigations with faculty,
              generating quality senior research projects that may facilitate student
              interest in pursuing additional scholarly activities, as well as attracting
              prospective students and new research faculty.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
