Title       : Conference on Performability in Hardware/Software/Human Computing Systems; New
               Brunswick, NJ, December 14-15, 1995
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9414708

Award Number: 9414708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Hoang Pham hopham@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Pham   This project is a conference on the subject of the performability of
              industrial computing systems that require hardware, software, and human
              operators to run.  Such systems include advanced manufacturing, high-speed
              transportation systems, communication systems, and medical equipment to name
              only a few.  The objective of the conference is to bring together researchers
              in industry and academia to share ideas and research results on the
              state-of-the-practice on hardware/software/ human performability on industrial
              computing systems.  It is also the objective of the conference to discuss and
              identify future research directions in this subject area.  Identification of
              critical research issues and the obstacles to be overcome in advancing the
              state of research in the area will also be covered.  It is hoped that such a
              conference will spur collaborative effort between researchers in academia and
              industry.  A tangible output of the conference will be a bound proceeding
              containing the papers presented and discussed at the meeting.   The problem of
              effective and reliable operation of hardware/software/human systems are ever
              present.  Failure of such systems or inabililty to control and manage them
              always carry with them high negative consequences in terms of cost and safety. 
              For these reasons, it is extremely essential that control and planning
              methodologies to better understand and operate such systems are developed. 
              This is a critical research area whose prominence and importance will continue
              to grow in the future.  Better understanding of such systems will be of
              significant benefits to the economy.
