Title       : NSF/CBNS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences - Approximation
               Dynamics with Application to Numerical Analysis - June 12-16, 1995
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1994   
File        : a9414241

Award Number: 9414241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen C. Chicone carmen@chicone.math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuri Latushkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1303,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9414241  Chicone       The purpose of the conference is to provide a forum for 
              an important series of lectures to be presented by Professor  George Sell,
              University of Minnesota.  He is a leading  expert in the theory and application
              of dynamical systems,  especially that part of the theory related to the
              dynamic  processes of natural phenomena.  Advances in the  mathematical
              modeling, analysis and application of these  processes are fundamental to our
              understanding of such  diverse physical phenomena as weather, pollution of 
              groundwater and rivers, aircraft flight, or the motion of  blood through the
              human heart.  The topic of the conference  is central to current research in
              the area of dynamical  systems and its practical applications.       Professor
              Sell's lectures will range over the basis for  a specific approach to
              understanding the long time behavior  of dynamical systems (the approach being
              approximation by  nearby systems that are amenable to analysis).  He will also 
              discuss the use of this approach for the design and  implementation of computer
              software to solve some important  physical problems.       In accordance with
              the program description for the  regional NSF/CBMS conferences, the organizers
              will invite  participants primarily from the Mid-West.  The funded 
              participants will be chosen from the ranks of professional  mathematicians and
              graduate students.  The research programs  of the professional participants
              should benefit in several  ways from the conference.  They will be able to
              learn an  important new approach to solving problems that they may  already be
              studying.  Also, they will enhance the teaching  mission of their home
              institutions by incorporating the  subject matter of the conference into their
              graduate  courses.  Graduate students will be presented with cutting  edge tool
              that will be a very useful component of their  graduate education.  In
              addition, some of them may well be  influenced to enter an important area of
              research where many  problems of enormous  import remain unsolved.
