Title       : Application of Large Eddy Simulation Methods to Complex Problems in Heat
               Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9414052

Award Number: 9414052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227720             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Pletcher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 There is an urgent need for better methods of predicting the thermal features
              of turbulent flows that are technologically important.  Although progress is
              needed at all levels of turbulence modeling, the recent advances in computer
              technology and the outlook for continued advances in the future suggest that it
              may be timely to give increasing attention to research on direct and large eddy
              simulation of turbulent flow to move these capabilities toward larger and more
              relevant problems.  Problems to be given particular emphasis in this study
              include separated flows with heat transfer.  The objectives of the proposed
              research are to:  (1) develop a better understanding of complex turbulent flows
              (particularly separated flows) with heat transfer with a view toward
              identifying improved turbulence modeling for the Reynolds-averaged
              Navier-Stokes equations, (2) evaluate and compare the characteristics of
              several subgrid-scale models for the large eddy simulation of turbulent
              separated flows with heat transfer including a dynamic model, and (3) work
              toward a more efficient computational strategy for spatially non-periodic flows
              to allow more relevant problems to be addressed with current computational
              resources.  The proposed research will attempt to make contributions both to
              the expansion of basic knowledge and to the advancement of the scientific
              predictive capability that is needed to maintain a competitive edge in design
              procedures for products such as gas turbine engine components, electronic
              devices (such as digital computers) and in manufacturing processes.   The
              research will employ direct and large eddy numerical simulations based on a
              preconditioned finite-volume discretization technique to solve the compressible
              Navier-Stokes equations for turbulent flows with heat transfer.  The direct
              numerical simulations will provide basic knowledge of some separated flows with
              heat transfer, particularly the rearward facing step flow, which have been very
              difficult to model through the Reynolds-avera ged Navier-Stokes equations. 
              This information will guide the development of improved closure models for the
              Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations and aid in the evaluation of
              subgrid-scale models for the large eddy simulations.  Particular attention will
              be given to establishing the merits and limitations of a dynamic subgrid-scale
              model suitable for flows with heat transfer.  The results should provide
              fundamental new knowledge about flows with heat transfer and result in improved
              means of predicting such flows and will enhance national competitiveness.
