Title       : UV Laser-Stimulated Etching and Epitaxial Deposition of Compound Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1996       
File        : a9414657

Award Number: 9414657
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tien-Pei Lee                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Shealy shealy@ee.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9414657  Shealy  The ability to combine lithography, etching and epitaxial
              deposition of advanced semi-conductor material systems will have a significant
              impact on the realization of complex integrated electronic and optoelectronic
              circuits.  The selective synthesis of III-V compound semiconductors using UV
              laser radiation in a low pressure Organometallic Vapor Phase Epitaxial (OMPVE)
              deposition environment will be investigated.  The availability of coherent
              tunable UV laser sources with sufficient power allows localized activation of
              the semiconductor surface in both etching and epitaxial growth modes of
              operation.  The apparatus used to support these studies is equipped with HCl
              gas which allows photo-simulated selective etching to be combined with
              selective growth.  Several mechanisms are responsible for photo-simulated
              selective etching and epitaxial growth depending on the type of laser source
              used and the reactants present on the substrate surface.  Among these
              mechanisms, one must consider thermal processes, photo-induced decomposition of
              reactants, and photo-generated carriers near the growth surface which alter the
              reaction kinetics.  The tunable deep UV laser source will allow various forms
              of excitations which will help identify the important processes resulting in
              high quality selectively grown materials.  Several lithographic techniques will
              be pursued to realize fine line geometries including focused laser scanning,
              projection through masks and interference holography.  Emphasis will be placed
              on synthesis techniques resulting in high quality semiconductor structures with
              sub-micron resolution in order to support the broadest range of applications in
              devices and circuits.  ***
