Title       : Twilight and the Naked-Eye Observer: Models and High- Resolution Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1997      
File        : a9414290

Award Number: 9414290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245298             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alistair B. Fraser abfl@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fraser/Abstract           This proposal requests research support for optical
              remote  sensing of twilight.  Like many other researchers, we are  interested
              in using twilight's optical structure to evaluate the  verisimilitude of
              atmospheric scattering models.  However, unlike  others, we propose to do our
              testing with a remote sensing system  that combines: a) multiple spectral
              channels with broad bandwidths,  and b) very high spatial and temporal
              resolutions.         This remote sensing system is human trichromatic color
              vision,  which has the obvious disadvantage that it is essentially  subjective.
               However, trichromatic analogues of color vision, such  as color film and
              digital imaging systems, let us map their  objective and reproducible responses
              into those of a typical naked-  eye observer.   Other advantages gained by
              using photography and  digital imaging include the ability to easily analyze: 
              a) spectra  from large portions (or all) of the twilight at once, b) the 
              temporal evolution of twilight spectra at very high resolutions,  and c) the
              spatial details of twilight polarization.         Specifically, we plan to use
              digital image analysis of color  slides, occasionally corroborated by
              spectroradiometry, to explore  the photometric, polarimetric, and colorimetric
              structure of  twilight.  With a variety of data inversion techniques, we will 
              then assess how well various atmospheric scattering models account  for
              twilight as seen by the naked-eye observer (we include here  observers equipped
              with simple linear polarizers).         In the past, twilight's ephemeral
              nature has restricted  researchers to gathering only limited amounts of
              photometric and  polarimetric data, and then usually only as a means of
              constructing  atmospheric soundings.  Colorimetric studies of twilight are even
               rarer.  As worthwhile as twilight-derived atmospheric soundings  are, here we
              propose a quite different goal:  measuring and  modeling twilight's largely
              unquantified visual structure.
