Title       : Renovation of Research Facilities in the Biology and Biotechnology Department at
               Worcester Polytechnic Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9414975

Award Number: 9414975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1009463            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill Rulfs jrulfs@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela J. Weathers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9184,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Worcester Polytechnic Institute  (WPI) is the recipient of ARI funds for the
              renovation of the Salisbury Laboratories. Home to the Department  of Biology
              and Biotechnology, the labs are over 100 years old and were last renovated in
              1974.  Research spaces throughout the building share common deficiencies that
              consist of:  warped, rusted and broken benches and cabinetry, poor heating and
              cooling utilities, the absence or limited electric,  gas, and plumbing
              services, and deteriorated flooring.  In spite of the deplorable conditions,
              the department has grown significantly in undergraduate and graduate majors who
              are actively involved in the research enterprise.  It is mandatory that seniors
              complete a Major Qualifying Project, a research or design project at a level
              appropriate for graduate study preparation.  In conjunction to this
              institutionally driven research imperative, the department encourages
              outstanding undergraduates to continue their work in a combined bachelor and
              master's degree program.  ARI funds will be used to support renovations
              including: reconfiguration of inefficient space, replacement of HVAC,
              electrical, plumbing and gas systems, installation of new casework and benches,
              provision for deionized water, and the replacement of a greenhouse.  The
              renovations will primarily impact research in the areas of molecular and
              neurobiology of invertebrates, and the biochemistry and kinetics of heavy metal
              uptake by fungi.  Other research that will be impacted includes: the physiology
              and biochemistry of secondary metabolites of cultured plants, the development
              and modeling of  the growth of transformed root systems in bioreactors, the
              physiology of immobilized bacteria, and the molecular biology of memory and
              invertebrate genetics.  This project will not only enhance the faculty research
              programs, but will provide the state-of-the-art facilities needed in order to
              prepare students for research careers.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
