Title       : Mathematical Sciences: NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences
               - Numerical Linear Algebra on ParallelProcessors - June 12 - 16, 1995
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1994   
File        : a9414856

Award Number: 9414856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Thiebaux                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23037              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. Pacheco peter@sun.math.usfca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University San Francisco
	      2130 Fulton Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941171080    415/666-6886

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Pacheco    ABSTRACT:  NSF/CBMS Regional Conference    #9414856  "Numerical
              Linear Algebra on Parallel Processors"       In most branches of science and
              engineering, numerical  linear algebra plays a central role in the solution of 
              problems by computer.  The reason for this is that  scientists and engineers
              usually solve nonlinear problems by  reducing them to a sequence of linear
              problems.  Thus  considerable attention has been devoted to the development  of
              efficient methods for solving problems in linear algebra  on computers.    
              Within the last ten years, the advent of parallel  processing has resulted in
              enormous additional growth in  research into numerical linear algebra, since
              many of the  methods used on conventional computers are inefficient when  used
              on parallel machines. As a consequence of this growth  in research, it is
              extremely difficult for researchers and  students to keep abreast of the state
              of the art. Thus there  is a great need for someone to provide a comprehensive
              view  of the current state of the art and anticipated future  developments. 
              This comprehensive view is especially important now because  there is a fairly
              clear consensus about architectures for  parallel machines and an emerging
              consensus about many  issues related to software.     In order to provide such
              a comprehensive view of parallel  numerical linear algebra and to stimulate
              further research  into the field, an NSF/CBMS Regional Conference will be held 
              at the University of San Francisco during the week of June  12, 1995, with
              Professor James W. Demmel as the principal  lecturer.     Professor Demmel will
              begin by discussing parallel  architectures and parallel software. He will
              continue with a  discussion of parallel algorithms for dense matrices. This 
              will include a discussion of parallel algorithms for matrix  multiplication,
              Gaussian elimination, the solution of least  squares problems and the
              calculation of eigenvalues and  eigenvectors. He will also lecture on parallel
              algorithms  for sparse ma trices. These lectures will cover direct and 
              iterative methods; they will discuss algorithms for  partitioning  sparse
              matrices, Cholesky factorization, GMRES, QMR, and the  Lanczos  and Arnoldi
              methods.     Professor Demmel's lectures will be supplemented by  lectures by
              several other specialists in the field. These  supplementary lectures will
              cover multifrontal methods for  matrix factorization, domain decomposition
              methods, parallel  finite elements, graph partitioning, and applications.
