Title       : Spatial Reasoning for Machine Understanding of Solid Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2000     
File        : a9414523

Award Number: 9414523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael M. Marefat marefat@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              IRI-9414523 Michael  M. Marefat University of Arizona $78,552 - 12 mos.  Spatial
              Reasoning for Machine Understanding of Solid Models  This is the first year
              funding of a three-year research project with the objectives of studying and
              developing geometric reasoning mechanisms and knowledge representation methods
              for modeling and recognition of semantic shape features that will be useful in
              industrial design and manufacturing. A person or a machine that is going to
              perceive objects in order to interact with them in any way must do more than
              see the objects; it is necessary to recognize them as what they are, to attach
              a meaning to them.  Actually seeing the objects as individual items with
              particular shapes and features is part of perception, and involves geometric
              reasoning. Attaching meaning to the objects means that there must be an
              internalknowledge representation for what is significant about them. A mapping
              from a set of geometric features to a meaning in terms of the knowledge
              representation is called semantics, after the analogous mapping in language. 
              As the product life cycles become shorter  and product variety increases, it is
              crucial to minimize the lag period between the start of a product's design and
              the time it is produced.  This project includes applying the developed
              geometric reasoning models and  mechanisms to solve important issues in machine
              understanding of designs, automated generation of  process planning strategies,
              and automated visual inspection based on solid models. Initial promising 
              results have been obtained on these problems.  Further investigation will be
              performed systematically  to develop the concepts and the mechanisms.  In 
              addition, the application of the concepts and  mechanisms to the development 
              of information driven intelligent integrated environments for flexible  design
              and production will be studied.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
