Title       : Renovation of Vacated Space for, and Creation of, a Consolidated and Upgraded
               Anthropology Research Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1997   
File        : a9414413

Award Number: 9414413
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Parman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               The Department of Anthropology at California State University, Fullerton (CSUF)
              and NSF will jointly support the renovation of vacated chemistry research space
              for new laboratories in archaeology, biological anthropology (osteology and
              primatology), ethnographic cultural analysis, museology, and visual
              anthropology.  The NSF award is a critical first step in a five-year plan to
              improve laboratory space essential to research and research training efforts
              for students at the B.A. and M.A. levels.     The impacted laboratories are
              currently located at diverse locations on the campus.  With the move of the
              Chemistry department to new research space, the Anthropology department will be
              able to consolidate and upgrade its facilities.  Renovation activities will
              involve space conversion including the removal of asbestos and out-dated
              laboratory benches and the installation of new plumbing, electrical, HVAC and
              hazard waste disposal systems.  The newly renovated space will include
              audioroom facilities, a darkroom, and computer-ready workstations to support
              research in ethnographic cultural analysis, museology, biological anthropology,
              and visual anthropology.  These enhanced facilities will support long-term
              archaeological research projects to understand the impact of historical
              cultural factors in an increasingly complex society.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
