Title       : Visual Communication and Species Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1998    
File        : a9414239

Award Number: 9414239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196044             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Uetz GEORGE.UETZ@UC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce C. Jayne  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                              Animals use a variety of signals to communicate with each 
              other, and evolution has resulted in an enormous diversity  of species-specific
              recognition mechanisms.  Species  recognition is critical, especially in
              mating, because  mistakes can result in loss of reproductive effort, or (in 
              the case of predatory animals) even death.  This research  concerns the
              question of how animals recognize members of  their own species and
              discriminate them from other species  using visual signals during courtship and
              mating.  A newly  developed video imaging technique will be used to understand 
              how visual signals function in the mating process of wolf  spiders, and how
              differences between species evolve.  Because spiders are potentially
              cannibalistic, species  recognition mechanisms are critical to survival as well
              as  reproductive success.  As a consequence, recognition is  innate and based
              on simple behavioral cues.  In the planned  experiments, visual signals of
              courting males (body  ornaments and behaviors) will be altered using computer 
              digitization and video animation, then presented to female  spiders on
              microtelevision screens.  Responses of females to  video images of their own
              species and those of other  species, and combinations of video images with
              audio  recordings of spider courtship vibration "songs", will test  hypotheses
              about the cues involved in species recognition.  Results of this research will
              allow a better understanding  of the mechanisms involved in species recognition
              in  animals.  This research will also contribute to the growing  knowledge
              about spiders, an ecologically important group of  invertebrate predators whose
              basic biology is less known  than other taxa.  Additionally, this research
              involves the  continuing development of a computer-assisted technique for 
              studying behavior which may be applicable to other species  and research
              questions in animal behavior (mate choice,  agonistic behavior, visual
              perception, neuroethology) and  other fields (image recogn ition, artificial
              intelligence).
