Title       : U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research in Computational Linguistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1995     
File        : a9414637

Award Number: 9414637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24524              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Pustejovsky jamesp@cs.brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0522300   Man-Machine Communication               
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 5950,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor James Pustejovsky of Brandeis  University and a
              graduate student to collaborate in computational  linguistics research with
              Susan Armstrong and others at the  Institute of Semantic and Cognitive Studies
              (ISSCO) of the  University of Geneva, Switzerland.  The goal of their research
              is  to account for the way in which words combine, taking advantage  of the
              different perspectives from which this issue has been  approached, namely,
              lexicographic, linguistic and statistical.  The problem is to establish a
              connection between computational  semantic theories and practical systems
              dealing directly with  modeling language use through `usage-based` criteria. 
              The  Brandeis group brings substantial theoretical experience on  lexical
              semantics and natural language generation, while the  Swiss group contributes
              the computational platform and the  multilingual environment for analyzing
              text, as well as  experience in machine translation systems. Collaboration
              between  the U.S. and Swiss research teams will introduce a cross-  linguistic
              perspective by taking advantage of information derived  from the analyses of
              multilingual corpora provided by the Swiss  participants.  Specifically, the
              Swiss group is involved in a  project to produce automatic multilingual
              generation of the  weather forecasts produced by the Swiss Institute of
              Meteorology.  This collaborative research contributes to the empirical 
              grounding of a theory of semantic selection.  Fundamentally, it  looks at how
              word meaning in natural language might be  characterized formally, in order to
              account for both the subtle  use of words in different sentences, and the
              `creative` use of  words in novel contexts.  The integration of rule-based
              technique  and data driven technique is a major area of interest in natural 
              language processing research.  On a practical level, this  research will
              contribute to the development of a multilingual  generator and the enhancement
              of machine translation systems.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
