Title       : Development of Category Knowledge and Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1995       
File        : a9414091

Award Number: 9414091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth F. Shipley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Our knowledge of the physical objects of our world includes the categories
              exemplified by different objects and the relations among categories of objects.
               This knowledge permits us to make inferences about novel objects of a familiar
              category (a previously unknown dog, Rover) as well as novel kinds of object
              categories that include the object at issue (Rover is a dog, a vertebrate,
              etc.); and it permits us to deduce properties of the object at issue (Rover
              barks, has a backbone, etc.).  Knowledge of categories related to the category
              at issue (topis are a kind of animal) permits one to deduce types of
              characteristic properties of members of the category at issue (topis have a
              characteristic diet) and to induce the specific values of these properties from
              a limited sample (topis are herbivores).   The analysis of valid inductive
              inferences by the philosopher Nelson Goodman provides and account of the
              development of the ability to make inductive inferences.  One premise of this
              position is that the more a person has attributed properties to a class, be it
              a class of individuals or a class of kinds (such as kinds of animals), the more
              readily this class acts as the range of an inductive inference.  This position
              also predicts a facilitation of induction over one class as the result of
              making inductive inferences about contrasting classes.   This account is to be
              tested in experiments with children.  The studies are concerned with
              preconditions for induction, the relative effectiveness of different categories
              in constraining inductive inferences, and the experiences that facilitate
              induction.  While the proposed research deals with physical objects such as
              non-human animals, plants, and artifacts, the findings are relevant to the
              development of children's reasoning about other types of entities.
