Title       : Acquisition of High Performance Computing for Undergraduate Chemical Research
               and Research Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1995    
File        : a9414026

Award Number: 9414026
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102122             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean A. Waldow waldowda@plu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig Fryhle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura A. MacGinitie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pacific Lutheran Univ
	      
	      Tacoma, WA  98447    206/531-6900

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9161,9178,9184,AMPP,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                    The funding of this proposal will significantly enhance  ongoing research,
              undergraduate research training, and will  provide an Internet service to the
              national undergraduate  chemical research community by providing high
              performance  computing and information infrastructure equipment. The  requested
              equipment will substantially upgrade our ability to  analyze NMR data and add a
              completely new computational and  modeling ability for direct use in our
              research projects and  research training activities.                Use of this
              equipment for current research at PLU will  focus on the following projects.
              Biotechnology: Hypothetical  enzyme inhibitors will be modeled and evaluated
              for their  potential effectiveness before synthetic work is undertaken.  New
              inhibitors and mechanistic probes will be designed.  Enzyme active sites and
              other aspects of tertiary structure  will be modeled using the requested
              software. Polymers: Model  phase diagrams for polymer blends will be generated
              for use  in studies of phase separation kinetics and local segmental  dynamics.
              Potential blends will be screened to focus on the  systems with the greatest
              potential. Polymer characterization  by NMR and modeling of pertinent
              thermodynamic, solution, and  conformational data will be needed in the phase
              diagram  calculations. Bioengineering: Studies on the generation of 
              electrokinetic fields in bone will be enhanced by extension  of the current
              studies to three dimensions. Prediction of  field effects in whole bone will
              thus become possible.                In terms of research training, we will
              target two  communities: local and national. First, we will utilize this 
              equipment in our existing undergraduate research training  courses. Second, an
              Internet accessible resource will be  established for undergraduate students
              doing chemical  research both in our program and around the country. In this 
              on-line "community," students can exchange research ideas,  find useful
              information, and take part in Internet based   undergraduate research poster
              sessions.                The console for our QE-PLUS 300 MHz FT-NMR will be 
              upgraded allowing access to stored data through an ethernet  connection. For
              the molecular modeling and NMR data analysis,  a Silicon Graphics and an IBM
              RS6000 workstation will be  acquired. The Silicon Graphics workstation will be
              primarily  for graphical modeling software, and the RS6000 will be used  for
              the computationally intense programs as well as a host  for the Internet
              service. Biosym's Modeling packages, Spartan  Modeling software, and NMR
              software (Felix) will be the core  analysis tools for the research components.
              List/mail and  gopher servers will be used for the Internet service for 
              undergraduate chemical research.
