Title       : The Physical and Radiative Properties of Aerosols Over the North Atlantic:
               Intensive Field Campaigns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1997   
File        : a9414808

Award Number: 9414808
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $537740             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hal Maring hmaring@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis Savoie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph M. Prospero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9414808  Maring    The overall objectives of AEROCE Theme 2 are:       a) to
              characterize the physical and chemical properties of  aerosols that are
              important to the radiative properties of the  atmosphere and to climate;      
              b) to investigate the processes that affect these properties;  and        c) to
              assess the relative importance of natural and human  sources.       To this end
              an intensive aerosol measurement program that  focuses on the chemical,
              physical, and radiative properties of  aerosols will be carried out over the
              NAO and their impact on the  radiative balance in the marine atmosphere.  The
              component of the  program covered by this project will focus on measurements
              of:       1) aerosol concentrations and size distribution from 3nm to  15um;   
                 2) aerosol light scattering, both total and backscatter at  three
              wavelengths using an integration nephelometer;       3)aerosol optical
              absorption using an aethalometer (measured  as part of a separate AEROCE Theme
              2 Proposal, Savoie et al.)       Both the aerosol size and optical scattering
              measurements will  be made at various relative humidities to investigate the 
              importance of atmospheric water vapor on the physical and optical  properties
              of aerosols.  The program will be carried out in a  series of intensive field
              experiments at Barbados, Bermuda and in  the Canary Islands.  Measurements of
              the physical and optical  properties of aerosols will be used to develop a
              climatology of  these properties.  In addition, we will use our measurements of
               these properties in conjunction with chemical and meteorological  data
              produced by other AEROCE investigators to identify and  quantify the
              contributions of various source regions and types.   Our data, coupled with
              concurrent measurements of column radiation  parameters will allow closure for
              the direct forcing terms in the  radiative energy balance equations.        
              The ultimate objective is to calculate the radiative forcing  caused by the
              major aerosol components over the mid- and lo w-  latitude North Atlantic and
              assess the relevance to climate.  These  measurements, when coupled to
              radiation models, will allow  estimates of the climatic consequences of future
              emissions  scenarios for major pollutant species.
