Title       : Renovation and Consolidation of Research Facilities of Department of Geology and
               Geophysics and the Seismographic Stations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1999   
File        : a9414440

Award Number: 9414440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Brimhall brimall@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Alvarez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Romanowicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9155,9196,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                McCone Hall, the Earth Sciences Building, located on the campus of the
              University of California, Berkeley, was designed to house three departments: 
              Geography, Geology and Geophysics, and Paleontology.  Sharing the facility with
              the departments are the Earth Sciences Library, the Seismographic Stations and
              the Museum of Paleontology, an organized research unit.  With the explosive
              growth in the scale and sophistication of experimental and analytical research
              in the Earth sciences, the adaptive capacity of the allotted space has become
              inadequate. There were no facilities initially designed for isotope work that
              require vital clean rooms for sample preparation, or dedicated space for
              experimental work involving apparatus operating at high temperatures and
              pressures designed to replicate the conditions within the Earth.  Analytical
              facilities necessary to determine the composition of rocks, minerals and fluids
              lack sufficient space.  Rock crushing and pulverizing rooms are inadequate and
              contribute to a major dust problem making it difficult to reduce contamination.
                Nevertheless, the faculty continues to be productive in an unfavorable
              environment.  Funding from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will
              assist the University in its efforts to renovate and consolidate research
              facilities for the Department of Geology and Geophysics, and the seismographic
              stations.  The facilities' modernization project is an integral step in a
              larger plan of enhancing academic excellence in Earth Sciences at Berkeley. 
              While supporting Earth scientists taking an active role in addressing urgent
              societal needs, the department is in the process of establishing an improved
              background base for rigorously gauging the effect of human occupation of the
              planet through its environmental research program.  Research laboratories where
              work on mineral physics and advance materials, seismic and geological hazards,
              global changing spanning a broad range of geological causes, effects and time
              scales, and interrogation of the record of Earth processes retained in rocks
              using a wide range of micro-analytical techniques will be renovated.  The
              department has been a leading force in these domains, as exemplified by
              pioneering research on the catastrophic efforts of comet impacts, effects of
              mountain uplift, landscape response, the development of non-renewable
              resources, and acid rain generation.  The renovation project will benefit 17
              faculty, 20 post doctoral fellows, 46 graduate students, and 38 undergraduates,
              providing them with a modernized facility to continue their pursuit of academic
              excellence in Earth science.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
