Title       : Artificial Intelligence Based Process Synthesis Methodology for In-Plant Waste
               Minimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1998  
File        : a9414494

Award Number: 9414494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151881             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yinlun Huang yhuang@che.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9148,9197,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Huang - Abstract - 9414494    Rapidly changing industrial technologies are often
              accompanied by the generation of hazardous or toxic wastes.  One way to reduce
              the quantity and toxicity of these wastes is to incorporate waste minimization
              strategies into process design.  This study will focus on the development of a
              novel and systematic process synthesis methodology for designing/modifying
              processes that satisfy environmental objectives.  The methodology assesses cost
              and waste minimization simultaneously, and utilizes knowledge representing
              operation protocols, environmental regulations, and designers' experience of
              process design and implementation of waste minimization strategies.  Because a
              large amount of extractable knowledge can only be represented in a symbolic
              form, and because the available process information and data are often
              imprecise, incomplete, and uncertain, conventional optimization techniques may
              not be applicable to solving waste minimization problems.  Instead, the
              principle investigator (PI) uses artificial intelligence techniques (AI) in the
              development of this methodology.  The adoption of these techniques will help
              the identification of economically desirable and operationally stable processes
              with minimum waste generation.    The goal of this research is to develop an
              intelligent process design system based on AI methodology.  This system
              consists of two subsystems: a decision support subsystem and a process
              synthesis subsystem.  The first subsystem performs preconceptual synthesis.  It
              is capable of identifying waste minimization problems in a process by means of
              an index of waste minimization, selecting the most efficient technology,
              determining the necessary unit operations and the interrelationships among
              processing units, and performing an overall economic evaluation.  The second
              subsystem utilizes the selected technology to synthesize or modify a process
              which will not only be cost-effective but also environmentally clean.  This
              design tool is not meant to replac e commercial process simulators, but could
              be used in conjunction with them.  The tool will be applied to a variety of
              processes in the chemical and petrochemical industries which are traditionally
              major waste generators.  The PI will work cooperatively with three companies,
              M. W. Kellogg, BASF, and Marathon Refining, in order to ensure that the design
              tool is effective for in-plant waste minimization.
