Title       : Acquisition of a Triple Stage Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1995       
File        : a9414018

Award Number: 9414018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Thomas mthomas@isnet.is.wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest U Sch of Med
	      Medical Center Blvd
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27157    336/716-4549

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  This application is a request for monies that wiU be  applied toward the
              purchase of modern  MS/MS instrumentation. Thirteen projects are included in
              the  application. The projects have been  submitted by participating
              investigators that are located in  7 academic departments from both the  main
              campus and the medical center. The university-wide  participation demonstrates
              a widespread  appreciation of the critical need for in-house MS/MS at Wake 
              Forest University. AU of the  investigators have used mass spectrometry in
              their research  and the availability of MS/MS  techniques wiU dramatically
              improve the effectiveness of  these investigators.      The MS/MS
              instrumentation will be used for the analysis of  a variety of complex
              molecules.  Samples will be ionized by one of several techniques  including:
              electrospray, cesium ion LSIMS,  or EUCI. A variety of compounds will be
              examined using the  MS/MS instrument including small,  complex organic
              monomers, peptides, and proteins. The VG  Quattro-II triple stage quadrupole 
              mass spectrometer having the foUowing options wiU fiU our  current needs:
              extended mass range,  EI and CI ionization source and interface, a data system 
              controUed gas chromatograph equipped  with split/splitless and cool on-column
              GC injectors, cesium  ion LSIMS, and an API LC-MS  interface for both classical
              and pneumaticaUy assisted low  flow rate electrospray.      The types of
              projects that will be supported by the MS/MS  system fall into three broad 
              categories. The first category of projects involves  structure analysis of
              smaller molecules, <2,500  amu. Several projects are included from synthetic
              chemists  desiring to determine the structures of  complex organic molecules
              and from biochemists studying the  oxidations of lipids and proteins.  These
              investigators wiU employ LSIMS, electrospray, and  El/CI techniques.      The
              second category of projects are from investigators  that need to 1) determine
              the masses of  proteins that are then generated by site-directed   mutagenesis,
              2) assess modifications to proteins  subjected to oxidative stress, or 3)
              analyze chemical  modifications that are generated in mechanistic  studies of
              enzyme action. In projects utilizing site-  directed mutagenesis, it is
              desirable to generate  proteins that have well defined modifications of the
              primary  structure. Electrospray techniques wiU  be employed to ensure that
              these proteins have been properly  processed. In the studies on protein 
              oxidation, the degree of oxidation and the number of oxygen  atoms added to the
              protein will be  assessed by the electrospray technique. In the mechanistic 
              studies, reactive substrates are added to  the protein and the result of the
              experiment is assessed by  determining the change in mass of  enzyme exposed to
              the reactive substrate. In addition to  analyzing purified proteins, mixtures
              of  peptides can be separated on the HPLC system and directly  introduced into
              the mass spectrometer  via the electrospray interface. Analysis of these
              fragments  is essential for determining the specific  region of the protein
              that has undergone chemical changes.      The last category of projects uses
              MS/MS for two types of  analyses. The first category will  employ CID
              techniques to assess the fatty acid composition  of phospholipids. One of the
              users  will employ this technique to identify which phospholipids  contain
              arachidonic acid and then assess  how the distribution of arachidonic acid
              changes in response  to the activation of metabolic  pathways that utilize
              arachidonic acid. The second type of  analysis will use CID techniques to 
              determine the sequence of small peptides. This type of  analysis will be
              employed to verify the site  of substitution by mutagenesis, determine the
              primary  sequence of a peptide, or determine which  amino acid has been
              modified after free radical oxidation or  after other chemical treatments.     
              At least two significant benefits will accrue to the  university from the
              acquisition of MS/MS  instrumentation. The first  benefit is an improved
              research  environment. Eight of the thirteen  investigators are junior faculty
              less than 40 years of age  and access to MS/MS is essential for their  career
              development. The programs of senior investigators  will continue to grow by
              having access  to advanced MS/MS techniques. The second benefit is the 
              improved training that will be available  to our graduate students and
              postdoctoral fellows.        Page 4
