Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Randomly Perturbed Infinite Dimensional Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9414153

Award Number: 9414153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39769              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Kotelenez pxk4@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9414153:  Kotelenez Abstract.  The research described in this proposal is an
              attempt to capitalize on the different approaches and strengths in stochastic
              analysis and related areas at two institutions: Case Western Reserve University
              and the Institute of Mathematics of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences in Kiev. 
              The subject of stochastic analysis is motivated by the work of Einstein and
              Smoluchowski, and later Ornstein and Uhlenbeck, on the (heavy) "Brownian"
              particle in a medium of light particles.  In North America much emphasis has
              been on stochastic modeling in particle systems:  in particular, interacting
              particles and so-called "superprocesses".   In the latter area, attempts have
              been made to develop physically meaningful stochastic equations for the
              distribution of diffusing and branching particles.  So far, rigorous stochastic
              partial differential equations (SPDE's) for the mass distribution have been
              obtained only in very special cases (space dimension one), due to the very
              singular character of the noise (a result of the independence assumptions on
              the level of particles).  The P.I. on the American side (P. Kotelenez) recently
              developed a new approach to  SPDE's  which leads to physically meaningful and
              mathematically solvable SPDE's in any space dimension.  Since this approach
              starts with stochastic  ordinary differential equations for the positions and
              momenta of the particles and then derives the SPDE's as mezoscopic equations
              from the microscopic equations, the applicability of these equations in the
              physical sciences is immediate.  Rigorous results    have been obtained for the
              case of long range interaction and mass    conservation.  Together with the
              Ukrainian investigators, who have    expertise  in both finite and infinite
              dimensions, we wil l attempt to    extend this approach to a large class of
              physically meaningful equations     for interacting and diffusing particle
              systems with short range     interaction and annihilation.  Another focus of
              the proposed research is      on so-called anticipating  integration, arising
              in elliptic equations and     certain integral equations.  Anticipating
              integration  actually originated in Kiev and has been given much attention in
              Western Europe (where it is    called the "Skorokhod integral") in recent years
              but much less has been     done in North America.  The research described in
              this proposal is an attempt to capitalize on the different approaches and
              strengths in     stochastic analysis and related areas at two institutions:
              Case Western     Reserve University and the Institute of Mathematics of the
              Ukrainian     Academy of Sciences in Kiev.  The subject of stochastic analysis
              is     motivated by the work of Einstein and Smoluchowski, and later Ornstein
              and Uhlenbeck,  on processes like Brownian motion.  In North America much
              emphasis has been on stochastic modeling in particle systems:  in    
              particular, interacting particles and so-called "superprocesses".   In the    
              latter area, attempts have been made to develop physically meaningful
              stochastic equations for the distribution of diffusing and branching    
              particles.  So far, rigorous stochastic partial differential equations   
              (SPDE's) have been obtained only in very special cases .  The P.I. on the   
              American side (P. Kotelenez) recently developed a new approach to  SPDE's which
              leads to physically meaningful and mathematically solvable SPDE's in any space
              dimension.  This approach  has immediate applicability in the physical
              sciences.   Together with the Ukrainian investigators, who have expertise  in
              both finite and infinite dimensions, we will attempt to extend the approach
              still further.  Another focus of the proposed research is on so-called
              anticipating   integration, arising in elliptic equations and certain integral
              equations.  Anticipating integration  actually originated in Kiev and has been
              given much attention in Western Europe (where it is called the "Skorokhod
              integral") in recent years but much less has been done in North America.
