Title       : Reactive Algorithms in Robotics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a9414862

Award Number: 9414862
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bhubaneswar Mishra mishra@cs.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 2891,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                The primary goal of this research is to construct a theoretical  framework for
              understanding and design of reactive devices starting  from the description of
              a high-level task.  The research is based  on a new class of robot algorithms
              that the PI calls ``reactive  algorithms.''  These offer insights into how a
              robot itself can use  its body parts like "analog computers'' and be
              computationally more  powerful than its "digital brain,'' and perhaps may
              ultimately shed  some light on the question of how insects with far fewer
              neurons  than a robot are able to accomplish much more complicated 
              manipulation and locomotion tasks.  So far the main applications of  these
              ideas have been in constructing new parallel-jaw grippers and  multifingered
              (2- and 3-fingered) hands, a "twirling-machine'' and  a walking machine.  The
              PI has built a prototype parallel-jaw  gripper ("NYU reactive gripper'') based
              on these algorithmic ideas.  The resulting gripper reduces the necessary
              computing power to only  a few simple digital circuits, utilizes primitive
              sensing  abilities, i.e., no more than a dozen infra-red emitters and 
              detectors and operates in a smooth manner without disturbing or  damaging the
              manipulated objects.  The PI has been investigating  how to describe these
              devices and prove their correctness using the  Ramadge-Wonham Discrete Event
              System (DES) formalisms. Another goal  is to understand the "computational''
              complexity of these devices  based on a framework for analyzing the
              "competitiveness'' of on-  line algorithms in comparison to an idealized
              clairvoyant  algorithm. Other theoretical questions relate to the effect of 
              noise, algorithmic modification for immunization against noise, the 
              sensor-placement problem, and stability and convergence properties.
