Title       : Renovation of Research Building at the University of Guam Marine Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1994  
File        : a9414850

Award Number: 9414850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 15,  1994  
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263360             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie J. Paul vpaul@uog9.uog.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susanne C. Wilkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Guam
	      UOG Station
	      Agana, GU  96910    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1305,9155,9169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The University of Guam Marine Laboratory (UOGML), the only U.S. marine
              laboratory in the tropical western Pacific, is a research unit of the
              University of Guam that serves the U.S.-affiliated islands of Micronesia,
              including the Territory of Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
              Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of Belau, and the
              Marshall Islands.  Established in 1970, the UOGML is uniquely situated near a
              variety of thriving coral reef habitats that have allowed the laboratory to
              become an important center for the study of tropical marine biology. 
              Previously, research conducted at the facility focused on the structure and
              function of coral reef communities with applied research programs on tropical
              fisheries and aquaculture.  However, over the past six years, research programs
              have been diversified to include chemical ecology, marine microbiology,
              biogeochemistry, larval biology, genetics of reef fishes, and paleobiology. 
              The Laboratory has acquired an international reputation in coral reef research
              in which the faculty have collaborated with coral reef scientist from all over
              the world.  Minority research programs are available, that currently involve
              twelve faculty members and over twenty students.   In order to maintain this
              treasured research base, the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will
              provide funds to enable the UOGML to modernize its research facility.  Funds
              will be used to renovate and improve the electrical and plumbing systems in
              individual faculty laboratories and multi-user laboratories.  Laboratory
              furniture will be replaced and configured to provide more efficient work space.
               The availability of a modern facility is vital to research as well as to
              studies of the development, conservation, and utilization of the region's
              substantial marine resources, which are of paramount importance to the people
              of the western Pacific.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
