Title       : New Methods in Free Radical Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1996    
File        : a9414240

Award Number: 9414240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Enholm enholm@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                    The focus of this research is the development of new synthetic
              methodology based on radical  anion intermediates, specifically samarium or tin
              associated ketyls which have a distinct free  radical component as well as an
              accompanying anionic behavior.  The ketylmediated opening  of oxygen and
              nitrogen heterocycles and carbocyclic rings with samarium iodide and tin
              hydride  will be studied.  In each case, one or two new bonds will be formed at
              the expense of either a  carbon-oxygen, carbon-nitrogen, or carbon-carbon bond.
               Mechanistic studies will determine the  nature of the tethered atom in terms
              of its ionic or free radical nature as well as the influence  of ring size on
              the fragmentation process.  Subsequent reactions of intermediates will allow 
              tandem processes to occur such as "moving the ring down the chain." 
              Applications of this  methodology will be used on optically active carbohydrate
              templates and to synthesize portions  of two natural products, capsimycin and
              X-206.    With this award, the Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the
              research of Dr. Eric J.  Enholm of the Department of Chemistry at the
              University of Florida.  Professor Enholm will  focus his work on the
              development of new synthetic methodology.  The emphasis of the research  will
              be on the use of radical anion intermediates to initiate fragmentation
              reactions of cyclic  systems, the products of which in turn can undergo further
              reactions.  In this way, one or two  new bonds will be formed at the expense of
              either a carbon-oxygen, carbon-nitrogen or carbon-  carbon bond.
