Title       : Acquisition of JEM-2010 Analytical Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1994    
File        : a9414017

Award Number: 9414017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David T. Shaw dshaw@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jui H. Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph T. Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne A. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eli Ruckenstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9157,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9414017  David T. Shaw      A general purpose analytical electron
              microscope (AEM) Model JEM-2010 with energy dispersive x-ray (EDX) analysis
              capability will be purchased.  The instrument is manufactured by JEOL, Ltd. 
              The AEM will replace the outdated Amray 1000A electron microscope with EDX
              capability purchased thirteen years ago through NSF grant.  The 200kV AEM
              system with a spatial resolution of 2.3 nm will provide both structural and
              chemical information at near-atomic-level.  Data and image processing software
              included with the package will provide better visualization and understanding
              of the microstructure of materials under investigation.  The AEM/EDX equipped
              with a TV monitoring system is controlled by user friendly software, which is
              ideally suited for the large number of users anticipated for this instrument.  
               The AEM will be maintained and operated by a research associate who has
              extensive experience in electron microscopy and sample preparation.  He will be
              responsible for training graduate students and post-doctoral fellows in the
              proper use of the instrument and data interpretation.  The on-going sponsored
              programs will utilize the instrument in the following areas:  phase
              identification in nanocomposite superparamagneric materials; phase
              identification and evolution in oxide superconductors; growth kinetics of
              sputtered and laser deposited semiconductor/superconductor thin films; grain
              boundary and substrate/film interface studies of semiconductor and
              superconducting thin films; and high temperature refractories and catalysts.   
              The analytical electron microscop will generate the following activity:  it
              will (a) enhance the quality of on-going research in materials related sciences
              at the State University of New York; (b) provide a hands-on experience to
              graduate students and post doctoral fellows on the state-of-the-art instrument;
              (c) provide the necessary data for future research programs addressing new
              technologies; and (d) increase university -industrial  collaboration through
              materials characterization and technology transfer.
