Title       : Plant Cell Biology Training Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9414106

Award Number: 9414106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $938532             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilynn E. Etzler MEETZLER@UCDAVIS.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Harada  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1115      RESEARCH TRAINING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9414106  Etzler  This award renews support for a Research Training Group (RTG)
              at the University of California at Davis.  The faculty group includes 13
              members drawn from the Sections on Molecular and Cellular Biology,
              Microbiology, and Plant Biology in the Division of Biological Sciences, and the
              Department of Vegetable Crops.   The RTG emphasizes training at the
              undergraduate and graduate levels with a focus on plant cell biology.  Research
              areas include biogenesis of subcellular compartments, signal transduction and
              intercellular communication, membrane biology, and post-translational
              modification and protein assembly.  Organisms studied by the faculty include
              yeast, unicellular algae, and a variety of higher plants.    Funds provided by
              the award are used to provide stipends for graduate students; support for
              individual students is limited to a maximum of four years.  Funds for support
              of undergraduate training include stipends for summer research activities and
              for continued research during the academic year.  The undergraduate program
              targets upper division students and complements an institutionally-supported
              program for lower division students.  About 10 students each at the
              undergraduate and graduate level are supported in each year.  In addition to
              providing stipends for students, the award has provided support for workshops
              on methodology, seminars and an annual retreat, and has provided partial
              support for equipping and operating a centralized training facility.  The
              facility both trains and assists students in the use of advanced microscopic
              and microchemical instrumentation.  Besides those who are directly supported by
              the award, other students and, in addition, postdoctoral fellows are able to
              participate in the training activities sponsored by the group and are able to
              use the training facility.  Though not supported by the grant, these students
              and postdocs are otherwise full participants in the RTG.  ***
