Title       : Apical Growth of Fungal Hyphae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1993  
File        : a9017130

Award Number: 9017130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Franklin M. Harold   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas P. Money  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The water mold, Achlya bisexualis grows in the form of large,                  
              aseptate hyphae that lend themselves to diverse physical                       
              techniques, light microscopy, and simple surgical procedures.  This            
              proposal is based upon the ability to measure and manipulate the               
              hydrostatic pressure gradient.  A pressure probe has been                      
              constructed adapted from U. Zimmermann's original design, which                
              permits the recording of turgor from growing hyphae and other                  
              eukaryotic microorganisms.  The magnitude of the pressure, its                 
              genesis and regulation and its function as the driving force for               
              extension will be studied.  The pressure probe should also permit              
              adjustments to the hydrostatic pressure, and may serve as the basis            
              for the development of a simple microinjection system.                         
                                                                                             
              Fungal hyphae extend by polarized secretion, laying down new cell              
              wall and plasma membrane at the apex.  The driving force for                   
              extension is supplied by turgor pressure, and cells yield to this              
              global stress by localized, controlled wall synthesis.  The goals              
              of this research are to understand how precursor vesicles are                  
              transported to the apex and what confines their exocytosis to that             
              site; how the polarized pattern of growth is maintained; how                   
              polarized patterns arise anew, as in the emergence of branches; and            
              how the work of surface enlargement is done.  The results of this              
              research will contribute new information about the mechanisms of               
              polarized growth in a fungal system.
