Title       : Cycling of Labile Intermediates at the Oxic/Anoxic Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1991  
File        : a9017737

Award Number: 9017737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255771             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary I. Scranton mscranton@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              More than 90% of the organic carbon buried in marine sediments                 
              each year is found in sediments which are anoxic within a few                  
              centimeters of the sediment-water interface.  In addition, the                 
              amount of organic carbon which is remineralized under anoxic                   
              conditions has been estimated to be between about 10% and                      
              almost 100% of the amount remineralized in oxic environments                   
              and anaerobic decomposition plays an important role in                         
              determining the quantity and chemical composition of the                       
              material which is ultimately buried.  However, the effect of                   
              anoxic conditions on the decomposition rate of specific organic                
              compounds is poorly understood.  One environment in which we                   
              can study the relative importance of changes in turnover rate                  
              constant and changes in production rate to concentrations of                   
              organic compounds is the oxic/anoxic transition zone.  The                     
              oxic/anoxic interface is a region of stratified microbiological                
              populations, and of rapidly changing properties.  This study                   
              will be one of the first to focus on the processes affecting                   
              the distribution and turnover of fermentation intermediates                    
              (hydrogen, acetate, propionate, low molecular weight amines)                   
              and of DOC near the oxic/anoxic interface, and will thus                       
              provide valuable information on sites of water column carbon                   
              regeneration in such systems.  The results also will  provide                  
              insights on how turnover rates of labile compounds vary within                 
              redox gradients, and whether variations in the turnover rates                  
              or in production rates are responsible for concentration                       
              maxima.  When compared with microbiological data, the results                  
              will also provide qualitative information about the roles                      
              played by the different microbial populations in carbon                        
              turnover.
