Title       : Passive Optical Sensing for Automatic Stationkeeping of ROVs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1991      
File        : a9017179

Award Number: 9017179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : August 15,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Shahriar Negahdaripour   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Last decade has seen an increasing demand for use of underwater                
              robotic vehicles for various ocean applications, for example                   
              pipeline laying, inspection, repair, geological survey, etc.                   
              Reliability safety, flexibility, and economics are amongst some of             
              the major factors that demand the development of intelligent                   
              Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs).  This permits more efficient use            
              of the vehicle, operator, and their support ships.  The ultimate               
              goal is the realization of systems with all the intelligence                   
              required to function autonomously in a variety of undersea tasks.              
                                                                                             
              One general capability essential to building some degree of                    
              autonomy into the ROV systems is accurate sensing of position and              
              movements relative to a fix coordinate system or nearby objects.               
              A particular application, as these vehicles become more widely                 
              used, is near-bottom stationkeeping; that is, maintaining a desired            
              position to perform some task near ocean floors.  With the current             
              technology, near-bottom stationkeeping can be done via active                  
              sensing, using acoustic or optical beacons that need to be                     
              positioned accurately on the ocean floor, and recovered upon                   
              completion of the task.  This is costly, tedious, and highly                   
              impractical in applications where active sensing is to be avoided.             
              This three-year project involves the investigation of an                       
              alternative solution to the problem, passive optical sensing by                
              exploiting the bottom natural features as beacons.  The goal is to             
              develop computer vision techniques for extracting information about            
              position and motion of the vehicle by interpreting images of the               
              undersea environment.
