Title       : Identification and Decentrialized Control of Critical Modes in Electrical Power
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1991    
File        : a9017565

Award Number: 9017565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali Feliachi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Electric power systems are examples of integrated                              
              complex nonlinear large-scale systems.  These systems                          
              contain a variety of components from a simple linear                           
              time-invariant continuous or discrete-time system to a                         
              complex nonlinear time varying stochastic system, each of                      
              which can be modeled. Because of these characteristics                         
              conventional analysis and control design methods cannot                        
              be applied to present and future electric power systems.                       
              The research supported in this project is to develop                           
              analytical tools suitable for analysis and control of                          
              complex electric power systems.  Specifically, the project                     
              focuses on:  (1) methodology to identify the critical                          
              modes in a given power system and expand this algorithm                        
              to derive coherency measures, (2) an algorithm to                              
              determine the minimum number of decentralized                                  
              actuators and sensors and their most effective locations,                      
              (3) a method to design robust decentralized controllers,                       
              and (4) applications of these techniques to power system                       
              stability and control problems.  These algorithms are                          
              effective for a wide range of operating conditions.  The                       
              methods are developed by investigating eigenstructure                          
              dynamics, sensitivity analysis, transfer function residues,                    
              and robust control design theory.  The problem is                              
              formulated in deterministic as well as stochastic                              
              frameworks using time and frequency domain techniques.                         
              Issues such as model uncertainties, nonlinearities, wide                       
              range of loading conditions, structural changes, controller                    
              structures, and computational efficiency will be the foci                      
              of the research.
