Title       : The Role of Sarcodine-Algal Symbiotic Associations in Upper Ocean Carbon and
               Nitrogen Cycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9017173

Award Number: 9017173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140346             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony F. Michaels   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bermuda Biol Sta Research
	      17 Biological Station
	      Ferry Reach, GE 01, BD      /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The three classes of symbiont-bearing sarcodines                          
              (acantharia, polycystine radiolaria and foraminifera) are a                    
              conspicuous component of upper ocean communities.  Most of the                 
              previous research on the ecology of these taxa has been                        
              concentrated on a single species or limited group of species.                  
              Dr. Michaels and colleagues will simultaneously examine the                    
              ecological role of the entire assemblage of these three                        
              protozoa. Their research examines two hypotheses:  1.  In                      
              nutrient-poor oceanic environments, the symbiont primary                       
              production in the entire population of acantharia, polycystine                 
              radiolaria and foraminifera will represent a significant                       
              fraction of the total primary production and will dominate the                 
              production by large cells (operationally defined as cells                      
              larger than 74um).  2. Sarcodines will be a disproportionately                 
              important component of sinking material from the euphotic zone                 
              compared with their suspended biomass. Symbiont production                     
              rates of the entire population of symbiont-bearing sarcodines                  
              are determined through a combination of  large volume and                      
              diver-collected production measurements to evaluate the                        
              importance of this production relative to total primary                        
              production.  The significance of these planktonic protests for                 
              the vertical flux of material is estimated by the concurrent                   
              measurement of both the stocks of sarcodines and the rate of                   
              sinking export. These measurements are coordinated with the                    
              GOFS Time-Series Study at Bermuda (participation in two                        
              cruises per year), which enables the investigators to view                     
              their results from a large, seasonal perspective.
