Title       : Dissertation Research: Settlement and Agriculture in Tiwanaku, Bolivia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1990   
File        : a9017234

Award Number: 9017234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8450               (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Mathews  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Alan Kolata, Mr. James Mathews will                 
              conduct archaeological survey and excavation to collect data for               
              his doctoral dissertation.  He will examine the relationship                   
              between the rise of the Tiwanaku state and changes in methods of               
              agricultural production.  The Tiwanaku civilization emerged in                 
              the Lake Titicaca Basin of Bolivia between 200 BC and 1100 AD.                 
              During its height, it controlled an area encompassing much of                  
              present-day Bolivia, southern Peru, and northern Chile.                        
              Preliminary evidence indicates that during this period the state               
              economy was based on surplus agricultural production through the               
              use of an intensive system which employed raised fields.                       
              However, it is unclear how the early stages of this process                    
              developed.  To shed light on this question Mr. Mathews will                    
              conduct an intensive systematic survey of prehispanic settlement               
              and agricultural features in one section of the Tiwanaku region.               
              These data will be supplemented with limited archaeological                    
              excavation.  Correlations between change in settlement pattern                 
              and agricultural expansion should then provide a better                        
              understanding of the long-term development of these linked                     
              political and economic systems.                                                
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  First, it will                
              increase our understanding of how large preindustrial states                   
              arise and are maintained.  Secondly, it may contribute to the                  
              development of appropriate technologies for third world                        
              countries.  In Bolivia today these same areas are much less                    
              intensively cultivated than in the past, and hopefully, Mr.                    
              Mathews will gain useful information about how the prehistoric                 
              agricultural system functioned.  Finally, this project will                    
              assist in the training of an extremely promising young scientist.
