Title       : High Performance Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer Upgrade of Advanced Scanning
               Ion Microprobe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1994    
File        : a9017112

Award Number: 9017112
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $849107             (Estimated)
Investigator: Riccardo Levi-Setti riccardo@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              We propose a biological instrumentation development program aimed              
              at a radical upgrade of the mass discrimination capability and                 
              secondary ion detection sensitivity of the University of Chicago               
              high resolution Scanning Ion Microprobe (UC SIM).  This is to be               
              accomplished by replacing the existing RF quadrupole mass filter               
              with a high performance magnetic sector mass spectrometer.  The                
              design and construction of appropriate transfer optics, and                    
              modification to the present secondary ion extraction system,                   
              together with high voltage and hardware construction, will be                  
              required to implement this goal.  The pursuit of fundamental                   
              biological studies at a much improved level of performance with                
              this instrument, that has already contributed substantial                      
              advances in many areas that benefit from imaging microanalysis,                
              justifies the proposed upgrade.                                                
                                                                                             
              Established biologists from several academic institutions will                 
              collaborate with us in exciting applications of the upgraded                   
              microprobe, in all cases continuation and amplification of                     
              successful pilot experiments already carried out with the UC SIM.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              These applications will aim at:                                                
                                                                                             
                   (a) Director mapping of the distribution of isotope-labelled              
                       nucleotides in human chromosomes and evaluation of the                
                       nucleotide content of fragile sites.                                  
                   (b) Identification of the mineral phases involved in bone                 
                       formation and of the mechanism of bone resorption                     
                       initiated by osteoclasts.  This will entail experiments               
                       with Ca isotopes as tracers, and the detection and                    
                       measurement of phosphorus.                                            
                   (c) Localization and kinetics of trace elements in tooth and              
                       bone tissues, relative to microstructure.                             
                       Microstructural study of organs (bone, brain) affected                
                       by aluminum.                                                          
                   (d) Study of the role of calcium in neuronal ischemia using               
                       retinal neurons as model system.  These studies will                  
                       make use of Ca isotopes and isotope-labelled                          
                       nucleotides as tracers.
