Title       : Mechanisms of Regulation of Cholesterol Transport in Steroidogenic Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1993       
File        : a9017752

Award Number: 9017752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vassilios Papadopoulos papadopv@gunet.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The long term goal of this project is the understanding of the                 
              hormonal regulation of steroidogenesis.  Steroid biosynthesis                  
              begins with the transport of the initial substrate, cholesterol,               
              from intracellular stores to the outer mitochondrial membranes.                
              Following this process, the rate limiting step in steroidogenesis              
              occurs, which is transport of cholesterol from the outer to the                
              inner mitochondrial membrane, where its metabolism to steroid                  
              hormones starts.  This investigator has identified an intrinsic                
              outer mitochondrial membrane protein participating in mitochondrial            
              cholesterol transport.  This protein is known as the peripheral-               
              type benzodiazepine receptor (PBR).  An investigation of the                   
              mechanisms by which PBR regulates cholesterol transport in                     
              adrenocortical and testicular Leydig cells is proposed.  At first,             
              the hypothesis that PBR regulate the release or migration of the               
              outer mitochondrial membrane steroidogenic pool of cholesterol will            
              be examined using in vitro reconstitution experiments of                       
              mitochondrial membranes.  Electron microscope studies on the                   
              localization of the receptor will be performed.  The role of PBR               
              in hormone-stimulated steroid biosynthesis will be investigated.               
              Phosphorylation of PBR, identification of the protein kinase                   
              responsible for this, and its correlation with the function of PBR             
              will be examined.                                                              
                                                                                             
              This research is based on a novel finding that a receptor for                  
              certain neurotransmitter antagonists that had been known for their             
              effects on the nervous system is also found on the outer membranes             
              of mitochondria.  Preliminary results suggest that this receptor               
              is involved in regulating a key step in the regulation of steroid              
              hormone biogenesis.  The results of this research should elucidate             
              the role of this receptor in the physiologically important process             
              of steroid hormone production.
