Title       : Collaborative Research: Integrated Field and Laboratory Studies of Foraminiferal
               Taphonomy in Quaternary Carbonate and Siliciclastic Depositional Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1991  
File        : a9017968

Award Number: 9017968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87233              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. David Liddell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Taphonomic alteration of foraminifera from Quaternary                     
              siliciclastic deposits in the northern Gulf of California will be              
              quantified through field and laboratory studies of test resistance             
              to abrasion, dissolution, bioerosion, and transport.  The close                
              juxtaposition of Holocene and Pleistocene deposits will allow the              
              evaluation of those processes involved in the transformation from              
              living foraminiferal biotas through near-surface sediment                      
              assemblages to preserved fossil assemblages.  The benefits from                
              such an approach include:  1) The identification of test                       
              morphotypes which predominate within assemblages accumulating under            
              particular environmental regimes.  2) Testing of the preservability            
              of taphonomic signatures.  3) When combined with data on the                   
              relative abundances of living species and test production rates,               
              the determination of the relative contributions of population                  
              dynamics and taphonomic processes to the formation of sediment                 
              assemblages.  4)The determination of test characteristics which                
              confer resistance to destruction has important evolutionary                    
              implications and should lead to the better understanding of the                
              morphological constraints on inhabiting particular environments.               
              The above information will be integrated with that obtained                    
              previously from Holocene carbonate environments at Jamaica,                    
              resulting in the development of broadly encompassing taphofacies               
              models for microfossil assemblages.  As these models are based upon            
              test morphotypes, rather than particular species, they should be               
              applicable to numerous environments and time intervals.
