Title       : Respiration-linked Metal Reduction in Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1990    
File        : a9017525

Award Number: 9017525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Myers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Dakota State Univ
	      Box 2201, Admin 130
	      Brookings, SD  570071998    605/688-4181

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1142,
Abstract    :
              Microbes that can couple their anaerobic growth to the reduction               
              of manganese(IV) and iron(III) have only recently been isolated                
              and make it possible to investigate the physiology and                         
              biochemistry of the microbial processes responsible for the use                
              of manganese(IV) and iron(III) as terminal electron acceptor for               
              anaerobic respiration.  These microbes may act as important                    
              biogeochemical agents for the cycling of these metals in aquatic               
              and soil environments.  The more immediate objectives of this                  
              project include the study of one such microbe, Shewanella                      
              (formerly Alteromonas) putrefaciens strain MR-1, including: (1)                
              determination of the growth energetics when growth is coupled to               
              the reduction of manganese or iron, and comparison of these                    
              energetics to those involving the use of other electron                        
              acceptors(O2, nitrate, and fumarate); (2) determination and                    
              preliminary characterization of the electron transport components              
              involved in the respiratory reduction of these metals; and (3)                 
              purification and characterization the terminal reductases                      
              responsible for the reduction of these metals.                                 
                                                                                             
              Several aspects of this work form the foundation for its                       
              scientific rationale.  First, the ability of certain bacteria to               
              couple their growth to the dissolution of manganese and iron                   
              oxides represents a novel form of bacterial metabolism; this                   
              project uncovers aspects of bacterial physiology and biochemistry              
              heretofore unknown.  Gaining insight into these mechanisms                     
              broadens the current state of knowledge concerning anaerobic                   
              (i.e. oxygen-free) respiration, knowledge which is currently                   
              limited to studies of only a few bacteria.  Such versatility                   
              makes this bacterium a valuable model for studying the components              
              and regulation of oxygen-free respiration.  Thirdly, as this                   
              bacterium could make a significant contribution to the cycling of              
              manganese and iron in aquatic sediments and flooded soils,                     
              knowledge of its mechanisms of metal reduction enhances our                    
              understanding of the roles of metal-reducing bacteria in the                   
              environment.  Overall, the studies lead to new ways of thinking                
              about oxygen-free respiration, as well as the environmental                    
              cycling of certain metals.
