Title       : Optimizing Control of LIquid-Liquid Extraction Columns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1993     
File        : a9017138

Award Number: 9017138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129377             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence L. Tavlarides lltavlar@ecs.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Liquid-liquid extraction is an important separation process                    
              and a key step in recently emerging technologies such as                       
              hydrometallurgical production of non-ferrous metals, treatment                 
              of dilute waste streams for metal recovery and hazardous waste                 
              elimination, refining and reprocessing uranium and plutonium                   
              in the nuclear fuel cycle and nuclear waste management, and                    
              biochemical separations.  It all plays a major role in                         
              traditional separation such as hydrodesulfurization in the                     
              petroleum industry.  Industrial scale equipment for                            
              liquid-liquid extraction include column contactors and                         
              continuous flow stirred tanks.  There is a lack of measuring                   
              techniques for column contactors which has been one of the                     
              reasons for the limited number of control studies for this                     
              process.  The development of a noninvasive ultrasonic                          
              technique in the PI's laboratory provides the opportunity of a                 
              new initiative in the control of the extraction process.                       
              Also, in situ miniature                                                        
              phase-separation devices developed at Syracuse University can                  
              be used in combination with concentration measuring probes                     
              (e.g., fiber optic, conductivity, refraction probes, etc.) and                 
              introduce a new possibility for multivariable control and                      
              on-line optimization.  This work is an attempt to utilize the                  
              above techniques for a safe, multivariable control of the                      
              extractors at optimal conditions.  Further, these techniques                   
              are the impetus for the second objective, to develop a                         
              multivariable non-linear predictive control algorithm for                      
              optimal operation.                                                             
                                                                                             
              An optimizing control strategy for liquid-liquid extraction                    
              columns is planned with the objectives of (i) controlling the                  
              dispersed phase holdup inside the extractor, (ii) ensuring                     
              safe operation with respect to flooding or phase inversion,                    
              and (iii) controlling the solute concentration to provide                      
              optimum extraction efficiency.  The process will be modelled                   
              by (i) linear models of first order transfer functions with                    
              dead time, and (ii) nonlinear models of population balance                     
              equations which include droplet interactions of breakage and                   
              coalescence.  Both models will be applied for the control of                   
              the process in the following sequence:                                         
                 - Adaptive gain-scheduling control of the dispersed phase                   
              holdup  by using linear models, with the objective of showing                  
              the application of the ultrasonic technique in the control of                  
              the extraction process.                                                        
                -  Nonlinear predictive control of the dispersed phase                       
              holdup without mass transfer by applying the population                        
              balance equations, to demonstrate the usefulness of physical                   
              models.                                                                        
                -  Nonlinear predictive control of the dispersed phase                       
              holdup    during mass transfer.                                                
                 -  Multivariable nonlinear predictive control of holdup and                 
                concentration using the population balance equations in an                   
              extended formulation to include mass transfer and                              
              concentrations.
