Title       : U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Physics): Search for Gravitational Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1993      
File        : a9017233

Award Number: 9017233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32424              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter F. Michelson e7.f69@forsythe.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 9200      US CHINA COOP IN BASIC SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              10        Physical Sciences                       
Program Ref : 1249,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a continuation of a collaborative project between                      
              Peter F. Michelson of Stanford University and He En.ke of the                  
              Institute of Gravitational Physics of Zhongshan University in                  
              Guangzhou, China.  This project, which began in 1985, is                       
              sponsored by NSF and the Chinese State Education Commission.                   
                                                                                             
              The direct detection of gravitational radiation is still the                   
              most important goal of research in gravitational physics and                   
              one of the most challenging problems in experimental physics.                  
              The detection of gravity waves would not only be of fundamental                
              importance to physics, but would open up an important new                      
              astronomical window on the universe.  Resonant.mass detectors                  
              have been under development at several institutions including                  
              Stanford and Zhongshan universities.  The Stanford detector                    
              has been utilized in coincidence experiments that have set                     
              the lowest upper limits to date on the flux of gravitational                   
              radiation.  Under the cooperative program between the                          
              Stanford and Zhongshan groups during the past five years, a                    
              coincidence experiment has been conducted, technical                           
              information about large.scale cryogenic detectors has been                     
              exchanged, and most recently, investigations of advanced                       
              antenna materials and vibration isolation techniques at low                    
              temperatures have been conducted.                                              
                                                                                             
              In the proposed study, the investigators will continue to                      
              develop improved detector technology, principally in the                       
              areas of vibration isolation and materials studies, undertake                  
              a collaborative effort to repair and upgrade the 4 K detector                  
              at Stanford, exchange information about other gravitational                    
              physics experiments in which there is mutual interest, and at                  
              the earliest opportunity, carry out another coincidence                        
              search for gravitational radiation.
