Title       : Membrane Transport of Melibiose by Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1993    
File        : a9017255

Award Number: 9017255
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Wilson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of the research is to elucidate the mechanism of action               
              of the carrier molecule in a substrate-cation cotransport system               
              in the bacterium E. coli, with specific focus on the melobiose                 
              carrier.  Isolation of spontaneous mutants deficient in cation                 
              recognition and sugar recognition will be followed by analysis of              
              their physiological abnormalities in membrane transport.  The                  
              physiological effects of amino-acid substitution in the carrier                
              molecule, particularly in membrane-spanning regions, will be                   
              examined.  Use of site-directed mutagenesis is expected to provide             
              an experimental test of the "helical hairpin" hypothesis for                   
              insertion of the melobiose carrier into membranes.  Other studies              
              will employ polyclonal antibodies in an attempt to determine the               
              orientation of presumed "loop" regions of the carrier in the                   
              membrane.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The means whereby small molecules such as sugars and inorganic ions            
              gain entrance to cells through the lipid-rich cell membrane is a               
              matter of fundamental interest and importance; active transport                
              across membranes often involves specific carrier molecules and it              
              is one of these--the melobiose carrier--that is the focus of this              
              research.  The goal of the project is to understand the molecular              
              aspects of the carrier molecule that permit it to bind specifically            
              to some molecules and not others, and to be inserted into cell                 
              membranes in a manner that permits cotransport of sugars and                   
              cations in appropriate directions.                                             
               //
