Title       : Excavations at the Middle Paleoithic Site of La Quina (Charente), France
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1993     
File        : a9017307

Award Number: 9017307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114663             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Jelinek   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Arthur Jelinek will              
              conduct three seasons of archaeological research at the site of                
              La Quina which is located in the Charente region of France.  This              
              important Mousterian site has been the focus of this group for                 
              several years and the results to date well justify continued                   
              excavation.  The site itself contains a series of stratified                   
              deposits which are extremely rich in both faunal and cultural                  
              remains.  Human skeletal material has also been recovered.  To                 
              date, approximately 6,000 lithic objects and 11,000 bones have                 
              been catalogued.  Over the next three field seasons, the team                  
              will expand the excavations in all levels.  Several approaches                 
              will be attempted to provide absolute dates for each level and                 
              archaeological materials will be analyzed to shed insight into                 
              Mousterian cultural and subsistence practices.                                 
                                                                                             
              Mousterian culture dates from the most recent part of the                      
              Pleistocene (Ice Age) and is associated with Neanderthal peoples               
              who were the immediate predecessors to modern humans.  In recent               
              years, these Neanderthals have been the subject of intense                     
              archaeological debate.  Some have argued that this group acted in              
              ways significantly different from the succeeding Upper                         
              Paleolithic groups and lacked the capacity for modern culture.                 
              Others argue that Mousterian industries and the behaviors they                 
              reflect are quite complex.  Unfortunately, little well collected               
              data exists to permit examination of the issue and in this                     
              context the site of La Quina is particularly important because of              
              the rich cultural materials it contains.  The large faunal                     
              assemblage should permit reconstruction of Mousterian hunting                  
              techniques and demonstrate how these changed and developed over                
              time.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will yield                 
              data of interest to a large group of archaeologists.  It will                  
              provide insight into the background from which physically modern               
              humans emerged and shed light on the process which led to this                 
              development.  Because Dr. Jelinek includes many students in this               
              project, it should aid in the scientific recruitment.
