Title       : Regulation of Neurohormone Synthesis in Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1994  
File        : a9017757

Award Number: 9017757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry L. Keeley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposed research will examine neurohormone synthesis and                  
              secretion in insects using the hypertrehalosemic hormone (HTH) as              
              the model.  HTH belongs to the adipokinetic/red pigment-                       
              concentrating hormone family that is widespread among insects.                 
              These hormones all stimulate mobilization of fat body nutrient                 
              stores to elevate circulating metabolites for energy. HTH also                 
              stimulates heme synthesis during fat body mitochondrial maturation             
              and acts synergistically with juvenile hormone to enhance protein              
              synthesis.  Hence, HTH is critical for regulating insect basal                 
              metabolism through effects on energy production/consumption.                   
              Measurements of HTH synthesis-secretion will be made by incubating             
              corpora cardiaca with ?3H!tryptophan and determine the amount of               
              ?3H!HTH formed using reversed-phase chromatography and scintillation           
              spectrometry.  The research will examine HTH synthesis-secretion               
              relative to a series of physiological variables that include: age,             
              sex, circadian rhythms, feeding, endocrine titers and effects by               
              other parts of the nervous system.  This research will provide a               
              base of data for future investigations into how physiological                  
              effectors control neurohormone gene expression in higher animals.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              Physiological changes in response to environmental changes in                  
              animals are mediated by the nervous system and, in turn, by                    
              neurohormones, peptide hormones that are produced and secreted by              
              the nervous system.  This proposal describes studies on one such               
              neurohormone, the hypertrehalosemic hormone (HTH) of the cockroach             
              Blaberus discoidalis, a hormone involved in the mobilization of                
              energy reserves from the fat body of the insect.  The project will             
              isolate the gene encoding HTH, and will study the physiological                
              regulation of HTH synthesis at the gene level.  The results should             
              provide basic information about the role of neurohormones in                   
              controlling physiological responses to environmental stimuli.  Such            
              basic information may also be useful in future applications in the             
              area of insect pest control.//
