Title       : The Social Implications of Changing Knowledge in the Life Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9017187

Award Number: 9017187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $928779             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila S. Jasanoff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,1109,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Current rapid developments in the biological sciences are enlarging            
              and altering our understanding of living systems, from individual              
              cells to global ecosystems.  These changes in knowledge carry                  
              profound, but insufficiently explored implications for social                  
              institutions and policies.  Historians, social scientists and                  
              biologists in the Program on Science, Technology and Society of                
              Cornell University are addressing these implications in a series               
              of five interrelated research projects:  (1) biology and the legal             
              order, (2) environmental change, (3) communication and use of                  
              scientific knowledge, (4) historical studies of scientific change,             
              and (5) women and biology.                                                     
                                                                                             
              In the first research project, historians, lawyers and ethicians               
              are examining the legal, social and ethical implications of recent             
              developments in genetic screening, gene therapy, and environmental             
              regulations.  Family, employment, health, education, and criminal              
              justice are all affected by the advances in biological sciences and            
              issues of privacy, equal protection, due process, free exercise of             
              religion, academic freedom, and separation of powers immediately               
              come to the fore.  Environmental scientists, historians and social             
              scientists are joining together in the second project to                       
              investigate questions like the socioeconomic implications of global            
              change, the pattern and scale in spatially explicit ecological                 
              models, integrated resource management for an ecologically and                 
              economically sound agriculture, and social construction of                     
              environmental modeling. Research in area 3 focuses on the role and             
              activities of scientists and other social actors in the                        
              dissemination of scientific information through varied channels of             
              communication.  In area 4, researchers aim to develop an                       
              understanding of current developments in the life sciences within              
              the framework of historical and philosophical perspectives on                  
              science in general; and to apply ideas about the meaning and nature            
              of scientific change to assessing the significance and direction               
              of contemporary trends in the life sciences.  Under "women and                 
              biology, investigators are examining the historical phenomenon of              
              why American women scientists have more often gone into biological             
              fields rather than into physical, mathematical or engineering                  
              specialties and the implications of this phenomenon for the "style"            
              of work in the life sciences.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Over five years, this grant supports postdoctoral fellows, graduate            
              and undergraduate student to participate in research and training              
              in each of these areas of research.
