Title       : Collision Cross Sections for Electron-Impact Dominated Processes in Etching
               Plasmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1993     
File        : a9017211

Award Number: 9017211
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219532             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt H. Becker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,9178,9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Plasma based processes such as plasma etching and plasma                       
              enhanced chemical vapor deposition are used in the fabrication                 
              of microelectronic devices.  Models of the system, used for                    
              design and control purposes, require a microscopic data base                   
              of the ground and excited-state densities of the various                       
              species in a "cold" plasma.  Physical parameters such as the                   
              gas mixture, gas pressure, power deposition, flow rate and                     
              reactor geometry are needed to determine the characteristics                   
              of the plasma.  Electronic collisions are the dominant                         
              processes in the initial breakdown of the plasma.                              
              Dissociative and/or ionizing electron collisions play a                        
              pivotal role, since they produce the species that are                          
              responsible for the etching and deposition.  Building a                        
              comprehensive data base, including experimentally derived data                 
              on electron collision cross sections, will help in the                         
              modelling and design of plasma processes.                                      
                                                                                             
              The P.I.'s plan to study dissociative and ionizing electron                    
              collisions with the reactive constituents of processing                        
              plasmas, and the stable radicals resulting from their break-                   
              up, along three lines:                                                         
                                                                                             
              (1) Laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) studies of the formation                  
              of neutral ground-state fragments using an electron beam / gas                 
              beam / laser beam apparatus set up to determine the absolute                   
              cross sections and appearance potentials for the formation of                  
              neutral ground-state dissociation fragments.                                   
                                                                                             
              (2) Studies of ionization and dissociative ionization                          
              processes- absolute ionization cross sections, appearance                      
              potentials, mass spectral cracking patterns - using a crossed                  
              fast atomic beam / electron beam apparatus.                                    
                                                                                             
              (3) Time of flight studies of energetic metastable formation                   
              of dissociation fragments using the above apparatus.
