Title       : Radiation-Induced Reactions in Polymer Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1991      
File        : a9017032

Award Number: 9017032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : October 1,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Bratoljub H. Milosavljevic   (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Kerry Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boris Kidrich Inst Nuc Sc
	      Vinca POB 522 11001 Belgrade
	      Belgrade, YO  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5954      YUGOSLAVIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              12        Chemistry                               
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this three-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research            
              project in polymer chemistry between B. Milosavljevic of the Boris             
              Kidrich Institute for Nuclear Science and J. Kerry Thomas of the               
              University of Notre Dame is to investigate the effects of high                 
              energy radiation on polymer materials.  The researchers propose to             
              develop a theory on the nature of the products formed by high energy           
              radiation.  The high energy radiation work will be carried out at              
              the Boris Kidrich Institute and polymer characterization will be               
              handled by the University of Notre Dame on their pulsed laser                  
              facility.   The results of this research on the use of radiation to            
              create miniature circuits on polymer materials will have an                    
              important impact in the microelectronics area.                                 
                                                                                             
              This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on                  
              Cooperation in Science and Technology and is supported through a               
              joint fund consisting of matching contributions from the U.S. and              
              Yugoslav governments.  The U.S. contribution is provided annually by           
              the Department of State.  No NSF funds are involved.  The award,               
              except for funds for U.S. scientist travel, is made to the Yugoslav            
              institution.
