Title       : Characterization of a HSP7O Cognate Upregulated During Cold Acclimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1992  
File        : a9017625

Award Number: 9017625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Guy clguy@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The process of cold acclimation is not well understood, but                    
              evidence is accruing for a genetic role in this process.  This                 
              project will focus on one aspect of gene regulation during cold                
              acclimation, and the relationship of increased protein expression              
              in the adjustment of metabolism to low temperature in plants. A                
              member of a class of proteins that becomes more abundant in                    
              plants and is therefore upregulated in during exposure to low                  
              temperature will be characterized in terms of structural                       
              organization of the protein(s) and gene(s), and regulation in                  
              response to low temperature and other related environmental                    
              stresses.  Previous work has demonstrated that the synthesis of                
              these proteins in leaf tissue is closely associated with cold                  
              acclimation (cold acclimation protein CAP).  Using preparative                 
              electrophoresis techniques, sufficient amounts of one of these                 
              proteins have been obtained (CAP79) to determine amino acid                    
              sequences of CNBr fragments using a gas-phase sequenator to                    
              separate phenylthiohydantoin-amino acid derivatives.  The amino                
              acid sequences, show that CAP79 is a 70kDa heat shock cognate.                 
              The sequence information was also used in the synthesis of                     
              oligonucleotides to probe a lambda Zap II cDNA library and to                  
              amplify specific genomic sequences by polymerase chain reaction                
              (PCR).  Polyclonal antisera to this group of proteins have been                
              modified.  Using these antibodies inframe cDNAs will be isolated               
              the identity of clones selected by oligos from the expression                  
              library will be confirmed.  The cDNAs will be characterized, and               
              used to isolate additional genomic sequences, with the intent to               
              characterize their structure and regulation by environmental                   
              factors that influence cold tolerance levels.  Isolation of all                
              parts of these genes including the regulatory regions is the                   
              goal.  Cell fractionation and immunocytochemical staining studies              
              are planned to determine the cellular localization of this low                 
              temperature upregulated protein(s).  Experiments are described                 
              that may suggest associative interactions of CAP79 with other                  
              cellular components, and potential for repair of cryoinjury to                 
              cold sensitive proteins.//
