Title       : Silica Diagenesis: Deeply Buried Sandstones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1990  
File        : a9017748

Award Number: 9017748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129523             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond Siever   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The diagenesis of deeply buried quartz arenite sandstones is                   
              important in the evolution of sedimentary basins, including                    
              paleohydrology and thermal history and the transition from high                
              grade diagenesis to low grade matamorphism.  The primary aim of                
              petrographic study will be to measure quantitatively cementation               
              by quartz and carbonate, pressure solution (geometry of grain                  
              contacts, timing and extent of chemical compaction), and porosity              
              loss as a function of pressure, temperature and integrated time-               
              temperature history.  Samples will be examined by petrographic                 
              microscopy, cathodo-luminescence and SEM, as well as by some                   
              chemical and istotopic analyses.  The diagenetic history will be               
              reconstructed and set in the context of burial and thermal                     
              history.  Pressure solution will be one of the main focuses,                   
              especially as it pertains to the transition between the high                   
              grade diagenesis of deep burial and the low grade metamorphism of              
              parts of deformed mountain belts.  Sandstones to be sampled                    
              include the Pennsylvanian of the Green River basin, Pennsylvanian              
              and Ordovician of the Anadarko basin, and Cambrian of the                      
              Michigan and Illinois basins.  Now uplifted undeformed and                     
              deformed sections of the Pennsylvanian of Pennsylvania will be                 
              compared with the Rhode Island Pennsylvanian and the Silurian                  
              Clough quartzite of New Hampshire.  The oldest sandstones will be              
              of Proterozoic quartz arenites from a well-studied section of                  
              Spitsbergen.  This study has practical significance in the loss                
              of porosity of quartz arenites at great depths (4-9km), which                  
              influences the mass transfer of fluids and thus production of oil              
              and, especially, gas.
