Title       : The Government-University-Industry Research Roundtable
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1991       
File        : a9017192

Award Number: 9017192
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don I. Phillips   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9143,9170,
Abstract    :
              The National Academy of Sciences will extend for two more years                
              the Government-University-Industry Research Roundtable (GUIRR).                
              Initiated as an experiment six years ago, the Roundtable is now                
              recognized as an established, unique organization in national                  
              science and technology policy affairs.  Federal agencies, state                
              governments, universities, and industry all look to the                        
              Roundtable as the only forum in the United States that brings                  
              together the leaders of all sectors of the research enterprise on              
              an ongoing basis and in a manner that injects imaginative thought              
              into the policy process and more effective procedures into the                 
              nation's research system.                                                      
                                                                                             
              The focus of the Roundtable continues to be on the three areas                 
              that have been the core of the Roundtable agenda since it was                  
              established:                                                                   
                                                                                             
                   1)   the academic science and engineering research                        
                        enterprise--its organizational arrangements, physical                
                        infrastructure, and support mechanisms;                              
                                                                                             
                   2)   new alliances between universities and other sectors                 
                        and between federal and state governments--their                     
                        contributions to academic research and teaching and to               
                        the processes of technical change and innovation in                  
                        industry, and the difficult policy issues that arise as              
                        a result of the increased interactions; and                          
                                                                                             
                   3)   the identification, recruitment, and retention of                    
                        science and engineering talent.                                      
                                                                                             
              A new proposed initiative, a comprehensive look at the                         
              management of the overall R&D enterprise, is a logical extension               
              of the work in these three areas.  This agenda is the result of                
              extensive discussions within the working groups and the                        
              Roundtable Council over the past year, together with input from                
              the relevant constituency groups, and is based on the                          
              accomplishments of current activities.  In addition, the                       
              Roundtable will respond to issues vital to science and                         
              engineering that emerge in the policy environment.                             
                                                                                             
              The topics addressed by the NAS Government-University-Industry                 
              Research Roundtable have direct relevance to NSF planning and                  
              evaluation activities.
