Title       : Star Formation in Molecular Clouds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1992  
File        : a9017710

Award Number: 9017710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank N. Bash fnb@astro.as.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neal J. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel T. Jaffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This grant supports the research of a group of scientists at the               
              University of Texas with the common theme of star formation in                 
              molecular clouds.  Drs. Frank Bash, John Davis, Neal Evans, and                
              Daniel Jaffe use a variety of observational techniques, ranging                
              from optical imaging to radio wavelength aperture synthesis, but               
              the primary focus is on submillimeter wave observations at the                 
              CalTech Submillimeter Observatory in Hawaii.  This group studies               
              star formation in external galaxies, in giant molecular clouds in              
              our Galaxy, and in nearby molecular clouds which are forming low               
              mass stars.  The observations are used to answer general questions             
              about the forces which control star formation, exploring in                    
              particular the role of spiral density waves and already formed                 
              stars in stimulating or preventing further star formation.                     
                                                                                             
              Examination of the physical conditions in star forming regions in              
              our Galaxy can elucidate those conditions and processes which favor            
              star formation at a level of detail not possible when observing                
              other galaxies.  Comparison of regions forming stars of very                   
              different masses can lead to a better understanding of what                    
              determines the initial mass function.  On the other hand, studies              
              of other galaxies can more easily assess the role of stimulated                
              star formation, especially in ring galaxies and in galaxies with               
              strong spiral density waves.  The research of Dr. Bash and his                 
              colleagues concerns the overall environment of star forming clouds             
              both in our Galaxy and in external galaxies.
