Title       : Studies of Interstellar Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1992  
File        : a9017082

Award Number: 9017082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce T. Draine draine@astro.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9256,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This grant supports Dr. Draine's research on several topics within             
              the area of theoretical astrophysics of diffuse interstellar                   
              matter.  The topics include: (A) excitation of interstellar                    
              molecular hydrogen, with the aim of being able to calculate                    
              accurately the non-local thermodynamic equilibrium excitation of               
              and emission from molecular hydrogen under various conditions; (B)             
              structure of non-stationary photodissociation fronts, including                
              both stationary and propagating fronts, with the aim of being able             
              to predict detailed emission spectra; and (C) interstellar magneto-            
              hydrodynamic shock waves in both diffuse and dense clouds,                     
              including study of the non-linear development of instabilities in              
              magneto-hydrodynamic shocks.                                                   
                                                                                             
              (A) As the most abundant molecule in the interstellar medium,                  
              molecular hydrogen is a critical diagnostic for regions of warm                
              molecular gas such as photodissociation regions and shock fronts.              
              It is essential to have accurate theoretical calculations of the               
              spectrum of collisionally excited molecular hydrogen.  (B) It has              
              recently become clear that time-dependent photodissociation fronts             
              are of major importance.  The neglect of gas flow through such a               
              front is a major limitation of current models, and Dr. Draine will             
              attempt to rectify this defect.  (C) One of the highlights of                  
              interstellar astrophysics of the last decade, the determination of             
              the spectra of shocks in molecular gas, is in gross disagreement               
              with observation.  Dr. Draine's course of study should help to                 
              eliminate this discrepancy.
