Title       : Regulation of Proteolysis During Legume Germination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1994 
File        : a9017420

Award Number: 9017420
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl A. Wilson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anna Tan-Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The mobilization of protein reserves in the germinating seed                   
              requires the action of a number of proteases at appropriate times              
              during growth of the embryo.  Four such proteases have been                    
              identified in the mung bean (Vigna radiata): proteinase F, vicilin             
              peptidohydrolase, and carboxypeptidase I and II.  The levels of                
              these proteins in mung bean cotyledons will be quantified at                   
              different stages of seed development and germination using specific            
              antibodies.   cDNA clones in lambda-gt11 for each of the proteases             
              will be isolated and used as specific probes to characterize and               
              quantitate protease mRNA levels.  These results will be combined               
              with those for the in vitro translatability of protease gene                   
              transcripts, and the direct determination of protease activities.              
              These studies will pinpoint the level of control of synthesis to               
              transcription, mRNA processing, translation, post-translational                
              processing, or a combination thereof.  The levels of proteases and             
              their mRNAs in cotyledons detached from the embryonic axis shortly             
              after germination will also be examined.  Detachment of the                    
              cotyledons disrupts the normal pattern of changes in the proteases,            
              and may offer insight into the role of phytohormones in the                    
              regulation of these enzymes.                                                   
                                                                                             
              An important part of seed germination and seed viability is the                
              mobilization of stored food reserves such as carbohydrate, protein             
              and lipids.  Little is known about the mobilization of protein                 
              reserves in the seeds of higher plants.  It is not known why                   
              different protein-degrading enzymes appear in different amounts at             
              different times during germination or how this process is                      
              controlled.  The work described in this proposal will develop the              
              molecular tools to study the regulation of the synthesis of four               
              different enzymes involved in protein degradation in mung bean                 
              seeds.  The development of these tools will offer in the future the            
              potential for controlling the process of protein degradation which             
              would impact agriculture, particularly the malting and brewing                 
              industries.//
