Title       : Tectonostratigraphic Development of the Early Mesozoic Newark Basin, Eastern
               North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1991        
File        : a9017785

Award Number: 9017785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90401              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy W. Schlische schlisch@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  A fundamental problem in extensional tectonics is unraveling-              
              three dimensions-the growth and evolution of half-graben-type                 
              basins and their basin-bounding faults.  This is a project to                  
              analyze the transverse and along-strike variations in basin                    
              subsidence through a study of changes in thickness and facies of               
              fixed-period Milankovitch-type lacustrine cycles recorded in six               
              cores to be drilled as part of another NSF-funded research project             
              as well as from correlatable outcrops from other parts of the early            
              Mesozoic Newark rift basin of New York, New Jersey, and                        
              Pennsylvania.  Such an analysis will also aid in the identification            
              of synsedimentary structures.  Variations in cycle thicknesses in              
              a vertical section will be used to constrain the factors affecting             
              the basin's historical (evolutionary) development, including its               
              growth through time.  Mass-balance basin filling models,                       
              constrained by the known geometry of the basin (based on available             
              seismic reflection profiles) as well as by variations in                       
              subsidence, will be constructed to assess the "background" or                  
              intrinsic effects of uniform subsidence and extension rates and                
              uniform input rates of sediment and water on generating the basin's            
              stratigraphic record.  Deviations of the actual stratigraphy                   
              (recorded in the cores) from the filling model's simplified                    
              predictions can then be used to assess changes in subsidence and               
              extension rates as well as changes in sediment and water supply.               
              In addition to furthering our understanding of the three-                      
              dimensional development of half-graben, this study also will                   
              constrain the early rifting history of Pangaea in eastern North                
              America.
