Title       : Ultraviolet Light and Temperature Effects on Reef-Building Corals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1992        
File        : a9017432

Award Number: 9017432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196232             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard M. Wellington Wellington@UH.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Recent explanations for the 1987 Caribbean-wide, mass coral                    
              bleaching event suggest that increased sea surface temperatures                
              and enhanced ultraviolet light penetration were major                          
              contributing factors.  This project will investigate this                      
              hypothesis by conducting a series of experiments designed to                   
              partition the relative effects that UV  light and temperature                  
              have on coral growth and survivorship.  Appropriate experimental               
              levels for UV irradiation will be based on data derived from: i)               
              long-term UV flux measurements recorded in 1989, ii) preliminary               
              field experiments assessing effects of enhanced UV exposures, and              
              iii) UV measurements to be taken in clear tropical oceanic                     
              waters.  Experimental corals (Montastrea annularis and Agaricia                
              lamarcki) held outdoors in UV-transparent acrylic aquaria will be              
              subject to two UV light regimes: 1) ambient UV flux, based on                  
              values obtained form prior long-term monitoring (controls), and                
              2) maximum UV flux simulating the conditions that occurred during              
              the 1987 bleaching event (based on results from preliminary field              
              experiments identifying UV levels leading to coral stress, or on               
              treatment, corals will be subjected to three controlled                        
              temperature regimes: 28oC (control), 30oC and 31oC (peak or near-              
              peak temperatures recorded on reefs in the Caribbean during 1987)              
              for up to two months.  Treatment effects will be assessed by                   
              quantifying changes in colony color, chlorophyll concentration,                
              zooxanthellae densities, mitotic indices and the concentrations                
              of UV blocking pigments form coral tissues (using HPLC).  A                    
              second experiment will separate the differential, and combined,                
              effects of UV-A and -B.  In addition to these experiments, we                  
              will establish a long- term UV monitoring program on Grand Cayman              
              Island, Cayman Island (site of the NOAA Aquarius habitat program)              
              and will relate these findings to observed intra- and                          
              interspecific differences in concentrations of UV pigments in                  
              reef corals along a depth gradient.  These data will constitute                
              an important baseline that can be used to document yearly and                  
              decadal changes in UV light levels resulting from continued                    
              deletion of stratospheric ozone.
