Title       : Developmental Visit-Institute for Earthquake Prediction in Moscow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1992        
File        : a9017984

Award Number: 9017984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerson Sher                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 1,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Switzer ps@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Iain M. Johnstone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5939      US/USSR ACTIVITIES
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal supports a project development visit by Dr.                      
              Paul Switzer, Stanford University to develop a familiarity                     
              with methods and programs of the Soviet team headed by                         
              Professor Keilis-Borok, International Institute of                             
              Earthquake Prediction Theory and Mathematical Geophysics,                      
              Moscow, Russia.  They share a common goal of potential                         
              cooperative research in earthquake prediction and                              
              statistical modelling and analysis.  They anticipate a                         
              technical report describing for U.S. readers the algorithm                     
              "M8" as it was used to obtain the claimed prediction of                        
              the Loma Prieta event.  This report will include a self-                       
              contained description of the features of the seismic                           
              record used and an account of all the parameters fitted.                       
              The understanding obtained in this effort will provide the                     
              basis for future efforts to adapt modern statistical                           
              methods to emperical earthquake prediction and validation.                     
                                                                                             
              This project fulfills the program objective of advancing                       
              scientific knowledge by enabling leading researchers in                        
              the United States and the U.S.S.R. to combine                                  
              complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong                      
              mutual interest and competence in the field of basic                           
              scientific research on the basis of equality, reciptocity,                     
              and mutuality of benefit.//
