Title       : Convective Groundwater Flow Induced by Climatic Gradients inthe Great Basin: A
               Computational Approach to System Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  1991    
File        : a9017724

Award Number: 9017724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193290             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Duffy cxd11@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Present-day environmental fluid flow problems are routinely                    
              concerned with making predictions over large space and time                    
              scales in systems with sparse field data.  The classical approach              
              identifies characteristic length and time scales as a means of                 
              resolving the basic forces or fluxes driving fluid circulation.                
              In a study of the hydrology of closed basins, Duffy and Al-Hassan              
              (1988) applied the concept of scale invariant topography to                    
              construct an empirical topographic distribution for the range                  
              bordering the Pilot Valley Playa in western Utah.  Regional                    
              correlation of mean precipitation with altitude was used to                    
              construct scaled inputs for modeling mountain-front recharge.  At              
              the playa or ephemeral lake, high evaporation rates were observed              
              to produce concentrated brines in the shallow groundwater,                     
              resulting in unstable stratification and the potential for free                
              convection.  These observations guided numerical experiments                   
              conducted over a range of closed -basin geometries, and led to                 
              the development of a force or flux balance for subsurface                      
              circulation driven by mountain precipitation and playa-lake                    
              evaporation.  The results suggest that the playa margin becomes                
              a critical hyhdrologic zone where upwelling groundwaters from                  
              mountain-front recharge (forced convection) and brine                          
              recirculation from the central playa (free convection) converge,               
              producing fresh and/or brackish springs.  The premise of this                  
              work is that the position of the freshwater-saltwater interface                
              represents a balance of hydro-climatic forces in the basin.                    
              Using characteristic lengths and velocities of the closed basin,               
              the Rayleigh number for salinity was shown to be linearly related              
              to a dimensionless group representing the steady-state position                
              of the interface.  The proposed research will attempt to extend                
              previous numerical experiments to include complexities of space                
              and time variability, namely: (1) the dynamic response of                      
              subsurface convection resulting from transient fluctuations in                 
              mountain recharge and playa evaporation; (2) the implications of               
              deterministic and stochastic heterogeneity to the estimation of                
              effective basin parameters; (3) regional flow from multiple-                   
              cascading basins of varying base level; (4) the role of surficial              
              hydrologic processes (runoff); and (5) the significance of                     
              unsaturated flow and the atmosphere-land surface boundary                      
              condition.
