Title       : Novel Probes of Photochemical Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1994   
File        : a9017447

Award Number: 9017447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marye Anne Fox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The structure, chemical properties, photoreactivity, and new                   
              routes for the generation of anions, stable radicals, and radical              
                                                                                             
              ions will be investigated in this project. Structure will be                   
              determined for these intermediates by a comparison of solution                 
              phase and solid state nmr spectroscopy, by electrochemical                     
              techniques, and by employing transient and steady state                        
              illumination as probes for excited state reactivity. Of particular             
                                                                                             
              interest will be the determination of how structure influences the             
                                                                                             
              acidities and oxidation potentials of several families of                      
              dianions, radical ions, and stable radicals. Fundamental                       
              thermochemical information will be attained by correlating rates               
              of photochemical and thermal electron transfer with redox                      
              potentials derived by high speed cyclic voltammetry or                         
              photomodulation voltammetry. A new thrust  exploring                           
              photochemistry in supercritical fluids will seek to probe                      
              solvation effects under carefully controlled conditions. In these              
                                                                                             
              studies, scientifically important questions will be probed of how              
                                                                                             
              aggregation, environment, and solvation affect chemical                        
                                                                                             
              reactivity, particularly electron transfer reactions.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
                                                                                             
              continuing work of Professor Marye Anne Fox at the University of               
                                                                                             
              Texas, Austin Campus. This research will generate results of a                 
                                                                                             
              fundamental nature about reactive intermediates in chemical                    
                                                                                             
              reactions. The mechanistic basis of organic chemistry rests on an              
                                                                                             
              understanding of the properties of reactive intermediates and                  
                                                                                             
              their involvement in chemical transformations. Knowledge of these              
                                                                                             
              intermediates will provide chemists with a better ability to                   
                                                                                             
              predict the course of chemical reactions.
