Title       : Gut Cell Cycles and Diel Feeding Patterns in Acartia Tonsa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1991      
File        : a9017781

Award Number: 9017781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darcy J. Lonsdale dlonsdale@ccmail.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Observations of the feeding activity of copepod populations               
              have revealed a wide range of responses both between and within                
              species.  Feeding may be continuous, with no change in gut                     
              fullness on a diel period, or feeding may occur on a cyclical,                 
              diel pattern.  A diel pattern may be seen in both non-migratory                
              copepods and in the absence of vertical stratification of                      
              chlorophyll a.  Recently, researchers have demonstrated that                   
              nocturnal grazing in Acartia tonsa was timed to lighting                       
              conditions.  However, while light may cue a feeding response,                  
              light conditions alone cannot explain an energetic advantage for               
              cyclical patterns in feeding.  One hypothesis is suggested                     
              Calanus finmarchicus, a vertical migrator, where a cyclical                    
              pattern is seen in gut cell development during feeding under                   
              experimental conditions.  These results indicate that during the               
              course of feeding certain cell types are depleted, and require a               
              non-feeding period to regenerate.  As a vertical migrator, C.                  
              finmarchicus has a natural period during the daylight hours in                 
              which to allow this regeneration.                                              
                   This research will investigate differences that might exist               
              in non-migrating copepods, exposed to continuous food.  This                   
              project will use morphometric analyses of the gut cells of the                 
              nearshore copepod Acartia tonsa over a 24-h period in the                      
              laboratory.  Analyses will be conducted at both the light and                  
              electron-microscope level.  Laboratory conditions will simulated               
              natural light and food conditions, and these results will be                   
              compared to samples taken from the field.  Patterns in                         
              physiological rates (digestive enzyme activity, glutamate                      
              dehydrogenase activity, and respiration rates) and gut fullness                
              will be determined concurrently.
