Title       : Thermodynamics of Site-Specific Binding Processes in Biological Macromolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9406103

Award Number: 9406103
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Enrico Di Cera   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9406103  Di Cera  In the proposed research project we plan to continue to
              develop the  thermodynamic theory of site-specific binding effects.  We have a 
              dual goal in mind.  First, we seek to provide experimentalists with  a
              conceptual framework and effective strategies to be exploited in  the
              experimental dissection of site-specific effects.  Second, we  seek to bring
              the analysis of cooperative effects in biology to a  whole new level by
              unraveling the thermodynamic foundations of the  behavior of subsystems open to
              interactions with other subsystems.   This is a basic problem in statistical
              thermodynamics which remains  in largest measure unformulated and unexplored,
              due to its  mathematical complexity.  Without a thermodynamic treatment of 
              local effects, our understanding of the most exciting and  challenging problems
              in biology, such as cooperativity, molecular  recognition and protein folding,
              will remain necessarily  incomplete.   %%%  Our project entails the development
              of a theory for interacting  systems in biology.  The goal is to understand the
              detailed basis  for protein-ligand and protein-protein recognition in terms of
              a  novel conceptual framework.  Protein-mediated molecular recognition  is a
              crucial step in nearly every aspect of biology, as well as in  the onset,
              propagation and control of diseases at the molecular  level.  The developments
              under the proposed research project will  provide us with a much deeper
              understanding of how proteins work.   This will eventually foster the
              developments of new strategies for  the control of diseases at the
              pharmacological level.    ***
