Title       : Studies of Tetrachloro-1,4-Hydroquinone Dehalogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1996      
File        : a9406909

Award Number: 9406909
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shelley D. Copley copley@cires.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cindy S. Orser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9406909  Copley  Tetrachloro-1,4-hydroquinone dehalogenase catalyzes the
              reductive  dehalogenation of tetrachloro-1,4-hydroquinone (TCHQ) and 
              trichloro-1,4-hydroquinone (TriCHQ) in a glutathione-dependent  reaction this
              enzyme is found in the pathway for pentachlorophenol  degradation in the soil
              microorganisms Flavobacterium sp. strain  ATCC 39723 and Sphingomonas sp.
              strain RA-2.  Enzymes that catalyze  reductive dehalogenation reactions,
              usually carried out by  anaerobic microorganisms in sediments and soils.  Since
              these  reactions are generally very slow, highly halogenated compounds may 
              persist in the environment for decades.  Despite the importance of  reductive e
              dehalogenatiion, no mechanistic or structural  information is available about
              the enzymes that catalyze these  reactions.  the only reductive aryl
              dehalogenasae that has been  purified is TCHQ dehalogenase.  This proposal
              describes the first  mechanistic experiments of this novel enzyme.  The
              specific goals  of the work described in this proposal are 1) to determine
              whether  metal ions, cofactors, or cysteine residues on the enzyme are 
              involved in transfer of reducing equivalents from glutathione to  TCHQ;2) to
              determine the effect of the chlorine and hydroxyl  substituents on catalysis;
              and 3) to measure kinetic isotope  effects to determine whether transfer of
              hydrogen to the aromatic  ring or carbon-chlorine bond cleavage are involved in
              the rate-  determining step.  These experiments will allow us to propose a 
              mechanism for TCHQ dehalogenase for more detailed studies in the  future.  A
              critical question in the field of biodegradation is how  microorganisms have
              evolved the ability to degrade compounds such  as pentachlorophenol which were
              not present in large quantities in  the environment until relatively recently. 
              One approach to the  question of he evolutionary origin of enzymes involved in 
              degradation of halogenated aromatic compounds is to compare the  enzymes and
              corresponding gene sequences in a number of  micro organisms.  The second part
              of this proposal focuses on a  comparison of the TCHQ dehalogenase enzymes and
              the corresponding  genes in Flavobacterium sp. strain ATCC 39723 and
              Sphingomonas sp.  strain RA-2.  %%%  During the last fifty years, large
              quantities of chlorinated  aromatic compounds have been introduced into the
              environment as a  result of manufacturing processes, inadvertent spills, poor 
              disposal practices and increased use of pesticides.  Many  chlorinated aromatic
              compounds are degraded only very slowly by  naturally-occurring microorganisms.
               The degree of resistant to  biodegradation usually increases with the number
              of chlorine  substituents.  Thus, highly chlorinated compounds such as 
              polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), hexachlorobenzene and  pentachlorophenol tend
              to persist in the environment.   Biodegradation of highly chlorinated aromatic
              compounds begins with  dechlorination reactions that replace chlorine atoms
              with hydrogen  atoms.  Once a sufficient number of chlorine atoms are removed
              form  the ring, these compounds can be degraded relatively quickly.      
              Despite the importance of this type of dechlorination reaction, no  mechanistic
              or structural information is available about the  enzymes tht catalyze these
              reactions.  The first part of this  proposal describes the first mechanistic
              experiments of this type  of enzyme.  A critical question in the field of
              biodegradation is  how microorganisms have evolved the ability to degrade
              compounds    such as pentachlorophenol which were not present in large 
              quantities in the environoment until relatively recently.  One  approach to
              this question is to compare the enzymes and  corresponding gene sequences in a
              number of microorganisms.  the  second part of this proposal focuses on a
              comparison of  dehalogenase enzymes in two different soil microorganisms, 
              Flavobacteium sp. strain ATCC 39723 and Spingomonas sp.strain RA-2.  ***
