Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Nature and Rate of Environmental Change in
               the Sierra Nevada -- AMS Radiocarbon Analysis of the Pleistocene/Holocene
               Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1996       
File        : a9406575

Award Number: 9406575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Byrne arbyrne@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1304,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9406575  BYRNE       Research on global change has focused on understanding 
              contemporary natural and human processes, but an important  ancillary line of
              inquiry consists of reconstruction of  historical records of change, thereby
              enhancing knowledge of the  outcomes of natural processes upon which patterns
              of human-  induced change now are superimposed.  Paleoenvironmental records 
              from around the world indicate that dramatic changes took place  during the
              transition from the Pleistocene to Holocene periods  roughly 10,000 years ago. 
              The primary driving forces behind  these changes are thought to have been
              fluctuations in global  atmospheric and oceanic patterns.  More accurate timing
              of  paleoenvironmental records is necessary in order to understand  these
              processes, however.  This doctoral dissertation research  project will focus
              its attention on advancing the synchronous  record of change in the Sierra
              Nevada of eastern California over  the period from 14,000 years to 9,000 years
              before the present.  Sediment cores have been drawn from a number of lakes in
              the  region, and pollen and macrofossil evidence in the cores have  been
              identifies.  Preliminary analyses using traditional  radiocarbon dating
              techniques indicate strong synchroneities  among the sites.  More detailed
              analyses will be conducted by  making higher-resolution AMS (accelerator mass
              spectrometry) 14-C  measurements on conifer needle fragments and pollen grains.
                    This project will improve the chronological precision of  records that
              document the nature and rates of environmental  change in the Sierra Nevada
              during the Pleistocene/Holocene  transition.  Of particular value will be
              improved understanding  of how abruptly climates may change.  As a doctoral
              dissertation  improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable
               a promising student to establish a strong independent research  career.
