Title       : Bayesian Demodulation Algorithms for Digital Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1994    
File        : a9406073

Award Number: 9406073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372130             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Fitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Saul B. Gelfand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9406073  Fitz       The Bayesian filter family of algorithms is a recently 
              developed family of deconvolution (both known and unknown channel)  algorithms
              for digital communications.  The Bayesian filters are  approximations to the
              K-lag optimum symbol-by-symbol estimator with  the unique characteristic that
              its resulting exponential complexity  is decoupled from both the filter lag and
              the channel length.  This  project 1) will produce significant refinements to
              the Bayesian  filter algorithms, 2) will produce an analytical characterization
               of these algorithms to provide greater insight into the  performance, 3) will
              examine some applications of the algorithms in  digital communications, and 4)
              will implement the algorithms in a  fixed point DSP architecture.  The Bayesian
              filters can be refined   to include significantly more general decision
              feedback structures,  to be applicable with more general channel models, to
              more  accurately model time-varying fading, and to implement optimal  combining
              algorithms.  The general decision feedback structures are  both similar to and
              a significant generalization of reduced state  sequence estimation.  This
              structure will provide an excellent  tradeoff between achieving a long decoding
              lag and maintaining a  reasonable level of complexity.  The channel models
              considered in  this project will be the autoregressive moving average model and
               partially observed Markov chain model.  Deriving deconvolution  algorithms for
              these channels enables a wider range of problems to  be addressed by Bayesian
              techniques.  The final generalization is  in the modeling of time-varying
              channels.  If high performance  deconvolution can be accomplished in a rapidly
              fading frequency  selective channel, then significant improvements are
              available in   the capacity of digital communication systems (especially ones 
              using TDMA).  Finally, methods for optimally combining more than  one
              observation per symbol will be considered in a Bayesian  framework.  Typical
              applications of this  type include antenna  diversity systems and fractional
              spaced equalization.  The Bayesian  filter has a great many potential
              applications areas and these  applications will be explored in detail.  The
              areas targeted are:  reduced complexity demodulation of nonlinear modulations
              with  memory; reduced complexity decoding of error control codes; high  speed
              high frequency (HF) digital communications; magnetic  recording; and land
              mobile radio.  ***
