Title       : Transcriptional Regulation by P and C1, Two Maize MYB - Homologs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9406233

Award Number: 9406233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erich Grotewold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9406233  Flavonoid derived pigments are almost universally found in
              the  plant kingdom, providing color to flowers, fruits, leaves and  storage
              organs. The most commonly found flavonoid derived pigment,  the anthocyanins,
              are derived from 3-hydroxy flavonoids. The  biosynthesis of the flavonoid
              derived pigments in maize presents a  unique system for the study of the
              structure and function of  transcriptional regulators. A large number of maize
              genes have been  reported that directly affect the amount, hydroxylation
              pattern and  distribution of flavonoids and flavonoid derived pigments. Several
               of the genes encoding enzymes of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway  have been
              cloned and characterized: C2, CH1, A1, A2,BZ1, BZ2, as  well as others which
              are shared between the 3-deoxy and 3-hydroxy  flavonoid biosynthetic pathways:
              C2, CH11, A1. The regulation of  these pathways in maize is controlled by two
              classes of regulatory  proteins: those with a Myb-homologous domain (C1 and P1)
              and those  with a basic helix-loop-helix domain (members of the R and B 
              families). Anthocyanin production requires the interaction of a  member of the
              C1/P1 family and a member of the R/B families. Thus  the pattern of anthocyanin
              pigmentation in any particular plant  part is given by the combinatorial,
              tissue specific expression of  the regulatory genes. The goals of this work are
              to 1) determine  whether the regulation of C2 and CH11 by P and C1 is similar
              to  that of A1 2) characterize the regions of P required for the P  regulatory
              function 3) structurally analyze the DNA binding domain  of P and its' relation
              to other plant Myb-homologs and 4)analyze  possible interactions of P with
              other factors.  %%%  The biosynthesis of the flavonoid derived pigments in
              maize  presents a unique system for the study of the structure and  function of
              transcriptional regulators, in that the absence of the  intermediates or final
              products of the pathway does not affect  maize viability and P activity can be
              readily scored  by inspection  of the kernels and cobs. The potential of the
              system is increased,  in that mutants of almost every gene in the pathway are
              available.  The results of this study should give greater insight into the 
              mechanisms of combinatorial regulation of biosynthetic pathways in  plants. 
              ***
