Title       : Analysis of Voltage-Induced Structural Changes in Cell Membrane Components with
               Miniature Infrared Waveguide Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1996      
File        : a9406681

Award Number: 9406681
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Braiman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9197,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9406681  Braiman  Miniature waveguide sensors will be used to detect IR
              absorbance  changes associated with voltage-induced conformational  transitions
              in membrane proteins.  The motivation for  miniaturization of the sensors is to
              permit in situ observation  of IR spectra from membranes of intact individual
              cells.  This,  in turn, will allow IR spectroscopy to be performed as a
              function  of cell membrane potential, which can be controlled by using a 
              whole-cell voltage clamp.  Sensitive voltage-dependent IR  difference spectra
              should thus reveal how the living cell's  membrane components responds to
              transient shifts in transmembrane  voltage.  A particular goal of this approach
              is to allow  investigation of a variety of ion channel proteins expressed at 
              high levels in single frog oocytes.  These IR spectroscopic  studies of
              biomembranes will depend heavily on the development of  evanescent-wave sensors
              based on thin-film dielectric waveguides.   A living cell's plasma membrane
              will be held in contact with a  thin film of Ge deposited on ZnS or CaF2
              substrate.  A portion of  IR light passing through the waveguide is carried in
              an  evanescent wave that can be absorbed by molecules in the  membrane.  The
              wavelength dependence of this absorption will  provide information about the
              vibrational modes, and thus the  structures, of the lipid and protein molecules
              in the membrane.    %%%  Miniaturized biomembrane sensors based on waveguides
              that conduct  infrared light will be developed.  These waveguide sensors, 
              consisting of thin films of infrared-transparent materials will  conduct and
              concentrate infrared light into a small tapered  region where the waveguide can
              be held in close contact with the  membrane of a single cell, such as a
              1-mm-dia. frog egg cell.   Although most of the infrared light passing through
              the waveguide  will be confined to the interior of the germanium film, a 
              significant fraction of the light energy will be conducted in a  micron-thick
              region outside the waveguide.  This s o-called  evanescent wave must therefore
              pass through the membrane of the  cell.  Selective absorption of different
              infrared wavelengths by  the cell membrane's components will be the basis for 
              spectroscopic analysis of their chemical structures.  A  particular goal is a
              basic understanding of how various ion-  channel proteins (responsible, e.g.,
              for neuronal signaling)  change in structure in response to the varying
              transmembrane  voltages found in living cells.  However, this research should 
              also advance our national technical capabilities in the sensitive  chemical
              analysis of a wide variety of tiny samples, which may be  of importance for
              such varied tasks as environmental monitoring  and industrial process control. 
              ***
