Title       : Cellular and Molecular Events in Early Leech Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9406141

Award Number: 9406141
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Weisblat weisblat@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Glossiphoniid leeches, including various species of  Helobdella, are useful for
              in depth analyses of  developmental processes for two reasons: first, they are 
              relatively simple animals with large, accessible embryos  that are suited for
              combined cellular and molecular  techniques.  Second, since leeches belong to
              the phylum  Annelida, an otherwise poorly studied group, the results  obtained
              are useful for making interphyletic comparisons.  Such comparisons are
              essential to distinguish general  developmental processes from phylum-specific
              ones, and also  to learn how evolutionary modification of developmental 
              processes leads to the appearance of diverse animal types.  For example,
              annelids and arthropods resemble each other  (and differ from molluscs) in that
              they both have segmented  body plans.  In both annelids and arthropods,
              segmental  tissues arise from longitudinally oriented, ventrally  situated
              arrays of cells, termed the germ band (in  arthropods such as the fruitfly
              Drosophila) or germinal  plate (in annelids).  In leech, the germinal plate
              arises in  strict head-to-tail (rostrocaudal) progression by repeated 
              divisions of specialized embryonic stem cells called  teloblasts.  Homologs of
              several genes involved in  rostrocaudal patterning of Drosophila seem to be
              expressed  in homologous patterns during rostrocaudal patterning of  leech. 
              This suggests that the molecular genetic processes  of differentiation and
              morphogenesis in later development  will be quite similar in the two phyla. 
              But the early  Helobdella embryo is strikingly different from the early 
              Drosophila embryo and strikingly similar to the molluscan  embryos.  Thus, the
              question of how cell fates are  determined in the early leech is of
              considerable interest.  The first part of this proposal contains experiments 
              designed to further previous investigations of how distinct  fates are assigned
              to particular cells in the developing  embryo, with emphasis on the assignment
              of mesodermal and  ectodermal fates to individual ly identified cells that are 
              born when the embryo contains only 10 cells, and to look for  similarities
              between Helobdella and Drosophila in this  regard.  A second question of
              interest is that of how the  "molluscan" mode of early leech development meshes
              with the  "arthropodan" mode of later development.  A critical aspect  of this
              process is the spreading of one layer of cells over  the entire surface of the
              embryo during the formation of the  germinal plate in Helobdella.  The
              experiments in the second  part of this proposal are designed to elucidate the
              cellular  processes involved in these morphogenetic movements.
