Title       : Regulation of Period and Pattern of Vegetative Development in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1994    
File        : a9406555

Award Number: 9406555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erin E. Irish erin-irish@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9179,9232,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Switching from vegetative (indeterminate) to reproductive  (determinate) growth
              is a major transition in the  development of the shoot in higher plants.  This
              transition  occurs at the shoot apical meristem, the region that  initiates
              primordia that differentiate as leaves separated  by stem tissue during
              vegetative development or as floral  organs during reproductive development. 
              The timing of this  transition has profound effects on the architecture of the 
              shoot, as well as influencing yield in crop plants.  The  mechanism regulating
              the transition to flowering is  beginning to be understood in plants in which
              the transition  occurs in response to environmental cues.  However, many  other
              plants flower in a variety of environments.  In these  plants it is believed
              that the primary determinant of the  timing of the transition from vegetative
              growth to flowering  is a developmental program, of which little is known.  The
               objective of the experiments proposed here is to examine  various aspects of
              the developmental program underlying the  switch to flowering in a plant of the
              latter group, maize.  The meristem receives information from elsewhere in the 
              plant and responds by either continuing leaf initiation  (indeterminate) or
              becoming determined for determinate  growth and forming an inflorescence, the
              tassel.  This  investigator will examine potential sources for that 
              information by organ culture techniques.  These experiments  will lay the
              groundwork for the eventual identification of  the signals that inform
              meristems of their progress through  ontogeny, which results in the precise
              regulation of the  morphology of maize shoots.  The maize vegetative shoot 
              apical meristem has been deduced to be organized in tiers,  in which typically
              the lowermost cells (at the periphery) of  the meristem will give rise to the
              first-formed nodes of the  plant, midmeristem cells to the later nodes, and
              upper cells  to the top of the plant.   Cells most likely to participate  in
              the formation of reproduct ive structures are located in  the apex of the
              meristem.  Resetting of the meristem by  excision and culture results in more
              nodes being formed by  the meristem than would normally occur.  An inevitable 
              result of this is a change in the contribution of at least  some cells in the
              meristem to the shoot.  This investigator  will use clonal analysis to
              determine the origin within the  meristem of the extra nodes of reset plants. 
              This  information will be useful for understanding the flexibility  of cells
              within a meristem with respect to the portions of  the plant to which they will
              contribute and the nature of  the reorganization that takes place as a meristem
              is reset  by excision and culture.  This may also have practical  implications
              for transformation of maize via the shoot  meristem.  Experiments are also
              planned to examine the  molecular nature of the resetting of the shoot's 
              developmental program by culturing plants carrying a  photosynthetic mutation
              that can become suppressed through  the course of normal development of a
              shoot.  These  experiments are expected to provide insight into normal  changes
              at the level of gene expression in differentiation  of successive nodes as part
              of the developmental program of  the plant.
