Title       : Analysis of the Molecular Mechanisms Regulating Epidermal Cell Interactions in
               the Arabidopsis Fiddlehead Mutant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1994 
File        : a9406215

Award Number: 9406215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Lolle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Reed College
	      3203 S E Woodstock Blvd
	      Portland, OR  972028138    503/771-1112

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A novel class of developmental mutants in Arabidopsis  thaliana where lateral
              organs of the shoot fuse upon growing  into contact have been identified by the
              PI.  Studies of the  original mutant, fdh1, indicate that organ fusion is 
              mediated by epidermal cell interactions.  Experimental  evidence suggests that
              morphogenetic factors are produced  that may induce fusion between epidermal
              cells and  preliminary results indicate that this activity can be  extracted by
              surface washes of fdh leaves.  At least three  genes that regulate organ fusion
              in Arabidopsis have been  determined by the PI.  Pollen from Arabidopsis and
              closely  related species will germinate and grow on the fdh1 shoot  surface. 
              Wildtype pollen from tomato, tobacco and  snapdragon plants, however, will not
              grow pollen tubes when  applied to fdh shoot surfaces.  These results suggest
              that  fdh1 plants express factors that mediate pollen recognition,  germination
              and growth.  The PI does not yet know whether  all organ fusion mutants support
              promiscuous pollen growth.  Both the organ fusion and pollen growth phenotypes 
              cosegregate with the original fdh1 gene mutation.  Since  only carpel epidermal
              cells fuse and interact selectively  with pollen in wildtype plants, the PI
              hypothesizes that  mutation of the FDH gene causes the constitutive expression 
              of a carpel-specific program in all epidermal cells of the  shoot.  Although
              fdh organs and epidermal cells are  morphologically normal, carpel-specific
              biological activity  is expressed over the entire shoot surface.  The 
              availability of such mutants makes possible the  identification of molecules
              involved in these biological  processes.  The objective of this research
              project is to  understand how epidermal cells mediate organ fusion and 
              identify ectopically expressed factors that may be important  in stigma-pollen
              interactions.  This will be accomplished  using biochemical, molecular and
              genetic approaches.  The PI  proposes to characterize factors mediating organ
              fusion and  pol len growth.  In particular we will analyze the fdh mutant  cell
              wall and cell wall constituents.  Cytochemical  techniques to determine the
              staining profile of fresh and  cryopreserved fdh tissues and the porosity of
              fdh cell walls  will also be conducted.  In a collaborative effort, an 
              analysis of the sugar and lipid monomer composition of fdh  cell walls will be
              done.  The expression of S-locus  glycoprotein genes and the presence of JIM
              antibody binding  species will also be tested for.  Initial attempts at 
              characterizing the morphogenetic factors will be made and  tests for functional
              conservation between C. roseus and fdh  factors will be conducted.  In addition
              efforts toward  isolating the FDH genes using one of three strategies will  be
              initiated.
