Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Technological Change in the Siberian Oil
               Industry: Performance and Its Influence on Regional Economic Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1994      
File        : a9406594

Award Number: 9406594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9664               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucy Jarosz jarosz@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9406594  JAROSZ       In Russia and other former communist nations, economic 
              activities are continuing to undergo structural transformations.  The processes
              through which the old institutions geared toward  centralized state control of
              resources into decentralized forms  of private ownership have varied in
              different industries and in  different regions.  This doctoral dissertation
              research project  will consist of a small-scale comparative study of changing 
              institutional structure through examination of four different 
              petroleum-extraction and -transportation operations in Siberia.  The initial
              phases of the project will include archival research  into international
              funding organization policies and programs.  Interviews will be conducted with
              officials at agencies like the  International Monetary Fund and World Bank,
              with project-  development officers and other officials at multinational oil 
              companies, and with lawyers experienced in joint ventures  involving Russia. 
              The doctoral student also will attend an  international seminar on petroleum
              and mineral law and policy.  The final phases of the project will consist of
              on-site visits to  the Siberian oil operation, where interviews will be
              conducted  with industry and local government leaders and workers, and data 
              will be obtained from published accounts and field observations.       This
              project will provide valuable new insights into  relationships among
              institutional and technological changes in an  important extractive industry. 
              In addition to generating  empirical information about four private oil
              operations in  Siberia, this research will enhance understandings of the
              impacts  of local, regional, and national policies and the intervention of 
              foreign multinational corporations on the development of an  important
              extractive activity.  As a doctoral dissertation  research improvement award,
              this award also will provide support  to enable a promising student to
              establish a strong independent  research career.
