Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows: Development of Mixed- Metal Catalyst Systems
               to Promote the Reactions of Low-Rank Coals with CO/H2O or CO/H2/H2O
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1994        
File        : a9406893

Award Number: 9406893
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27220              (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline E. Burgess   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9406893  Burgess    This award is under the International Junior Investigator
              and  Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S. scientists and  engineers
              to conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at  research centers of
              proven excellence.  The program's awards  provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique  or complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Caroline E. Burgess to work with Dr.
              William Jackson  of Monash University in Australia.    The aim of this research
              is to develop catalysts for the  efficient conversion of coals into fluid fuels
              suitable for power  generation.  Reactions in this project will involve a
              selection  of low-rank coals from Japan, Australia and the US.  Catalysts  for
              reactions with CO and synthesis gas (CO, H2) will be  developed.  In the case
              of lignitic coals, the as-mined coals  with considerable water content will be
              reacted in an aqueous  medium.  The most efficient catalyst system will be
              developed to  promote reactions with the readily attainable synthesis gas 
              (CO/H2).  Mixed catalytic systems will have to be developed which  facilitate
              the breakdown of the coal with CO/H2O and then promote  the reaction of the
              resulting fragments with H2.  Dr. Burgess  believes that it will be possible to
              gain valuable information  into the chemical structure of low-rank coals by
              this study.  ***
