Title       : Tubulin Structure and the Colchicine Binding Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1997  
File        : a9406242

Award Number: 9406242
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Bane sbane@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9184,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9406242  Hastie  Microtubules are an integral part of the cytoskeleton of all
              eukaryotic cells. Composed primarily of  the protein tubulin, a 100 Kdal
              heterodimer, these structures perform diverse functions in vivo. Many  aspects
              of the mechanism by which microtubules assemble and disassembly in vitro are
              currently being  unraveled; however, an understanding of microtubule dynamics
              in vivo remains  Microtubule assembly can be perturbed by a variety of
              exogenous substances. The oldest and most studied  compound in this class is
              colchicine, an alkaloid from the Autumn crocus. Colchicine binding to the 
              soluble tubulin heterodimer results in disruption of normal microtubule
              assembly and subsequently  microtubule-mediated processes. The ubiquity and
              specificity of colchicine binding to tubulins in higher  eukaryotes has led to
              the hypothesis that the colchicine binding site is of critical importance in
              the in vivo  regulation of microtubule dynamics.  To understand the role of the
              colchicine binding site on tubulin in the processes of microtubule assembly 
              and disassembly, structural information about tubulin and the colchicine
              binding site is necessary. In this  project, the two dimensional structure of
              the colchicine binding site will be identified through  photoaffinity labeling.
              The relationship of the colchicine binding site and other important domains of
              the  protein in three dimensions will be determined using fluorescence
              techniques. And finally, the depth of  the binding pocket and the nature of the
              interactions between tubulin and ligands bound to the colchicine  site will be
              probed using l9F NMR spectroscopy. The combined results of these three projects
              will  provide a clearer understanding of the molecular features of the
              colchicine site on tubulin and its  relationship to the structure of the
              protein.  The linear sequence(s) of tubulin that comprise the colchicine
              binding site will be identified through  photoaffinity labeling. Multiple
              photoaffinity labeling analogs of colchicine in wh ich the photolabile  groups
              are predicted to be within the interior of the colchicine binding site are
              employed. This approach  is innovative in that it is designed to identify
              peptides within discrete subdomains of the ligand binding  site. Moreover, the
              photolabile groups are an integrated part of the ligand rather than an
              appendage on  the ligand, increasing the likelihood that meaningful results
              will be obtained.  The relationship of the colchicine binding site and the
              exchangeable GTP site, the Vinca alkaloid binding  domain, and the well
              characterized sulfllydryl moieties on ~-tubulin will be probed in three
              dimensions  by fluorescence resonance energy transfer. These sites are known to
              be interrelated, but their proximities  are unknown. The distances between
              these sites will be determined using carefully chosen fluorescent  probes for
              the various sites. The results from these investigations will be integrated
              into the current, low  resolution understanding of tubulin structure.  The
              association of ligands with the colchicine site on tubulin appears to be
              mediated by an unusual, little  explored mechanism: a ~-stacking interaction
              between the ligand and an aromatic amino acid in the  binding site, which is
              probably a tryptophan. The existence of this proposed stacking interaction will
              be  scrutinized by l9F NMR spectroscopy. Like the proton nucleus, the fluorine
              nucleus is subject to ring  current effects that can be observed in the F NMR
              spectrum. Fluorinated analogs of colchicine will be  prepared and their spectra
              in the presence of tubulin will be determined. These experiments will provide 
              direct evidence of the hypothetical ~-stacking interaction if it exists and
              will define the region of the  binding site in which the stacking interaction
              takes place. Unlike the proton nucleus, the fluorine nucleus  is subject to
              solvent isotope effects. The fluorinated colchicinoids will be further
              exploited to determine  the solvent accessible and solvent inaccessible
              portions of the ligands when  bound to tubulin. These  experiments will serve
              to delineate the depth of the colchicine binding site on tubulin.  tubulin. 
              %%%  Microtubules are an integral part of the cytoskeleton of all
              nucleus-containing cells.  These structures  are often seen projecting from the
              nuclear center of the cell to the peripheral wall of the cell and play  a major
              role in cell growth.  When a cell divides, the microtubules serve to pull the
              cell apart to form  two daughter cells.  Microtubules perform their function in
              cell division and other types of movement  through processes of assembly and
              disassembly.  The microtubules are composed primarily of the  protein tubulin,
              which assembles to form small (13 nm diameter) tubes during cellular division. 
              The  assembly and disassembly processes of the purified protein has been
              studied extensively, but it is  unknown how microtubules form and disintegrate
              in the living cell and what types of factors control  their dynamics in the
              cell.  One of the most useful tools for studying microtubules is the alkaloid 
              colchicine.  Colchicine is a substance that originates in the Autumn crocus (a
              member of the lily  family).  When colchicine binds to tubulin, the
              colchicine-tublin complex prevents normal assembly of  microtubules and thus
              halts, microtubule-mediated processes.  Because colchicine binding activity is 
              found in all animal tubulin, it is thought that the colchicine binding site on
              tubuli is an important part  of the protein in the regulation of microtubule
              assembly and disassembly in the cell.  At this time,  little is known about the
              structure of tubulin and the colchicine binding site on tubulin.  In this 
              project, information about the molecular nature of the colchicine binding site
              and the structure of  tubulin will be sought.  Knowledge about the structure of
              the colchicine binding site can be  used to  discover the naturally occurring
              substance that may interact with tubulin at the colchicine binding site  and
              therefore be involved in microtubule regulation  in he cell.  Information about
              the structure of t  ubulin in three dimensions will be useful in understanding
              what parts of the protein are involved in the  contacts that occur in the
              microtubule and the relationship between these sections and the different 
              regulatory sites on the protein.  ***
