Title       : Tunicate C-type Lectins as Acute Phase Reactants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9406649

Award Number: 9406649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273915             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerardo R. Vasta vasta@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9406649  Vasta    As knowledge of the biochemical properties and gene sequences
              of  animal lectins has accumulated in recent years, we have begun to 
              understand not only their complex molecular and gene organization,  but also
              their evolution and multiple biological roles.  The goal  of this research is
              to characterize the molecular and gene  structures and binding properties of
              lectins from selected  invertebrates in order to understand their evolution as
              self/non-  self recognition molecules, and to elucidate the molecular 
              mechanisms of their biological functions.  With prior NSF support  considerable
              progress has been made in isolation, purification, and  biochemical
              characterization of four distinct L-fucosyl binding  lectins, CPL-I, -II, -III,
              and -IV, from plasma and hemocytes of  the protochordate Clavelina picta. 
              Serological and primary  structure evidence suggest that C. picta lectins are
              related to  acute phase reactants from vertebrates, namely, human pro-clotting 
              factor VIIIc (F VIIIc), C-reactive protein (CRP), and serum amyloid  P (SAP). 
              The C.picta lectin binding properties, including the fine  specificity for
              L-fucose-containing oligosaccharides, affinity  constants, divalent cation
              dependence and effect of toxic metals,  have been extensively characterized,
              and the amino acid residues of  the polypeptide chain involved in the
              interactions with the ligand  have been identified by specific chemical
              modification.  C. picta  lectins bind preferentially to oligosaccharides that
              exhibit non-  reducing terminal fucose but surprisingly, also bind 
              phosphocholine, galactans, sialic and muramic acids, and  proteoglycans. 
              Preliminary studies to identify the "natural"  ligands, both exogenous
              (environmental and colony-associated  bacterial isolates) and endogenous (tunic
              sulfated galactan) have  begun.  Based on experimental results thus far, it
              appears that C.  picta lectins are multifunctional recognition/effector mosaic 
              molecules, involved not only in recognition and opsonization o f  potentially
              pathogenic bacteria from the environment but also in  wound repair upon injury
              of the body wall.  Additional lectins have  now been isolated from C. picta
              that have been characterized as  belonging to the S-type.  Until recently,
              S-type lectins were  believed to be restricted to vertebrate species.  This
              finding  resulted not only in the isolation of S-type lectins in a variety  of
              invertebrate species but also in the crystallization and  resolution of the
              three dimensional structure of an animal lectin  for the first time.  To obtain
              the complete nucleotide sequence  that will allow alignment of the extensive
              amino acid sequence  obtained so far, a hemocyte cDNA library was constructed
              in the  expression vector lunizap and through PCR techniques, a nucleic  acid
              probe for CPL-III was developed.  The hemocyte cDNA library  was screened with
              this probe and positive recombinant phage clones  were isolated.  All the
              clones selected yield a product of similar  size when used as templates for PCR
              with the same primers.  These  are currently being sequenced.  Goals for the
              next three years are  to conduct studies in two areas:  1)  Protein and cDNA
              structure of  C. picta lectins:  By the end of the current funding period it is
               expected that substantial nucleotide sequence of CPL-III will be in  hand, and
              the extent of homology to the acute phase reactants CRP,  SAP, and F VIIIc will
              be determined.  By the end of the new funding  period equivalent information
              should be available for the other  three C.picta lectins.  2)  Biological role
              of C.picta lectins:   Endogenous and exogenous "natural" ligands, i.e. tunic
              sulfated  galactans and polysaccharides from selected environmental bacterial 
              strains, will be sought and characterized.  in vitro studies of the 
              interactions of the characterized "natural" ligands or their  relevant
              determinants on the C.picta hemocytes will be studied, and  the inducibility of
              C.picta lectins by the putative natural ligands  will be examined.  %%%  The
              goal  of this research is to characterize the molecular  structure, properties
              and biological functions of certain sugar-  binding molecules ("lectins") from
              selected invertebrate animals to  understand their evolution as self/non-self
              recognition molecules,  and to clarify the molecular mechanisms of their
              biological  functions which may be important in the defense mechanisms of a 
              diversity of animals.  ***
