Title       : Behavioral Ecology of Vocal Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9406217

Award Number: 9406217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack W. Bradbury   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9406217  Bradbury                              Abstract    A major focus of
              research on vocal communication concerns  why and how complex repertoires
              evolve in some organisms and  not in others.  Complex vocal repertoires are
              found in  humans (e.g. speech), some other primates, cetaceans, many 
              songbirds, and parrots.  Comparative work over the last  decades has shown that
              complex repertoires are used in  recognition of individuals and associations,
              sharing of  environmental information, declaring of intentions, and 
              competition for mates (sexual selection).  Sexual selection,  alone or in
              combination with individual recognition, seems  to account for many of the
              complex repertoires in songbirds.  Nonhuman primates declare subtle variations
              in intention and  have some simple environmental meanings.  Cetaceans remain 
              difficult to study, but there is now evidence of both  sexually selected
              repertoires and social association  signatures.  Although both captive and wild
              parrots are  known to develop complex vocal repertoires and continue to  learn
              new signals as adults, nearly nothing is known about  how their complex
              repertoires are used in the wild.    Dr. Jack Bradbury and his students have
              located a study site  in Costa Rica that hosts four species of parrots, has an 
              open forest making direct observations feasible, provides an  extensive road
              system for following the birds, and has  sufficient control of poaching that
              the birds can be  approached closely without perturbation.  Birds will be 
              outfitted with newly designed radio transmitters and  followed intensively. 
              All vocalizations will be recorded  and correlated with social composition of
              groups,  environmental contexts, and behaviors.  Functions can be  verified by
              playback of natural and modified calls to wild  birds.  Parrots are extremely
              responsive to such playbacks.    Dr. Bradbury thus hopes to clarify the role of
              complex vocal  communication in a group of animals that, although critical  to
              the general understanding of vocal commu nication  processes, has largely
              remained a mystery.  The results will  provide a basis for subsequent lab
              studies on brain-behavior  relationships and allow contrasts with other avian
              and  mammalian groups.  Furthermore, the extensive ecological  data to be
              collected in this study will be useful to Costa  Rican conservation biologists.
