Title       : Protein Structure Determinations by NMR and Joint NMR-X-ray Refinement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9406065

Award Number: 9406065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Hoffman dave@noddy.cm.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9406065  Hoffman  The goal of the proposed research is to analyze the structures
              of  two unusual and biologically significant protein molecules. The  specific
              structures to be investigated are: (1) the "0.3" protein  of bacteriophage T7;
              (2) the RNA-binding protein L9 from the  prokaryotic ribosome.  In each case,
              the structural information  obtained will provide insight into the mechanism
              used by the  protein in performing its particular function. The 12.5 kDalton 
              03 gene product of bacteriophage T7 is unique in its ability to  bind to E.
              coli restriction enzymes and RNA polymerase. The  protein performs the task of
              inhibiting the E. coli restriction  system, thus permitting the T7 phage to
              safely inject its genome  into the host cells. There is evidence suggesting
              that the 0.3  protein may function by mimicking the DNA structures that are 
              normally recognized by the E. coli  restriction system. The  structure of the
              0.3 protein will be determined by NMR methods,  providing insight into the
              mechanism by which it binds and  inhibits DNA-processing enzymes. L9 is a
              highly conserved primary  RNA-binding protein from the prokaryotic ribosome. In
              the  proposed research plan, NMR and x-ray data will be used to supply 
              structural constraints, and the protein structure will be  determined by a
              simultaneous refinement against both the NMR and  x-ray data, or
              "joint-refinement". This joint-refinement approach  should yield a much higher
              resolution structure, in which both  RNA-binding sites are well defined. This
              analysis will provide a  model as to how NMR and x-ray data can be practically
              and  logically combined to determine the structure of a single protein 
              molecule.  %%%  The principal goal of the proposed research is to analyze the 
              structures of two unusual and biologically significant protein  molecules. The
              specific structures to be investigated are: 1) a  protein that is unique in its
              ability to bind to and inhibit the  function of DNA-processing enzymes; and 2)
              a protein with the  ability to  recognize and bind specific sequences of
              ribosomal  RNA. In each case, the structural information obtained will  provide
              insight into the mechanism used by the protein in  performing its particular
              function. An additional goal of the  proposed project is to develop new methods
              for determining  protein structures, using the combined data from nuclear
              magnetic  resonance (NMR) experiments and x-ray diffraction experiments. It  is
              anticipated that these new methods will be useful in  determining protein
              structures with greater accuracy.  ***
