Title       : Marker-Propagation Networks: A Quantitative Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1996  
File        : a9406998

Award Number: 9406998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anand R. Tripathi                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan I. Moldovan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Marker-propagation networks (MPNs) represent a powerful  computational model
              especially suitable for artificial  intelligence and other  applications where
              information is often  uncertain and incompletely specified.  MPNs refer to
              networks of  active nodes and labeled links.  The power and  novelty of this 
              model derives from the fact that the processing instruments are  programmable
              data patterns of flexible length called markers.  Node processing  is activated
              by the arrival of markers.  Marker  propagations through the  network are not
              driven by destination  addresses, instead, they depend on local  conditions in
              the nodes,  network topology and the information programmed in  each marker. 
              This is a major difference between MPNs and other parallel  processing models,
              and it is the reason why MPNs are capable of  handling weakly  or incompletely
              specified applications.    Previous work in the area of  marker--propagation
              processing  assumed much simpler models.  The model studied  in this project 
              operates asynchronously, and is highly programmable.  Some of  the  critical
              issues related to the implementation of MPNs on existing  parallel  computers
              are possible programming paradigms, sources of  parallelism, load  balancing,
              design tradeoffs, and others.    The approach taken in this project  is a
              quantitative one, meaning  that the model is implemented on several  parallel
              computers,  performance is measured and the results compared.    The  MPN model
              offers scalability and has the potential of being a  preferred  architecture
              for future supercomputers dedicated to  knowledge processing  applications.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
