Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Dynamics and Pinning of Spiral Wave
               Defects in Active Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9406090

Award Number: 9406090
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew L. Belmonte   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9406090  Belmonte      This award is under the International Junior Investigator
               and Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S.  scientists and engineers
              to conduct three to twelve months  of research abroad at research centers of
              proven excellence.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint 
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities,  expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Andrew L. Belmonte  to work with Dr. Jorge
              R.  Tredicce at the Institut NonLineaire de Nice.    Dr. Belmonte proposes to
              study the motion of  spiral wave  defects, developing methods to attract and
              hold them by  suppression of chemical reactivity in controlled regions,  and
              measuring the strength of this "pinning."  He also  proposes to explore the
              creation and disruption of these  defects, and their perturbation by complex
              boundary  conditions and anisotropic or inhomogeneous media.  The  unpinning or
              disruption of such spiral defects would have  important implications for the
              dynamics of ventricular  fibrillation in the heart (leading to sudden death),
              which  is thought to be caused by pinned spiral waves of electrical  excitation
              in the muscle. ***
