Title       : Mathematical Sciences: RUI Problems in Magnetohydrostatic Equlilbrium Arising in
               the Study of the Solar Corona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1994      
File        : a9406573

Award Number: 9406573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daljit S. Ahluwalia                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward W. Stredulinsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9406573  Stredulinsky         One of the outstanding open problems in solar
              astrophysics  is the existence of enormously high temperatures in the sun's 
              corona, on the order of a million degrees Kelvin, which have  baffled
              astrophysicists for generations. The main object of this  project is to give a
              careful mathematical analysis of a theory  due to E.N. Parker which claims that
              coronal heating is primarily  due to the formation of certain violent
              disruptions in the suns  magnetic field (the formation of current sheets)
              associated with  solar flares. Due to the relationship with sun spots and solar
               flares the issue of coronal heating is directly tied to the  practical issues
              of variations in the earth's climate and  electromagnetic interference. The
              main focus of the analysis will  be the study of tube like loops of magnetic
              field lines with ends  anchored in the suns surface or photosphere. It is
              proposed that  current sheets form when the ends of such a tube are twisted
              more  than a certain critical amount.       In attempting to understand the
              phenomenon of current sheet  formation in Parker's model of coronal heating,
              the equations of  ideal 3D magnetohydrodynamics will studied in an open flux
              tube  geometry. Existence of solutions will be considered subject to 
              prescription of the twist in the magnetic field lines from one  end of the tube
              to the other. It is conjectured that smooth  solutions will exist up to a
              certain critical twist, at which  point current sheets will form i.e. the curl
              of the magnetic  field (the current) will become a singular measure, the
              singular  part supported on a set of finite two dimensional measure. The 
              transition from subcritical to critical values of the twist is  conjectured to
              correspond to a critical exponent in a geometric  type of Sobolev inequality
              linked to the topology of the field  line structure. The main emphasis will be
              placed on the constant  pressure or force free case of ideal MHD. Existence of
              solutions  will be studied through the use of an  iteration scheme which 
              avoids the lack on compactness inherent in many variational  approaches to the
              problem.
