Title       : Helix Interactions in Membrane Protein Folding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9406983

Award Number: 9406983
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $775000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. Engelman don@paradigm.csb.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9406983  Engelman  We conceptualize membrane protein stability in terms of a
              two-stage  model:  many transbilayer helices can be regarded as independently 
              stable folding units which interact specifically in a side-to-side  fashion to
              generate tertiary and quaternary structures.  This  contention is supported by
              experiments and suggests that a detailed  understanding of membrane helix
              interactions will lead to greater  understanding of membrane protein structure
              and to more powerful  prediction methods.  During the past grant period, we
              established the independent  stability of many (but not all) of the helices of
              bacteriorhodopsin  (BR), evolved a model system permitting detailed
              computational and  experimental studies of the dimerization of glycophorin A
              (GpA)  transmembrane helices, studied the possible roles of polypeptide  links
              and retinal in bacteriorhodopsin stability, and discovered  that one
              bacteriorhodopsin helix is capable of reversible  spontaneous insertion across
              lipid bilayers.  These studies have  now permitted a more refined investigation
              to be designed:  1.  Spontaneous insertion will be studied using the reversible
               transbilayer insertion of BR helix C as a starting point.  Which  sequence
              features permit or abolish such insertion?  Can a pH  difference translocate
              the peptide across a lipid bilayer?  Can an  experimental delta delta G be
              assigned to each amino acid?    2.  Folding intermediates and alternative
              domain structures will be  studied using BR as a model.  Is the helix F - helix
              G hairpin a  stable domain?  Do helices A or B interact separately with the
              rest  of the molecule?  3.  Structural studies exploiting NMR will be used to
              define the  detailed structure of the glycophorin dimer.  Is it as predicted 
              from mutagenesis and computation?  4.  Measurement of the energy of helix-helix
              interactions will be  made using sequence variation in the glycophorin helix. 
              These will  be used to test computational approaches and to seek chemical 
              principles in the interactio ns.  5.  Effects of the lipid environment on the
              stability of helix-  helix interactions will be studied.  Possible insights
              into the  relative contributions of lipid-lipid, lipid-helix and helix-helix  
              interactions will be elucidated.  %%%  Many important biological events happen
              within membranes.  The  responses of cells to their environment, the conversion
              of energy  from one form to another, the regulation of the living state of a 
              cell, and many other vital processes involve the interactions of  molecules
              inside the membrane structure.  Our work to this date and  our planned
              experiments are aimed at understanding how specific  interactions occur and
              describing these in chemical terms.  Since  so many important events happen in
              this environment, and since it  has been shown that the specificity of
              different binding events can  be very high, it may well be that new
              pharmacological agents can be  found that will act within membranes to modulate
              cell activity.   Indeed, it may prove to be the case that some drugs already 
              discovered act in this way, but we do not yet understand their mode  of action.
               A higher level of understanding will permit the design  of search methods to
              find new drugs and, perhaps, the de novo  design or modification of drugs for
              specific effects.  ***
