Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Geographical Perspectives on Innovation in
               Pollution Prevention
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1994       
File        : a9406571

Award Number: 9406571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9485               (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Angel dangel@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9149,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9406571  ANGEL       Pollution prevention is now widely regarded as necessary
              for  industrial and environmental sustainability. However, little is  known
              about how technological change is facilitated for pollution  prevention and how
              information and technology may be transferred  from the leaders of pollution
              prevention to other firms. This  study will focus on an investigation of the
              significance of  location and regional context for processes of innovation and 
              technological change in the search for technologies and work  practices that
              ameliorate the environmental impact of  manufacturing industries. The project
              will determine how and to  what extent various aspects of regional networks
              such as deep  pools of labor, appropriate infrastructure, and a diverse mix of 
              economic activities enhances the pollution prevention performance  of
              establishments and industries beyond what we would expect to  find in the
              absence of such clustering. A mailed questionnaire  survey of chemical
              establishments will be used to examine how  independent variables such as
              establishment location, market  forces, environmental regulation, and the level
              of inter-  establishment cooperation affect an establishment's innovation 
              strategy and success at pollution prevention.       This research brings
              together two important streams of  geographic research: the geography of
              innovation and the  environmental effects of industrialization. The study
              should  generate new insights into development and diffusion of pollution 
              prevention practices within manufacturing industries. As a  doctoral
              dissertation research improvement award, this project  will also provide
              support to enable a promising student to  establish a strong independent
              research career.  ***
