Title       : Cell Interactions and Cell Fate Specification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1996   
File        : a9406446

Award Number: 9406446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Ettensohn ettensohn@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long term objective of this research program is to  elucidate the mechanisms
              of cell interactions that control  cell fates during early embryogenesis. 
              Signaling between  embryonic cells is a fundamental mechanism of cell fate 
              specification in all multicellular animals.  An  understanding of cell-cell
              interactions in the early embryo  will require not only an analysis of the
              molecular basis of  the signaling, but also an understanding of the cellular 
              context of such interactions within the embryo.  With these  goals in mind, the
              proposed research program involves an  integration of cellular and molecular
              methodologies.  The  P.I. will apply these experimental strategies to the 
              developing sea urchin embryo, a manipulable, optically  transparent
              experimental system.  He plans to focus on a key  regulatory interaction that
              occurs between the two principal  populations of mesodermal cells in the
              embryo, primary and  secondary mesenchyme cells (PMCs and SMCs).  PMCs transmit
              a  signal during gastrulation that suppresses the skeletogenic  potential of
              SMCs and directs these cells into an  alternative developmental program.  This
              interaction plays  an important role in the specification of SMC fates and the 
              process of skeletogenesis, and serves as a model system to  study embryonic
              regulation and cell signalling in the early  embryo.  Three key aspects of the
              PMC-SMC interaction are to  be addressed:  (1) the development of new methods
              for  studying the dynamics of cell fate-switching in living  embryos; (2) the
              properties and molecular basis of PMC  signaling; and (3) the properties of the
              responding SMCs.  The proposed research will significantly advance our 
              understanding of a central issue in developmental biology.  In addition, this
              research program will continue to support  the training and development of
              young developmental  biologists at the undergraduate, graduate, and
              postdoctoral  levels.
