Title       : Comparative Methods and Phylogenetic Analysis Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1994     
File        : a9406964

Award Number: 9406964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emilia P. Martins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1228,9135,9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9406964  Martins  Comparative data are used in many areas of biology to infer
              the history of phenotypic characters such as behavior, life histories or
              physiology for which direct evidence from the fossil record is rare. 
              Comparative data are also used when researchers infer the behavior and
              physiology of humans from that of animal models or search for general patterns
              that are true for diverse groups of organisms.  In the last few years, a number
              of problems have been pointed out regarding the design of comparative
              experiments and the statistical analysis of the resulting data.  A number of
              solutions have been proposed to address those problems.  Most of these
              solutions were derived from phylogenetic (genealogical) reconstruction methods,
              and all involve ways in which phylogenies can be incorporated into the analysis
              of comparative data.  These phylogenetic analysis techniques (PATs) are
              particularly useful in describing how to infer phenotypic change from the
              information found in living species.  Because of the basic statistical problems
              involved, PATs are also important in all comparative studies whether or not
              explicitly historical questions are being asked and will eventually be used by
              researchers in almost all areas of biology.   As most PATs were only developed
              during the last decade, however, many of the statistical issues underlying the
              incorporation of history into interspecific studies have not yet been addressed
              and it is often difficult to find computer programs to conduct the analyses. 
              The current study proposes to use a combination of theoretical, computer
              simulation and applied techniques to alleviate many of these problems. 
              Theoretical approaches will be used to develop phylogenetic techniques tthat
              incorporate within-species variability into the analyses, allow for
              consideration of both continuous and categorical variables, include estimators
              for the possible actions of natural selection, and consider the interactions
              between phenotypic traits and the environments in which th ey are observed. 
              Computer simulation will be used to explore issues in the design of comparative
              studies such as which species should be sampled, and to make recommendations
              about the choice of available techniques to analyze categorical variables. 
              During this process, a large package of computer programs will also be produced
              that is user-friendly, available for all standard operating systems, and
              includes a detailed manual and on-line help systems.  These programs will help
              to make phylogenetic analysis techniques available and accessible to all
              comparative biologists.
