Title       : Acquisition of A SQUID Magnetometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1994       
File        : a9406115

Award Number: 9406115
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chia-Ling Chien clc@pha.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel H. Reich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Collin L. Broholm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Funds are requested for the acquisition of a SQUID  magnetometer to conduct a
              variety of research projects in  superlattices, multilayers, granular solids,
              metastable  alloys, low dimensional quantum magnets, and other systems  with
              low-dimensional magnetic and superconducting entities,  funded by the NSF.
              These samples will be fabricated by  multisource advanced sputter deposition,
              molecular beam  epitaxy and single crystal growth. These systems are  designed
              to reveal finite-size effects and dimensional  crossover in magnetic and
              superconducting systems with  various correlation lengths. The realization and
              the origin  of magnetic surface anisotropy and perpendicular  magnetization
              will be investigated. Surface and interfacial  magnetism of a variety of
              heterostructures and superlattices  grown by MBE will be studied. In
              superconductor/magnetic  multilayers, experiments are proposed to investigate
              the  relationship between the effects on superconductivity and  the magnetic
              ordering and conductivity of the magnetic  layers. A number of metastable solid
              systems will be studied  in order to reveal new properties in structures
              unattainable  by conventional methods. Low dimensional antiferromagnets 
              provide unique opportunities to explore quantum many-body  effects. Various
              issues of the giant magneto-transport  properties in granular magnetic systems
              will be explored.  These are problems of fundamental interest, many of them 
              having important technological implications. In all these  studies, a high
              sensitivity SQUID magnetometer with low-  field and variable frequency
              capabilities is imperative.    Funds are requested for the acquisition of a
              superconducting  quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer, the most 
              sensitive type of magnetometers, to conduct a variety of  research projects in
              superlattices, multilayers, granular  solids, metastable alloys, low
              dimensional quantum magnets,  and other systems with low-dimensional magnetic
              and  superconducting entities, funded by the NSF. These a re  problems of
              fundamental interest, many of them having  important technological
              applications, such as magnetic  recording media, field-sensing elements in
              magnetic  recording heads, and superconducting devices.
