Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Equivariant Bifurcation Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1996     
File        : a9406144

Award Number: 9406144
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar Knobloch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9406144  Knobloch    This is a proposal to study the formation and stability
              properties of  patterns occurring in physical systems. Because such patterns
              often  exhibit a high degree of symmetry the techniques employed in the study 
              are designed to take full advantage of such symmetries. In practical 
              applications these symmetries are usually not exact. Therefore a  particular
              emphasis of the proposed work is to study the effects of  small
              symmetry-breaking ``imperfections'' in the system. The proposed  work is thus
              designed to make symmetry-based techniques applicable to  realistic systems.
              The proposal focuses on the effects of distant  endwalls on patterns in the
              form of propagating waves, patterns of  oscillations in acoustically excited
              spherical bubbles and the  formation of three-dimensional patterns in
              morphogenesis.    This is a proposal to study bifurcations and pattern
              formation in  systems with symmetry. Such systems occur naturally in a variety
              of  applications. The proposal focuses on pattern formation near onset. In 
              this regime the process is described by amplitude equations. In  symmetric
              systems these must respect the assumed symmetries. The  resulting equations
              enable one to compute not only the possible  patterns but also their relative
              stability. The proposal focuses on  extending this approach to
              three-dimensional patterns (such as those  created by the Turing instability or
              the modes of oscillation of an  acoustically excited bubble). In addition in
              order to make the  technique applicable to realistic systems in which the
              assumed  symmetries are usually only approximate the proposal emphasizes the 
              study of small externally imposed symmetry-breaking imperfections.  Such
              imperfections may have important  qualitative consequences and  may be
              responsible for the introduction of chaotic dynamics into  systems that would
              otherwise be nonchaotic.  ***
