Title       : Primitive Antibodies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1995      
File        : a9406280

Award Number: 9406280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Marchalonis dianah@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              M 8I                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       *       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                     M 8I   
              M 8I                                                                           
                                                                                             
                        '   (   )   *   +   ,   -   .   /   0   1                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            F
                 Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             ,     9 w       
                                       9       y w   ,        !                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                 Abstract
              Marchalonis 9406280     Sharks belong to one of the most primitive vertebrate
              classes.  This investigator has been studying the immune system of sharks for a
              number of years.  The blood of these animals contains high levels of
              immunoglobulins, but this is IgM, a type of immunoglobulin which appears first
              in mammals in response to an antigen.  Like human antibodies, these shark
              immunoglobulins show a large diversity in sequence.  With the recombinant DNA
              technologies this laboratory was able to determine the sequence of the genes 
              and their corresponding proteins, and found that the mechanisms for generating
              diversity in these immunoglobulins differs from that of mammals.  In sharks the
              V (variable),  J (joining) and C (constant) regions are not separate as in
              mammals, with their products coming together  and combining to form different
              immunglobulin molecules, but exist in  V,J,C  clusters. Nevertheless the
              proteins of the shark show great diversity and a lot of similarity to the
              mammalian chains.  More recent studies from this laboratory show that the RAG
              (recombinant activating gene) is a lso found in the shark, but may have a
              different function from that in mammals.  %%%  These studies which are
              elucidating the immune system of the sharks, one of the most primitive
              vertebrates,  will not only provide information on how the immune system of
              these organisms operates, but will give information on the probable development
              of the immune system of vertebrate organisms. ***                         ;    
                                                  Oh     +'  0                               
                     $       H       l                             S u m m a r y I n f o r m
              a t i o n                           (                                          
                      &                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      D       h                                              
                  R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                      
              Abstract                            Una Solomon                         Una
              Solomon                 @    M  8I                          @                  
                              @    M  8I                                                     
                                                          @                                  
                      Microsoft Word 6.0                                                     
              2                                                                              
                      ;                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 e =       e                   *                                             
                           l       l   l       l       l       l       l                     
                                                               s   1                         
                                                                                       5     
                       U           T       2   s                       l                     
                                                                 s               l       l   
                                                                                 l           
                 l                                                       l       l       l   
                 l                           k                                               
                                                               Abstract Marchalonis 9406280  
                Sharks belong to one of the most primitive vertebrate classes.  This
              investigator has been studying the immune system of sharks for a number of
              years.  The blood of these animals contains high levels of immunoglobulins, but
              this is IgM, a type of immunoglobulin which appears first in mammals in
              response to an antigen.  Like human antibodies, these shark immunoglobulins
              show a large diversity in sequence.  With the recombinant DNA technologies this
              laboratory was able to determine the sequence of the genes  and their
              corresponding proteins, and found that the mechanisms for generating diversity
              in these immunoglobulins differs from that of mammals.  In sharks the V
              (variable),  J (joining) and C (constant) regions are not separate as in
              mammals, with their products coming together  and combining to form different
              immunglobulin molecules, but exist in  V,J,C  clusters. Nevertheless the
              proteins of the shark show great diversity and a lot of similarity to the
              mammalian chains.  More recent studies from this laboratory show that the RAG
              (re
