Title       : Silver: Concentrations, Sources, Processes in Fresh Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1995   
File        : a9406373

Award Number: 9406373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92363              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gaboury Benoit gaboury.benoit@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,9189,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                  9406373     Benoit    Silver is one of the most toxic metals in the aquatic
              environment,  yet, because of past contamination artifacts, there are currently
               no reliable data on its concentration, transport, and fate in fresh  waters. 
              Based on lab experiments that simulate estuarine  conditions, silver at
              moderate levels can be directly toxic to  plankton and invertebrates while low
              levels can influence estuarine  community structure and reduce bivalve growth
              rates.   Fresh  waters, having more silver sources and less complexation by 
              chloride  than do estuaries, are likely to have an even greater  problem with
              silver toxicity. Silver's naturally low abundance  means that it may derive
              almost entirely from anthropogenic  sources, and can serve as a non-degradable
              tracer of pollution,  free from obfuscation by natural background concentration
               variations.  An equally important reason to study silver is that it  is one of
              the few pure class B metals, and as such, its  study can  help to delineate one
              end of the total range of metal behavior.  At  present the aquatic chemistry of
              silver is poorly understood.    Because of the almost complete lack of reliable
              information on  freshwater silver, this proposal is designed as a
              reconnaissance to  explore the biogeochemical context of silver cycling and to 
              position researchers for more detailed studies of specific  processes in the
              future.  The research comprises three main  components:  1) to initiate
              establishment of benchmark Ag levels in  freshwater, 2) to identify and
              quantify natural and anthropogenic  sources, and 3) to specify and begin to
              investigate processes and  mechanisms that control silver's transport,
              bioavailability, and  fate.      The research will use ultra-clean methods to
              avoid contamination  artifacts that have plagued nearly all previous studies on
              trace  metals in fresh waters.  An important goal is to prompt additional 
              freshwater studies  that use these methods.  The investigation will  be
              conducted along the entire length  of the once highly-  industrialized
              Quinnipiac River, including a mid-stream lake.  A  mass balance approach will
              be used, providing the opportunity to  compare natural, point, and nonpoint
              sources of silver, and to  quantify removal rates.  Based on preliminary
              measurements,  headwaters of the Quinnipiac are extremely clean, while the
              lower  river is badly contaminated.  Two other rivers, the Naugatuck and 
              Connecticut, will be studied in less depth in order to increase the  generality
              of  the findings within the constraints of a modest  budget.  Of these two, the
              Naugatuck has a history of severe metal  pollution, while the Connecticut does
              not.    Techniques that will be used are:  1) conventional membrane  filtration
              (to separate particulate and non-particulate fractions),  2) ultrafiltration
              (for colloidal forms), 3) anodic stripping  voltammetry (to appraise silver
              -organic matter complexes), 4)   thermodynamic calculations (to estimate
              dissolved ion speciation),  5) measurement of pore water (to evaluate diffusive
              flux from  sediments), and 6) Ag concentration  and 210Pb geochronology of 
              sediments (to assess resuspension fluxes and document contamination  history).
