Title       : Formation of Hollow Fiber Membranes via TIPS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0004534

Award Number: 0004534
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330794             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Lloyd LLOYD@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-0004534
Douglas R. Lloyd
University of Texas

ABSTRACT

Polymeric
              membranes in flat sheet and hollow fiber form are the basis of many industrial
              separation processes.  The advantages of the hollow fiber geometry in membrane
              processes are well documented in the literature.  Traditionally, phase
              inversion techniques have been used to make the hollow fibers from glassy
              polymers.  In 1981, the thermally induced phase separation (TIPS) method for
              making flat sheet membranes was introduced.  TIPS allows the production of high
              performance membranes from a broader range of polymeric materials that offer
              performance advantages over phase inversion membranes for certain applications
              because of greater thermal and chemical stability.  For example, potential
              applications include separations involving of strong organic solvents and high
              concentrations other harsh chemicals, separations involving elevated
              temperatures, purification of etching solutions in the micro-electronics
              industry, lactic acid recovery in the food industry, and separation of toxic
              pollutants, pharmaceutics, and fermentation products, as well as membrane
              distillation.  In many of these membrane applications, it is essential to have
              an anisotropic membrane with well controlled pore structure. The objective of
              the proposed research is to provide the requisite fundamental knowledge
              necessary to control porous structure in anisotropic, microporous, hollow fiber
              membranes produced via TIPS.

This research project constitutes a systematic
              and fundamental study to characterize and model the impact of system physical
              properties and processing parameters on the processability, microscopic and
              macroscopic structure, and performance of hollow fiber membranes formed via the
              TIPS process.  Through a balance of modeling and experiments, this research is
              generating the fundamental knowledge needed to control the concentration and
              temperature gradients in the homogeneous solution and to develop the process
              for the formation of anisotropic hollow fibers on a laboratory scale.  A fully
              coupled heat-, mass-, and momentum-transfer model for predicting the
              temperature, concentration and velocity profiles within the nascent membrane at
              the time of phase separation and surface pore size after quenching is being
              devised.

