Title       : Ordering the Heavens: Astronomy & Cosmology in the Carolingian Renaissance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a0004224

Award Number: 0004224
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce S. Eastwood   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the Carolingian Renaissance (ninth-tenth centuries) was there any place for
              natural science, especially astronomy and cosmology, and did any notable
              innovation occur? Answering "yes" to this question, the project expands the
              cultural and institutional motivations of that renaissance and accords
              importance to the study of the natural world order. The revival and use of a
              set of four texts on astronomy and cosmology from the Roman Empire by
              Carolingian scholars, teachers, and students initiated a new stage in
              scientific awareness, advancing well beyond the focus of the previous three
              centuries upon time-keeping and the construction of calendars. New concepts of
              celestial order were more elaborated when using numbers and were distinctly
              novel and inventive in their attention to space. Routine studies of the heavens
              came to include diagrams, both for clarity and for instruction in new themes,
              during the ninth century. Both commentary and diagrams added to the four Roman
              texts provided not only explanations but also questions and alternatives to
              their contents. Diagrams especially were used to clarify, question, and
              redirect doctrines in these texts. Diagrams were a tool for the creation of
              hypotheses and models in Carolingian astronomy.

Teaching and research on
              astronomy and cosmology was enabled by the lending, copying, excerpting, and
              glossing of the ancient texts. Many Carolingian institutions participated,
              making the activity an essential part of the renaissance. Each of the texts
              stimulated a somewhat different set of interests and questions. Study of the
              many Latin manuscripts from the period shows attention to the following few
              among a large group of topics: planetary order, circumsolar planets, the
              different lengths of the four seasons, retrograde motion of planets, eccentric
              and epicyclic models of planetary motion, and the force of the sun as a
              planetary influence. These topics received discussion and diagrams by
              Carolingian scholars. Over the course of the ninth and early tenth centuries a
              tremendous body of new knowledge was created, a body of knowledge characterized
              primarily by qualitative models and complemented by subordinate quantitative
              data. The Carolingian Renaissance created anew an awareness of forms of
              planetary order and motion that had disappeared in late Antiquity. This
              understanding was an essential basis for further inquiry and development in the
              eleventh and twelfth centuries as Greco-Arabic astronomy was encountered and
              then actively sought.

The project is a library research topic, designed to
              study of medieval Latin manuscripts. Among the many copies of each text the
              variations in text, scholarly comments in margins, and varying diagrams added
              as explanations or questions reveal the different understandings of these texts
              by different Carolingian scholars at different times.  As a result,  the
              project will significantly advance knowledge in the history of science, the
              philosophy of science, the study of knowledge-transfer across cultures, and the
              historical study of the Carolingian Renaissance.


