Title       : Affirmative Action at Work: Corporate Compliance Activites and Workforce
               Composition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0004333

Award Number: 0004333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174655             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank R. Dobbin dobbin@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In 1964, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act, which outlawed employment
              discrimination, but did not outline specific means of compliance.  Employers
              experimented with dozens of different compliance measures.  Many were largely
              symbolic, such as anti-discrimination policies, while others offered procedural
              guarantees of equal treatment, such as in dealing with sexual harassment and
              formal promotion.  Still others were more substantive in that they involved
              positive steps to increase diversity, such as special management training for
              women and minority mentoring programs. Which of these measures have worked? 
              How did the law matter, and through what kinds of changes in employment
              practices did it have influence?  This project builds on institutional theories
              of organizational action to address these questions.  It distinguishes between
              symbolic, procedural, and substantive anti-discrimination activities, and
              specifies hypotheses about the relative effectiveness of each strategy.

The
              project tests the hypotheses using employment data from the annual reports that
              412 large employers submitted to the government from 1978 through 1993.  These
              publicly available reports detail employment by race, ethnicity, and gender in
              nine occupational categories.  It also surveys these companies to chart the
              history of their personnel practices, and merges the survey data with the
              annual reports.  It then analyzes how particular employment practices of the
              companies (obtained from the survey data) affect the gender, racial, and ethnic
              composition of their workforce (obtained from the annual reports).  The project
              represents the first sustained effort to sort out the effects of employment
              practices on workforce composition, and to measure the effectiveness of
              activities designed to satisfy anti-discrimination laws in making the workforce
              more diverse.

