Title       : NBER Web-Based Archive of International Trade Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a0004290

Award Number: 0004290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Lipsey rlipsey@gc.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Feenstra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will establish a Web-based archive of international trade data. 
              The archive will be of use to economic policy makers needing both recent data
              on international trade, and comparable data for past years.  While the U.S.
              federal government now distributes current data through the National Trade
              Databank (NTDB), this data can be difficult to use and does not provide the
              comparable data for previous years; thus, the NTDB does not allow policy makers
              to make decisions based on longer-term trends.  Our archive will provide data
              on both U.S. and worldwide trade, and also on trade barriers, over a wide range
              of years.  In addition to its usefulness for policy, the archive will be of
              particular help to dissertation writers and other young scholars doing
              empirical research in international economics. The principal investigators will
              work in conjunction with a number of other researchers at the National Bureau
              of Economic Research (NBER, Cambridge, MA and New York). 
     At the heart of
              this archive is a comprehensive database of U.S. import and export data.  In
              addition, the archive will include:
   Historical data, U.S. exports and
              imports: prices, quantities, and values, quarterly for 1879-1913; values,
              matched with U.S. production, at ten year intervals from 1869-1947
   
              State-level agricultural exports and imports for the United States
   
              Detailed annual export and domestic price data for manufactures from the U.S.,
              U.K., Germany, Japan, France, Sweden, Taiwan, Korea, and Singapore
   Outward
              foreign direct investment data for the U.S., Japan, Germany, Sweden,
              Switzerland and some developing countries, as well as inward foreign direct
              investment data for many countries
    World trade data, as available from the
              United Nations and Statistics Canada
    Trade flows to and from China,
              computed from several sources
     Data on congressional voting in the U.S. on
              trade issues, related to characteristics of the congressional districts
   
              Data on U.S. antidumping cases
    U.S. and worldwide tariff data
    This
              data will be useful for addressing a wide range of issues, such as:  the impact
              of international trade on domestic employment and wages; the responsiveness of
              trade flows to exchange rate fluctuations; how international trade flows change
              as production moves to lower-wage countries; and how growing exports from
              newly-industrialized countries has impacted specific industries. 

