Title       : US-South Africa Dissertation Enhancement: Assessing the Impact of Transitional
               Justice on Democratic Legitimacy--A Case Study of South Africa's Truth and
               Reconciliation Commission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2001   
File        : a0004436

Award Number: 0004436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer Widner  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0511603   Societal Aspects                        
Program Ref : 1066,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0004436
Widner

This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US graduate
              student, Mr. David Backer, working under the guidance of Professor Jennifer
              Widner, of the Department of Political Science at the University of Michigan,
              to conduct a case study to assess how and under what conditions the Truth and
              Reconciliation Commission (TRC) has influenced support for South Africa's
              transition to a democracy.

Truth and reconciliation commissions are commonly
              being used by countries undergoing a democratic transition.  Do these
              commissions have any direct and substantial effects, either positive or
              negative, on individuals' loyalty to the institutions and practices of a new
              democracy?  Currently many scholars and practitioners are in disagreement about
              the effectiveness of these commissions. Backer will conduct a case study of
              South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) to determine whether
              or not the opportunities for participation and engagement in its processes
              generated support for the newly emerging democratic institutions in South
              Africa.  The TRC stressed neutrality (exemplified by the equal status accorded
              to abuses by the apartheid regime and the opposition), openness, and
              transparency, and its proceedings were made public through media offerings and
              official reports.  Thus a large segment of South African adults either
              participated in or knew about the TRC process.  Through ethnographic research,
              a community study, focus groups, testimony evaluation, and surveys, Backer will
              evaluate two models of political support, one that focuses on public
              perceptions of the legitimacy of the TRC process, and the second which embeds
              the first model within the broader context of a commitment to South Africa's
              emerging democracy.  Each of these has models four explanatory variables: 1)
              mitigating factors, such as awareness, participation, and projected images
              about political relations and procedures; 2) the level of policy satisfaction;
              3) alternative explanations; and 4) control variables, such as age and gender. 
              Subjects will have been participants in the TRC process, followed media reports
              of the proceedings, and/or read the official documents released by the TRC. 
              The results should provide important knowledge on how successful these
              commissions are likely to be in performing their assigned functions.  Dr. Hugo
              van der Merwe and others at the Centre for the Study of Violence and
              Reconciliation (affiliated with the University of Witwatersrand) will provide
              guidance on this project to Mr. Backer.   

The results are expected to
              provide valuable information for the study of democratization and transitional
              justice.  Researchers and government officials will also gain important
              knowledge about the impact that the Truth and Reconciliation Commission has had
              on South Africa's democratic transition.  The project will also support an
              international research experience very early in the career of an outstanding
              graduate student.  This grant is being jointly funded by the Division of
              International Programs and the Division of Social and Economic Sciences.

