Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Science in the Creation of
               Endangered Species Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2001     
File        : a0004300

Award Number: 0004300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9030               (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Sanford Rikoon RikoonJ@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This study will examine the role of science in the formation of United States
              endangered species policy.  In particular, the project will use the West Indian
              manatee as a longitudinal case study.  The project will accomplish three major
              goals. First, it will examine when and how scientific knowledge is incorporated
              into policy. Second, it will explore the role that scientists play in the
              process of creating biodiversity policy. Finally, it will identify what, when,
              and why social, cultural, political and economic factors preempt the use of
              science in the process of policy formation and implementation. Using the West
              Indian manatee as a longitudinal case study, multiple research methods will be
              used to achieve these goals. Specifically, researchers will use content
              analysis of scientific literature published on the manatee, content analysis of
              documents establishing policy directed at manatee recovery and protection, and
              personal interviews of key persons responsible for the creation of policy
              regarding manatee recovery and protection. The research findings will be useful
              to scientists, natural resource managers, and legislators by documenting and
              analyzing the process through which linkages are made between science and
              endangered species policy. The research will also contribute new knowledge
              about the sociological significance of science in the policymaking process.
