Title       : The Limits of Law: An Analysis of Immigration Law Implementation in Italy and
               Spain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a0004218

Award Number: 0004218
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66687              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kitty C. Calavita kccalavi@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the implementation of immigration laws recently passed in
              Italy and Spain that include expansive legalization programs and greater access
              for immigrants to social services.  These laws seem inconsistent with the
              economic benefits that previous studies have observed from the marginalization
              of immigrant workers.  Several hypotheses will be tested. First, it is expected
              that these laws, despite the change in policy, will have little substantial
              impact on the numbers of illegal immigrants or their access to social services.
              Second, it is hypothesized that there will be a convergence of outcomes in
              Spain and Italy. Third, it is anticipated that the limited impacts of these
              laws will be primarily the consequence of economic-structural, not political,
              forces.  The project will draw from a wide range of data sources, including
              government documents, secondary sources, and interviews. This project will make
              several theoretical contributions. Most notably, it will contribute to the
              legal impact literature, which focuses on the ability of law to affect real
              social change; the literature on immigration law and policy as it relates to
              the failure of immigration law to achieve its stated objectives; and the
              literature addressing the symbolic aspects of law. At the broadest level, the
              project will enhance our understanding of the relative importance of economic
              and political variables in the implementation of immigration law and, by
              extrapolation, legal change more generally.
