Title       : Integrating Lay and Expert Perspectives on Risk for Site-Specific
               Decision-Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2001  
File        : a0004329

Award Number: 0004329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369686             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine Vaughan evaughan@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Decisions about a contaminated waste site can lead to significant social
              conflict and can have enduring psychological impacts within nearby communities.
              The risk situation and its potential to affect the quality of life can evoke
              hypervigilance, outrage, fear, apathy and a decreased sense of efficacy or
              control. Productive relationships between communities and regulatory agencies
              are essential for timely, fair and effective remediation decisions. However,
              risk management is particularly difficult when the public questions the
              reliability of risk estimates, remains skeptical about assurances of "no
              association" between health and exposures, and asserts that traditional
              analyses largely overlook concerns of affected populations. Early and
              meaningful public involvement in risk management is advocated as the best plan
              for minimizing conflict and improving decisions. But early stages of the
              process traditionally have been viewed as strictly in the realm of experts, or
              "science-based" activities. The integration of scientific principles and public
              values to profile a community risk situation rarely has been attempted in this
              country. The feasibility and effects of this strategy on the well-being of
              communities and the resolution of disputes about risk remain to be
              demonstrated. This project implements and evaluates an innovative strategy for
              participatory risk characterization proposed by the National Research Council.
              The model suggests that scientific analysis, as well as the perspectives and
              values of affected populations, should be incorporated into the process of
              profiling and characterizing risks. Within selected lower income and ethnically
              diverse communities, this longitudinal field experiment examines public
              responses to risk characterization and communications with officials from an
              involved federal agency. Several communities in close proximity to a site on
              the Environmental Protection Agency's National Priority List are matched on
              specific sociodemographic and other variables, and then randomly selected for
              participatory risk characterization or standard procedures. Long-term
              consequences of the new process are measured through telephone surveys and
              repeated in-person interviews with residents. The project offers an in depth
              study of change and stability over time in communities' risk judgments, coping
              strategies, framing of the decision problem, emotional responses,
              interpretation of and memory for risk information, perceived goals of risk
              management and trust in relevant parties. Archival records of communication
              between the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) and
              communities near prioritized sites also are used to document social conflict
              and public responses in the presence or absence of participatory risk
              characterization. Implementation of a well-controlled experiment is possible
              through extensive collaboration with the ATSDR. The ATSDR is the federal agency
              primarily responsible for communicating with public audiences about the human
              health risks presented by prioritized toxic waste sites. The study is expected
              to yield useful information about the feasibility and effects of increased
              community involvement early in the management process when risks are initially
              characterized. 
