Title       : Global Sea Level and Late Cretaceous to Miocene Sequences: New Jersey Coastal
               Plain Drilling Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0004164

Award Number: 0004164
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura M. Bybell lbybell@usgs.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Survey
	      Mail Stop 970
	      Reston, VA  22092    /   -

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0004164
Miller


Successful drilling onshore in the New Jersey Coastal Plain
              and offshore on the NJ shelf and slope has provided:  1)  ages for major Late
              Cretaceous - Cenozoic sequence boundaries;  2)  causal links between the
              formation of sequence boundaries and the growth of ice sheets between 42 and 10
              Ma, and hints that such a link exists in the older, supposedly "ice-free"
              world;  3)  preliminary estimates of the amplitudes of global sea - level
              changes;  4)  evaluation of links among sequence stratigraphic architecture,
              global sea-level variations, and margin evolution;  and 5)  constraints on the
              causes of major global events in Earth history, including the middle
              Eocene-earliest Oligocene global cooling, the late Paleocene thermal maximum,
              the K/T boundary, early and late Maastrichtian events, and the
              Cenomanian/Turonian carbon extraction event.  

Drilling onshore in New
              Jersey has met fundamental goals, but has also raised fundamental questions
              that can be answered by drilling in the Delmarva peninsula.  Drilling near
              Bethany Beach, DE will provide: 1) the first detailed record of upper
              Miocene-Pliocene 
(10 - 2) Ma sequences in this region; 2)  downdip late
              Eocene to Pliocene sequences needed for eustatic estimates;  3) a stratigraphic
              reference section for the late Eocene Chesapeake Bay impact.  

This project
              will take advantage of an opportunity for joint funding and collaboration with
              the USGS by drilling a borehole on the coast near Bethany Beach, DE that will
              not only yield a late Eocene-Pliocene record of marine sequences, but also will
              provide a critical test of tectonic changes in subsidence on the Atlantic
              margin.  The USGS Eastern Regional Mapping Team (ERMT) drillers will
              continuously core a 1500-1600 ft. borehole as part of a developing cooperative
              project with Rutgers, NSF, and allied partners (New Jersey Geological Survey,
              LDEO, USGS Water Resources, CNRS (France), WHOI, Delaware and Maryland
              Geological Surveys).  Most direct drilling costs are already secured
              (USGS/NJGS/DGS);  this award only provides science support costs and minimal
              drilling costs to deepen the hole for the P.I.s purposes. 
***

