Title       : Collaborative Research: Diel, Seasonal, and Interannual Patterns in Zooplankton
               and Micronekton Species Composition in the Subtropical Atlantic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0004256

Award Number: 0004256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239881             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah K. Steinberg debbies@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              


Planktonic communities comprise an incredibly wide diversity of organisms
              that form the basis of marine food webs. We propose a multi?species inventory
              of zooplankton and micronekton at the Bermuda Atlantic Time?series Study (BATS)
              station, an 11 ?year, ongoing oceanographic time series situated in the western
              North Atlantic subtropical gyre or Sargasso Sea. The program will provide
              high?resolution species data that covers diel, seasonal, interannual, and
              decadal time scales. Detailed accompanying environmental data already available
              from BATS cruises (e.g., water column temperature, oxygen, nutrients, and plant
              pigment concentration) add additional value to the data set. Both species and
              environmental "metadata" will be formatted using techniques already well
              developed and in use at BATS for compilation and provision of data of interest
              into OBIS. Our proposed project will involve participation from both academia
              (Bermuda Biological Station for Research, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution,
              Russian Academy of Sciences' Zoological Institute) and government (the
              Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History). We have
              developed a partnership with significant collective experience in the study of
              the subtropical North Atlantic system and expertise in the identification (and
              ecology of) all major taxa of zooplankton and micronekton. This project will
              provide a high quality time series of zooplankton and micronekton species
              composition enabling us to dissect the difference between natural variability
              and real 'change' in the diversity of plankton communities. This will be
              critical for testing and validation of ecosystem models, and for understanding
              the effects of long term climate change on ecosystems.

