Title       : Operation of the CPR Survey in the North Atlantic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0004385

Award Number: 0004385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $635505             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Wiebe pwiebe@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) survey, (1931 to present) is the only
              long- term and ocean basin wide operational survey of plankton in the world.
              There has been an increasing recognition of the value of this multi-decadal
              time series as a 'barometer' against which to assess environmental change.
              There is a growing awareness that the quality of marine ecosystems is subject
              to a wide range of anthropogenic impacts from pollution stress, eutrophication,
              and loss of biodiversity, to over exploitation of fishing resources. Evaluating
              and quantifying the scale and effects of such issues is becoming increasingly
              important as an ecosystem approach is applied to environmental management.
              Superimposed on the above issues are the potential effects of climate change on
              oceanic ecosystems that appear to be linked to increases in anthropogenic
              greenhouse gases and global temperature.  Operated by the Sir Alister Hardy
              Foundation for Ocean Science (SAHFOS) in the North Atlantic, this survey is
              supported by an international consortium of funding. . The USA as a member of
              this consortium has played a key role in helping to underpin the survey since
              SAHFOS was established in 1990. As a long term program, the main objective is
              to maintain the spatial and temporal integrity of the survey and to continue to
              add further years to the time series. The Survey already comprises close to
              200,000 samples analyzed into ~400 different taxa of zoo- and phytoplankton.
              This resource provides opportunities for study of pelagic ecosystems at a wide
              range of temporal and spatial scales. As the survey expands into other regional
              seas and oceans comparative ecological studies between different Large Marine
              Ecosystems will be possible. High potential exists for calibration with
              multispectral satellite products. The results have already demonstrated highly
              significant relationships with hydroclimatic variability represented by the
              North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) and hold considerable promise as input to a
              new generation of ecosystem based fishery models. Other objectives include: the
              development of an improved understanding of mechanisms behind observed decadal
              and shorter period spatial and temporal variability and the interpretation of
              hydrobiological variability and biodiversity within the context of global and
              climate change in marine ecosystems. Central to the aims of SAHFOS is the
              promotion of the CPR approach within international programs such as GOOS,
              GLOBEC and LMEs.
