Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Design and Implementation of Automatic Parallel
               Detection Layer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a0004438

Award Number: 0004438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23612              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nader Bagherzadeh nader@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 5944,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0004438
Bagherzadeh 

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Professor Nader Bagherzadeh, Department of Electrical and Computer
              Engineering, the University of California, Irvine, California and Dr. Hesham
              Eldeeb, Computer and Systems Department, Electronics Research Institute, Cairo,
              Egypt.  In applications requiring high computing power, one approach is to put
              together many processors in the same computer. The utilization of all the
              available computational power involves a tremendous programming effort, which
              creates a need for compiler and run-time support.  Software developers face the
              challenge of how to exploit application parallelism without rewriting and
              redesigning current sequential programs and algorithms from scratch.  One
              approach is to isolate programmers from parallelism by adopting optimizing
              compilers for parallelism detection, named as implicit parallelism.  This frees
              programmers from the details of controlling concurrency, thus concentrate on
              the application.  The work of the two scientists is aimed at fully automating
              the parallelization process of computer program applications to transform the
              sequential source code into parallel source code.  They will introduce an
              Automatic Parallel Detection Layer (APDL) which accepts as input a sequential
              source code C program and produces as output an equivalent source case program
              in parallel form which is then executed on a distributed memory multicomputer
              machine.

Scope:  This collaborative project brings Dr. Eldeeb's experience
              in high performance computing, parallel virtual machines, parallel logic
              programming and virtual reality to work in the PI's laboratory at UC, Irvine. 
              Dr. Bagherzadeh's research interest is in the area of high performance
              computing, superscalar design, multithreading and virtual reality.  His
              expertise also includes star-connected cycles interconnection networks and
              real-time computer processing.  His theoretical and computational background
              will significantly help in the successful completion of this research.  He will
              be responsible for providing the expertise to formulate the structure of the
              automatic layer, and will provide the applied cases for the project according
              to certain required applications in his research laboratory.  
The project
              meets INT criteria for support of cooperative projects that are mutually
              beneficial.  Funding for this project is provided by the Division of
              International Programs and the Division of Computer-Communications Research.  
