Title       : Exploring the Earth at High Resolution: The IRIS 2005 Program Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0004370

Award Number: 0004370
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82463539           (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Simpson simpson@iris.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inc Res Inst Seismology
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  20005    202/682-2220

NSF Program : 1578      FACILITY SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1307,1322,1325,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0004370
Simpson    

The Earth's interior remains a major scientific frontier
              holding the key to understanding the origin of the planet, its evolution
              through geologic time to its present structural state, as well as the internal
              forces driving plate dynamics, earthquakes, volcanism, and the geomagnetic
              field. Inaccessible to direct observation below a few kilometers (the limit of
              drilling and exposure by erosion) the Earth's crust, mantle, and core are
              primarily studied through their interaction with seismic waves. Recent
              developments in seismic sensor design, and the acquisition, transmission and
              storage of data have resulted in dramatic improvements in the resolving power
              of seismic imaging of the interior. Earthquake research, including rapid and
              accurate location and characterization of the earthquake source, its magnitude
              and a better understanding of the physical process involved, has also
              benefitted greatly from recent technical advances. In parallel with these
              advances, the science of seismology has also increased its ability to
              contribute to the monitoring of a ban on underground nuclear testing.   
              

The Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS) is a
              consortium of 96 U.S. universities and not-for-profit institutions with
              research and teaching programs in seismology. IRIS operates a national facility
              for the development, deployment, and operational support of modern digital
              seismic instrumentation to serve national goals in basic research in the earth
              sciences, in earthquake research, and in nuclear test ban monitoring. IRIS is
              organized in four major program elements: (1) The Global Seismographic Network
              (GSN) currently consists of a global deployment of 136 permanently installed
              very-broad-band, wide dynamic range digital seismic stations; (2) The Program
              for Array Seismic Studies of the Continental Lithosphere (PASSCAL) manages a
              pool of portable seismometers which are made available to the seismology
              research community for scheduled regional and local scale studies and  rapid
              response for earthquake aftershock studies; (3) The IRIS Data Management System
              (DMS) provides the national and international seismic research community with
              timely access to data from the GSN and PASSCAL. It archives and distributes the
              data from these programs and facilitates the standardization of data formats
              and data exchange protocols. The IRIS DMS is also a founding member of the
              international Federation of Digital Seismographic Networks and is designated as
              the FDSN's official data repository; and (4) The IRIS Education and Outreach
              (E&O) Program which enables audiences beyond seismologists to access and use
              seismological data and research for educational purposes, including teacher
              workshops, student internships, museum exhibits, educational materials, and
              programs for under-resourced schools.  This award will provide support for the
              operation of the IRIS facility during the period 2001-2005.   
***

