Title       : Community Values in the Use of Computer Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a0004243

Award Number: 0004243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146243             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew L. Feenberg afeenber@mail.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to contribute to the further development of the
              concept and practice of "virtual community" by addressing three interrelated
              questions: (1) What technical features and designs of computer networks need to
              be introduced, modified, or eliminated in order to support and facilitate
              community activities and values? (2) What norms and forms of social
              organization are required by robust virtual communities? (3) What are the
              offline conditions necessary for online community to prosper? The project
              understands "community" in the strong sense as a scene of long-term
              interactions on which a large share of human development occurs. As such it is
              a fundamental human value and deserves a prominent place in the field of
              computer ethics. The practice of virtual community is also relevant to the
              prospects for democracy in the information age. The democratization of the
              Internet involves not merely the economics of participation, but also the
              ability of ordinary people to express themselves and pursue meaningful
              experiences in the virtual worlds created by computer communication. Community
              applications on the Internet have arisen spontaneously for the most part and
              there has been little study of how different types of software impact online
              community life. But adequacy of software support for network communities will
              be among the decisive factors determining whether they will succeed in becoming
              a widely accepted means to reliable and consequential relationships and
              cooperative action with others. As commercial interest in online community
              begins to emerge, groupware intended for community building proliferates on
              different platforms and in different formats. A new field of software
              development - "groupware for community" - is starting to take shape. This
              research addresses issues central for the development of this field. It will
              evaluate the technical features and functions offered by the most widely used
              types of "groupware for community" against a set of ethical values and norms
              definitive for community. It will carry out case studies involving particular
              online groups with different groupware formats, namely: a mailing list, a
              newsgroup, a web-based community-building application, and a "virtual world."
              The goal will be to uncover whether the existing software reinforces or
              frustrates the attempt to realize the ethical principles of community life. The
              project will also investigate the "real-life" contexts in which these groups
              have emerged and established themselves as sustainable entities. Presentations,
              publications, and the final report will propose guidelines for effective
              technical (hardware and software) and organizational support for online
              community-building. Findings will enrich the theoretical understanding of the
              relationship between software design and user agency and, generally, between
              information technology and society.
