Title       : Development of an Inexpensive Continuous GPS System for Remote Monitoring of
               Volcano Deformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a0004067

Award Number: 0004067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46484              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis J. Geist dgeist@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0004067
Geist

This grant provides partial support to acquire
              continuously-monitoring GPS units that will be installed on Sierra Negra
              volcano in the Galapagos Islands of Ecuador.  Several technological
              breakthroughs now enable the deployment of a continuous monitoring,
              high-precision GPS network in a remote setting at reasonable cost.  The network
              to be developed in this proposal will comprise four single frequency GPS
              instruments with two dual frequency instruments, one of which will serve as a
              base station.  Data will be continually streamed from the single frequency
              receivers to the base via radiomodem, where it will then be relayed in near
              real time via VSAT to UNAVCO in Boulder.  The data will then be available via
              ftp to the principal investigator at the University of Idaho for processing. 
              The network will be deployed on Sierra Negra volcano in the Galapagos
              archipelago.  Sierra Negra has been chosen for a variety of reasons.  First,
              satellite interferometry indicates that Sierra Negra is currently experiencing
              some of the fastest uplift rates of any volcano on the planet, on order of 50
              cm/y.  Second, the remote location of the Galapagos provides a robust test for
              deployment and operation of such a system, to demonstrate that it can be used
              to monitor virtually any volcano in this hemisphere.  Although the archipelago
              is remote, Sierra Negra is relatively accessible, the PI has a great deal of
              logistical experience there, and the project will be supported by the Charles
              Darwin Research Station.  Third, there are several projects currently being
              undertaken with the goal of understanding deformation of Sierra Negra's caldera
              (annual campaign GPS,  fracture mapping, and monthly INSAR measurements). These
              are expected to dramatically increase our understanding of the uplift at Sierra
              Negra, and the deformation processes leading to caldera formation in
              general.

***

