Title       : Observational Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0004205

Award Number: 0004205
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186478             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Rosenbaum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An observational study is an empiric investigation of the effects of a
              treatment, policy, intervention or exposure which was not randomly assigned to
              subjects, as it would be in a randomized experiment.  Observational studies are
              common in most fields that study people, because harmful or unwanted treatments
              cannot be imposed on human subjects for experimental purposes.  The central
              difficulty in an observational study is that, because treatments were not
              randomly assigned, the subjects receiving different treatments may not be
              comparable, so differing outcomes after treatment may not be effects caused by
              the treatment.  If the treatment groups differ before treatment in ways that
              have been measured, there is an overt bias that often can be removed by
              adjustments, such as matching.  Often there is concern that treatment groups
              differed before treatment in ways that were not measured, that is, concern
              about hidden biases.  Hidden biases cannot generally be removed by adjustments
              and must be addressed by other means.  Statistical methodology for
              observational studies concerns adjustments for overt biases and methods of
              design and analysis to address hidden biases.  The current project will develop
              and extend statistical methods for overt and hidden biases.

In many fields,
              including health services research, epidemiology, public program evaluation,
              and economics, most studies of treatment effects are observational studies. 
              Observational studies are also common in several fields that perform
              experiments, including clinical medicine and psychology.  Statistical methods
              for observational studies are useful and are used in these fields.

