Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research (INRIA): Detection and Characterization of
               Temporal Changes in Satellite Image Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0004494

Award Number: 0004494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24502              (Estimated)
Investigator: Isaac Cohen icohen@iris.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 5918,9198,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0004494
Cohen

This three-year award for U.S.-France cooperative research in
              computer vision involves Isaac Cohen of the Institute for Robotics and
              Intelligent Systems at the University of Southern California (USC), Roberto
              Manduchi of USC and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and Isabelle Herlin,
              Director of the Projet Air at the Institute for Research in Informatics and
              Applied Mathematics (INRIA) at Rocquencourt, France.  The US and French
              research teams will address the problem of detection and characterization of
              temporal change in environmental image sequences obtained through satellite
              remote sensing.  The environmental problems in question involve vegetation and
              forestry monitoring, and ocean/atmospheric sciences.

Computer vision
              techniques are widely used for detecting and characterizing temporal changes in
              images.  This proposal extends this work to the characterization of image
              properties for texture change detection as found in vegetation and forest
              images, and to the determination of physical properties for non rigid motion
              phenomena such as clouds, and ocean-atmosphere exchanges. The US investigators
              bring to this collaboration expertise in optical flow, variational methods and
              texture modeling.  This is complemented by the French team's expertise in non
              rigid motion in general and the motion of clouds in particular.  The project
              also takes advantage of access to Landsat remote sensing images and ground
              truth measures provided by the French team.  The project will advance
              understanding of methods and techniques for automatic analysis of satellite
              images and lead to development of new computer vision tools for use in earth
              systems science research 

This award represents the US side of a joint
              proposal to the NSF and the French National Institute for Research in
              Informatics and Applied Mathematics (INRIA).  NSF will cover travel funds and
              living expenses for the US investigators and graduate student.  INRIA will
              support the visits of French researchers to the United States. 

