Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Language Socialization from Modality to Morality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2000  
File        : a0004156

Award Number: 0004156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10853              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie H. Goodwin mgoodwin@anthro.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this dissertation project is to investigate the relationship
              between the socialization of language and the socialization of morality.  More
              particularly, this study takes a discourse-grammar and linguistic anthropology
              approach to investigating the interdependent relationship between (a) the
              cultural socialization of moral concepts and practices and (b) the language
              socialization of modality and abstract metaphors.

The cultural socialization
              part of this study begins with recent findings by  neurological studies of the
              prefrontal cortex which indicate that there is a sensitive period for the
              development of social and moral development from around 10 to at least 15 years
              of age.  These studies also indicate that the particular social and moral
              values and practices we develop depend on physical and social interaction with
              others in our community; this interaction can also be understood as a kind of
              fully embodied socialization process. The linguistic part of this study begins
              with less recent and much more meager findings by linguistic researchers that
              seem to indicate that the mature development of a "full" modal system occurs
              over time and with experience, and does not reach full maturity until at least
              the age of nine but probably well beyond the age of 12.  Based on both the
              neurological and linguistic findings, this research project is guided by the
              hypothesis that there is in fact a direct and important synergy which is taking
              place between (a) the cultural socialization of moral values and practices; (b)
              the linguistic socialization of modality as a complex system of deontics,
              epistemics and conditionals; and (c) the cultural and linguistic socialization
              of abstract metaphors in order to integrate cognitive, behavioral and
              linguistic expressions of moral values and practices.

Subject ages for the
              study range from 11-14; activities include movement as well as speech.  Data
              collection focuses on the videotaping of naturally occurring classroom and
              rehearsal activities.  Video data will be digitized, transcribed and
              micro-analyzed for movement as well as speech.  Linguistic analysis will
              examine what modal and metaphorical forms are used, how they are used together
              to form a highly complex semiotic system, and how the linguistic socialization
              of this modal system is related to the socialization of social and moral
              concepts and practices among members of the same community.
