Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Between Two Worlds: Prosecuting Adolescents in
               Juvenile and Criminal Courts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a0004334

Award Number: 0004334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9874               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jo Dixon dixon@mail.soc.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will examines how adolescents are prosecuted and sentenced for
              delinquent acts in criminal courts compared to juvenile courts.  In particular,
              different stages of case processing - pretrial detention, waiver, adjudication,
              and sentencing - will be compared between three different juvenile courts in
              New Jersey and three different criminal courts in New York.  The project will
              examine several hypothesized sources of differences between these courts. 
              Namely, whether the organization and structural arrangements of the forums
              shape the actions of each court.  These arrangements include the physical and
              architectural layout of the court, the goals and normative frameworks adopted
              by the court actors, the rules of operation and organization of the courts, and
              the formal organizational structures of legal institutions.  The project will
              also explore the hypothesis that the qualities of the individual cases or
              defendants will affect the processing and outcome of a case. The project will
              utilize ethnographic and interview data to test these hypotheses.  A
              comparative study of adolescents processed in juvenile and criminal courts is
              important because it bears on both sociological and policy questions.  It adds
              to the organizational literature by testing its applicability to the
              prosecution of adolescents in juvenile and criminal courts.
