Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Managed Care on the Gender Gap
               Among Physicians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a0004424

Award Number: 0004424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory N. Price                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Cutler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The advent and spread of managed care, beginning in the 1970s, has significantly
              increased product market competition in the health care industry.  At the same
              time, the gains in relative earnings of female physicians over the last two
              decades have been remarkable.  How might these two trends be related?  Economic
              theory predicts that increased competition in the product market makes it more
              costly for consumers, colleagues, and employers to discriminate.  Increased
              competition in the market for medical services, associated with the advent and
              spread of managed care, would be expected to lead to improvements in the
              relative earnings of discriminated groups such as women.  This dissertation
              research examines this theory by comparing the change in earnings of women
              physicians to that of male physicians in states with high managed care growth
              to that in states with low managed care growth.  Preliminary findings indicate
              that women physicians in states with high managed care growth narrowed the
              gender gap in hourly earnings by ten percentage points between 1986 and 1990
              relative to women physicians in low managed care growth states.  This nearly
              eliminates the gender gap in hourly earnings and reduces the gap in annual
              earnings by about a third.  

The preliminary findings  yield only a snapshot
              of how changes in the market for medical services affect the gender gap among
              physicians.  To sufficiently explore this topic in detail, this project
              utilizes data on a large sample: proprietary data collected by the American
              Medical Association on an annual basis since 1981.  The AMA data allows one to
              track the supply and geographic distribution of the physician population,
              follow general trends that physicians face in the market for medical services,
              and note important changes in resource utilization and practice arrangements. 
              In short, the AMA data will allow the principal investigator to build on the
              preliminary results  already generated using less suitable sources of data. 
              






















