Title       : Copernicus and the Aristotelian Tradition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0004206

Award Number: 0004206
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andre L. Goddu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stonehill College
	      320 Washington Street
	      Easton, MA  02357    508/565-1069

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT ABSTRACT:  SES 00-04206
Andre Goddu
Copernicus and the Aristotelian
              Tradition


The Copernican theory rejected and reformed the geocentric view
              of the universe.  The main philosophical support for geocentricism derived from
              Aristotle supported by over a thousand years of commentary.  Copernicus was
              educated  in the fundamentals of Aristotelian philosophy at the University of
              Cracow between 1491 and 1495.  Late medieval Aristotelianism encountered by
              Copernicus had departed from Aristotle on a number of issues  for a variety of
              reasons.  Consequently, the late medieval Aristotelianism Copernicus
              encountered in Cracow was eclectic and flexible.  Although Copernicus
              recognized his departure from the tradition, the arguments that he presented in
              his major work were dependent on late medieval commentaries.  Copernicus
              offered no new physics to account for the motions of the earth.  Copernicus
              hoped to persuade Aristotelians to open their minds to consider adapting
              Aristotelian principles to the heliocentric system.  

The PI proposes to
              examine relevant documents in Poland and in Uppsala Sweden related to the
              university education of Copernicus.  The PI also will gain access to laregely
              unrecognized Polish scholarship on these issues, and begin to build bridges
              between Polish historians of science and those in the West.   The PI is seeking
              to document how Copernicus' education helped him frame arguments in the
              Aristotelian tradition.  This research is part of a larger project by the PI
              that aims toward a revisionist account of Aristotelian reactions, Copernican
              defenses, and the scientific revolution.  

