Title       : Ice Extent and Late Glacial and Deglacial History of W. Hunafloi, NW Iceland:
               Combining Terrestrial and Marine Evidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2001      
File        : a0004233

Award Number: 0004233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Andrews andrewsj@Colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Jennings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
OPP-0004233
Andrews

The late Quaternary extent and thickness of
              ice and the deglacial chronology of the Northwest Peninsula of Iceland are
              poorly constrained.  The Principal Investigators will conduct a collaborative
              research project on the glacial and deglacial history of the western coastline
              and uplands of western Hunafloi, NW Iceland, and the adjacent marine trough,
              Hunafloaall.  The proposal builds on marine cruises in 1996, 1997 and 1999, and
              on a pilot field program conducted in the summer of 2000.  The purpose of the
              project is to resolve the late Quaternary glacial history of part of NW Iceland
              and to correlate the terrestrial record with the marine record.  This research
              will add new insight into the glacial history of marine arctic margins and a
              very old debate on biological "refugia."
At least two models for the
              reconstruction of glacial extent during the Lower Glacial Maximum (LGM) and
              subsequent retreat have been suggested for Iceland, but these are based on only
              limited radiocarbon dates.  In the NW Peninsula, the glacial reconstructions
              vary from an extensive ice cover model with no ice free areas to a refugia
              model in which ice free areas existed on the high plateaus with vascular plants
              surviving glaciation.  These studies are based entirely on terrestrial glacial
              evidence and interpretations, but this must be intimately linked to the
              offshore sedimentary record of glacial and marine sediments.  High-resolution
              3.5 kHz acoustic stratigraphy and marine cores from the Hunafloaall trough
              suggest that the LGM extent may have been relatively restricted.  In
              Hunafloaall, a basal dimicton containing foraminifera, is overlain by a thin
              (<2 m) sequence of IRD-rich glacial-marine and marine sediments.  Basal dates
              on the IRD-rich muds indicate deglaciation occurred by 13 thousand years ago
              (ka).  Dates from the dimictons are finite and > 20 ka.  Such a thin deglacial
              sequence provides a major contrast with SW Iceland where the deglacial
              sediments reach thickness of 10-40+ m. The virtual absence of deglacial
              sediments in Hunafloaall is perplexing and raises serious questions of ice
              extent and chronology on the adjacent NW Peninsula.
Cosmogenic isotope
              exposure dating techniques will be used to constrain "maximum" and "minimum"
              models of glacial extent.  Specifically, 3He and 36CI isotopes will be used to
              date the basaltic upland surfaces, end and lateral moraines, and glacial
              erratics.  Tephrachronology and physical properties of the sediment samples
              will be used to link the terrestrial and marine records. 
The Principal
              Investigators will continue their field and laboratory investigations on: 1)
              the vertical and lateral extent of glaciation along this coastline, including
              collection of samples for cosmogenic isotope exposure dating; 2) the pattern
              and timing of deglaciation and any subsequent glacier expansion; 3)
              investigation of the marine cores with the view toward discriminating between
              tills and glacial marine dimictons, and with a focus on more accurately dating
              the onset of deglaciation; and 4) changes in relative sea level as a measure of
              ice load and history.  The field work will continue and expand a pilot program
              that began in summer of 2000, involving the Universities of Colorado, Iceland,
              Goteborg, and Edinburgh.





