Title       : US-Kenya Dissertation Enhancement: Fragmenting the Commons: Property Rights
               Transitions in Maasai Pastoral Land
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a0004415

Award Number: 0004415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Elinor Ostrom ostrom@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0511603   Societal Aspects                        
Program Ref : 5991,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0004415
Ostrom

This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US graduate
              student, Ms. Esther Mwangi, working under the guidance of Professor Elinor
              Ostrom, of the Department of Political Science at Indiana University at
              Bloomington, to conduct a study of the underlying forces in the movement to
              privatize commonly held land in areas inhabited by Maasai pastoralists in
              Kenya.

The transformation of land property rights from communal rights,
              which are often based on indigenous systems, to more formal and legally
              enforced individual rights is occurring throughout much of Subsaharan Africa. 
              Privatization enables modern methods of land management to be applied with the
              expectations that: 1) land productivity will increase; and 2) environmental
              degradation that resulted from the communal systems will be controlled or
              reduced.  But assigning rights to a single holder disenfranchises many
              individuals who formerly had customary rights to the resources in that area. 
              Furthermore, it can result in a highly politicized system for determining land
              access.  Maasailand is a climatically diverse and often harsh environment, and
              the Maasai had traditionally relied on herd mobility to maximize the
              variability of the food and water resources for their livestock.  But starting
              with the land privatization movement in Maasailand in the 1960's, many Maasai
              banded together to form group ranches, and many of these ranches are now being
              separated into individually owned units.  The fragmentation of their range
              should increase the Maasai's vulnerability to environmental variability, so why
              are they choosing a land management system that is inconsistent with their
              survival strategies and cultural traditions?  Mwangi will conduct studies to
              determine: 1) Why property rights in Maasailand are changing from group-owned
              parcels to individual units; 2) What the environmental consequences of this
              transition are; and 3) Whether this transition represents an appropriate model
              for the environmental and socio-cultural conditions of the Maasai.  She will
              analyze how the incentives of particular actors (such as group ranch members,
              individual ranch owners, and policy makers) are oriented towards a particular
              property rights system, and the institutional mechanisms they use to make their
              preferences a reality.  To accomplish this, she will conduct interviews with a
              variety of individuals, and carry out archival research at the Kenya National
              Archives and Kajidao District Archives.  The environmental health of a land
              area may be another important consideration in the transformation of property
              rights.  Mwangi also hypothesizes that the greatest amount of range degradation
              will occur in the individual units due to their higher concentrations of
              livestock.  To test this hypothesis, she will conduct vegetation analyses and
              collect data on rainfall patterns in order to develop an environmental
              assessment of range conditions and health between group-held and
              individually-owned parcels of land.  Project results should help establish a
              theory of property rights transitions for Maasailand which takes into account
              the mix of political, socio-economic, and environmental conditions under which
              transition occurs.  Dr. Patricia Kameri-Mbote and others at the African Center
              for Technology Studies will provide guidance to Ms. Mwangi on this
              project.

The results should advance the theory of common property rights,
              contribute valuable information about land management policy, and also increase
              the current knowledge about the political  economy of pastoral Africa.  This
              grant will also support an international research experience very early in the
              career of an outstanding graduate student.  This project is being jointly
              funded by the Division of International Programs and the Division of Social and
              Economic Sciences.

