Title       : Competitive Ion-Exchange Adsorption of Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0004544

Award Number: 0004544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269901             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Willson willson@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0004544
Competitive Ion-Exchange Adsorption of Proteins
Richard
              Willson
University of Houston


This study applies a unique set of test
              proteins, which are identical in size and shape but which differ in color and
              adsorption behavior, for use as probes of competitive adsorption phenomena. 
              These proteins are derived from the recombinant soluble core of cytochrome b5,
              expressed in E. coli from a synthetic gene.  The adsorption behavior of these
              proteins is tailored by conservative mutations of surface glutamic-acid and
              aspartic-acid residues.  The work explores the competitive equilibrium
              adsorption behavior of mixtures of these proteins of similar size but differing
              adsorption affinities.  Nonporous adsorbents are used for the initial
              equilibrium work to avoid complications from dynamical/transport effects which
              are investigated separately.  A shallow-bed, rapid-filtration technique is 
              used to observe adsorption, desorption, and displacement dynamics on a short
              time scale.  Specific topics being addressed include the effects of competitors
              on adsorption heterogeneity and adsorbent selectivity among proteins.
              

Recombinant pharmaceutical proteins now make a substantial contribution to
              health care.  Examples include insulin for treatment of diabetes, tPA for
              unblocking coronary arteries in heart attacks, and new, effective medicines for
              anemia, hemophilia, and breast cancer.  The production of recombinant proteins
              generally consists of two stages, cultivation of bacteria or mammalian cells
              and then purification of the desired product from the complex mixture produced
              by the cells.  Protein purification is the more expensive stage and is the
              subject of intense research interest and commercial development.  This work
              addresses the fundamental behavior underlying the performance of the most
              widely-used purification method, selective adsorption of contaminants onto
              charged particles in ion-exchange chromatography.  The particular focus is the
              competitive adsorption of proteins - how the presence of contaminants can alter
              the adsorption behavior of a desired product.  This competition among proteins,
              which is essential to separating the mixture, is relatively little-investigated
              and poorly understood. Better understanding of these mechanisms will lead to
              better separation technologies and thus to higher-quality, lower-cost medical
              products. 








