Title       : Collaborative Research: The NE Sector of the Laurentide Ice Sheet: Dating Outlet
               and Local Glacier Moraines at Clyde with Cosmogenic Isotopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2001 
File        : a0004466

Award Number: 0004466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gifford H. Miller gmiller@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric J. Steig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Miller
OPP- 0004466

This is a collaborative proposal with the
              Universities of Vermont and Colorado and Bentley College. Our view of the
              Laurentide Ice Sheet has changed from a thick monolithic dome with a relatively
              stable central core to a thinner, multi-domed and more dynamic ice system with
              inherent instabilities.  The role of the ice sheet in the climate system
              includes perturbations to atmospheric flow as its height increased, and
              altering the planetary energy balance due to albedo changes.  In addition,
              through massive ice-berg and meltwater discharges, the ice sheet was a
              determinant on North Atlantic thermo-haline circulation.
Primary information
              on the timing and style of continental glaciation has played a key role in this
              conceptual evolution.  Along the northeastern margin of the Laurentide Ice
              Sheet, extensive series of moraines provide a direct record of past ice-sheet
              behavior.  Early studies were limited by an inability to date these deposits
              directly.  Consequently, arguments were advanced for both a similar timing and
              magnitude of glacial advances along all margins of the ice sheet, and for
              fundamentally asynchronous responses between different sectors of the former
              ice sheet.  With the development of cosmogenic exposure dating, it is now
              possible to date the moraines directly and resolve much of this debate.  Recent
              studies by the Principal Investigators  have established the utility of the
              method by dating glacial features on southern Baffin Island and demonstrated
              that this region was completely glaciated at the last glacial maximum. 
              However, they also have evidence that the northeastern coast was less
              intensively glaciated and preserves a much longer glacial history.
The
              Principal Investigators will conduct a one-year study in the Clyde region which
              is the type site for the NE Laurentide Ice Sheet. Building on the extensive
              Baffin Island field experience of Miller and Davis, and the cosmogenic
              expertise of Bierman and Steig, they will map glacial deposits, ice-flow
              characteristics, and systematic changes in the glacial geomorphology, and
              collect samples for cosmogenic and radiocarbon dating.  Their results will
              establish the suitability of cosmogenic exposure dating in this region, the
              optimum sample type, and address the first-order question: are the extensive
              moraines preserved on the forelands of last glacial maximum age or do they
              represent much older glaciations?  The cosmogenic and radiocarbon data, linked
              to direct mapping of glacial deposits in the field and on aerial photographs,
              will allow them to better define the style and timing of glaciation, and the
              nature of the inception phase of a glacial cycle.



