Title       : Collaborative Research: Punctuated Equilibrium, Ripeness, and Conflict
               Resolution of International Rivalries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2001   
File        : a0004279

Award Number: 0004279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45008              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Diehl p-diehl@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research develops a theory of large policy change, with specific
              application to conflict resolution of international rivalries.   The theory of
              large policy change is itself part of the punctuated equilibrium approach to
              policy.  The model will first address two key concepts in the conflict
              resolution and policy literature namely "ripeness" and "window of opportunity."
               The research formalizes and tests models that incorporate window of
              opportunity variables and uses the window of opportunity concept to
              conceptualize ripeness.  From the general policy model, the investigators
              derive a sub-model that applies to the resolution of long-standing interstate
              conflicts which yields testable propositions that can be examined in the
              context of enduring rivalries and a representative sample of lesser state
              rivalries.  Specific outcomes of the project include:  1) a formal theory of
              punctuated equilibrium models; 2) a specific model of large policy change; 3)
              rigorous specification of the window of opportunity and ripeness concepts; 4) a
              punctuated equilibrium model of international rivalry resolution; 5) new data
              on conflict resolution compatible with the most widely used data set on
              interstate rivalries; and, 6) a series of empirical analyses on the conditions
              associated with conflict resolution in rivalries over the period
              1816-1992.

This investigation promises to enhance substantially our
              understanding of the topic and to provide a database for use by a large number
              of scholars interested in the topic.


