Title       : The Modern Myth of the Mad Scientist
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0004200

Award Number: 0004200
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Clark   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : W,Clark
	      
	      Los Angeles, CA  90024    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Many scientific autobiographies and biographies, as well as many learned and
              popular histories written about science situate themselves, consciously or not,
              within the horizon of the modern myth that the extraordinary scientist is a
              "mad" one, either an eccentric or an evil genius. In popular mentalities,
              moreover, such attributes tend to be projected onto scientists per se. This
              project seeks to illuminate the origins of this myth or "metanarrative" about
              the modern scientist. The origins of the "mad" scientist are traced from the
              17th through the 19th centuries.  Methodologically, the project connects to
              cultural studies and the history of mentalities, and it makes a contribution to
              a rather new research field, the "history of scientific personae." The PI
              reconstructs how various sorts and cases of normal and extraordinary scientists
              - for example, "mechanical philosophers," anatomists, galvanists, and
              individuals including Johannes Kepler, Isaac Newton, Benjamin Franklin, Anton
              Mesmer, Charles Babbage, Thomas Edison - were conceived, imagined, fashioned,
              and presented as scientists or "natural philosophers," themselves, by their
              colleagues and by the public. As a contribution to the history of mentalities
              and of scientific personae, the research also examines fictional or literary
              "mad" scientists. The popularity of Frankenstein and Doctor Jekyll and Mr.
              Hyde, for examples, illuminate extant mentalities about scientists; moreover,
              such works may alter popular and even learned mentalities about the persona or
              figure of the scientist. Tracing the early origins of the myth, the project
              attends to certain figures, such as the Philosopher and the Sorcerer, that were
              important in the period before the emergence of the modern scientist. The PI is
              investigating the extent to which such figures played a role in shaping the
              image of the eccentric or evil genius. The research for the project is being
              conducted at the Max-Planck-Institut fiir Wissenschaftsgeschichte in Berlin, as
              well as at libraries in and around Berlin. At the end of two years of research,
              the PI intends to have produced an academic monograph that will contribute to
              the new field of research on the history of scientific personae.  This study
              also should advance better understandings of both extraordinary and normal
              scientists by illuminating the deep-seated historical context and
              socio-cultural public fears suggested by pervasive notions of scientist as
              eccentric or evil genius.
