Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Strategic Use of Event Memorability in the
               Rejection of False Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2001  
File        : a0004369

Award Number: 0004369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8520               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail S. Goodman ggoodman@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project examines false memory, that is, why one remembers events that have
              not occurred.  In particular, the study will investigate the conditions under
              which children and adults reject the occurrence of false events due to a
              strategic use of event memorability. It has previously been suggested that
              individuals' evaluations of event memorability are used heuristically as a
              basis for decision making about whether events occurred. This heuristic is
              termed the "metacognitive strategy." The objective of the project is to examine
              the conditions under which children and adults utilize event memorability
              heuristically, that is use the metacognitive strategy, to reject false events.
              Specifically, the proposed research attempts to answer the following questions:
              1) Do developmental differences exist in the rate of correct rejection of
              memorable and non-memorable items, and, if so, what are the implications of age
              differences for understanding metacognitive strategy utilization? 2) How do
              encoding and retrieval conditions affect rejection of memorable versus
              non-memorable events? 3) Can the use of the memorability heuristic be detected
              in the rejection of false autobiographical events? The findings will have
              theoretical relevance because they will shed light on strategies used to reject
              false events. This will inform the legal system about conditions under which
              witnesses are less likely to create false memories, preventing inaccurate
              testimony and miscarriage of justice.
