Title       : The Role of Ritual in the Emergence of Classic Maya Leaders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2000  
File        : a0004410

Award Number: 0004410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa J. Lucero lislucer@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Lisa Lucero will conduct one season
              of archaeological excavation at the site of Saturday Creek, located in the
              Belize lowlands. Because riverine areas were the loci of earliest Mayan
              settlement they often contain long occupational records and thus offer
              excellent venues to examine directional change over time. Based on prior work,
              Dr. Lucero has uncovered an approximately 1,700 year sequence from ca. 800 BC
              to 890 AD at Saturday Creek. The goal of her work is to understand how
              centralized political authority developed, as Mayan culture moved from
              egalitarian to stratified and increasingly large numbers of individuals were
              integrated into regional units. It is unclear how ruling elite gained and were
              able to maintain power. Both archaeological and ethnographic data indicate that
              ritual and ceremonial activities played an important role in Mayan society and
              Dr. Lucero will focus on this. Ceremonies serve to unify people, can legitimize
              political agendas and increase the prestige of sponsors. Based on preliminary
              data it is hypothesized that rituals involving death, dedication and ancestor
              veneration originated at a family level and were later appropriated and
              transformed by emerging elites to serve broader integrative functions.
              Eventually, she believes they became closely associated with royal families and
              served, in community eyes, to link them with the divine. The Mayan
              archaeological record is rich in materials such as ritual caches of ceramics
              and other objects which served ceremonial functions and these have been
              discovered in a wide variety of contexts. At the Saturday Creek site Dr. Lucero
              will excavate a series of structures including solitary structures, an elite
              compound and a palace which span a range of social statuses and time. She will
              determine whether the earliest ritual remains occurred in family associations
              and later expanded beyond this immediate context. Through analysis of cache
              contents she will also gain insight into how rituals changed over time.

This
              research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to
              many archaeologists and shed new light on the forces which served to integrate
              early large scale societies. Approximately 10 -12 students will participate in
              the field research and thus the project will also serve an important
              educational function.

