Title       : Domestic Poliitcal Attitudes and International Behavior in Central America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a0004331

Award Number: 0004331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Lewis-Beck michael-lewis-beck@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Political philosopher Immanuel Kant asserted that democracies are fundamentally
              different domestically from non-democracies.  Accordingly, democracies behave
              differently than do other types of states in the international arena.  In
              particular, he argued that democracies are more pacific at the dyadic and
              systemic level than other governmental forms.  This theory is known
              alternatively as the "Pacific Union" and the "Democratic Peace."  This project
              explores one component of the Kantian theory, that is, the contention that the
              cultural norms of citizens in democracies are favorable to increased
              cooperation and harmony among formerly hostile neighboring states.
	Since the
              time of Kant's initial formulation of the theory, scholars have written
              extensively about reasons for the existence of a Democratic Peace.  Numerous
              authors have made four specific arguments about why democracies are more likely
              to cooperate with other democracies and why they do not go to war with other
              democracies.  These arguments center on democracratic institutions that favor
              compromise, high levels of trade among democracies, disproportionately high
              levels of democratic membership in international institutions which lead to a
              complex interdependence, and domestic cultural norms of trust and tolerance
              which become internationalized.  The first three sets of arguments have been
              tested carefully and repeatedly in the scholarly literature.  However, the
              assertions about the connection between domestic democratic norms and
              international behavior have not been demonstrated robustly.
	This project
              assesses the link between domestic political cultural values of democracies and
              international cooperation and peace.  Scholars of international relations have
              relied on proxy measures for domestic norms favorable to democracy and, in
              turn, they have argued that these same values affect international behaviors. 
              This project directly measures both domestic political cultural values and how
              those values translate into feelings towards neighboring countries through
              scientific survey research.  The research consists of surveying scientific
              samples of citizens of two democratizing neighboring countries to assess two
              groups of ideas:  first, the prevalence and depth of values associated
              typically with democracy and, second, the degree to which democratic political
              culture translates into an extension of the same values to citizens of a
              neighboring democracy.
	The project is conducted in El Salvador and Honduras,
              two democratizing countries that have a prior history of animosity and distrust
              of each other.  The two cases also are appropriate venues for this project in
              that I am fluent in Spanish and have extensive experience conducting survey
              research in El Salvador.  If the Kantian argument regarding democratic
              political culture holds true, then citizens of these two Central American
              neighbors should express both pro-democratic responses to survey questions
              regarding their norms and values as well as feelings of trust and cooperation
              across the border.  Their feelings of trust and cooperation should be stronger
              still regarding more established democracies, but considerably weaker toward
              non-democratic states.
	This research fills a gap in the existing literature
              regarding the relationship between democracy domestically and peace and
              cooperation internationally.  By directly asking citizens about their norms and
              values through survey research, this projects offers an important test of the
              extent to which democratization contributes to changes in international
              attitudes and behaviors. 

