Title       : Dissertation Research: A Quantitative Assessment of Frontal Bone Morphological
               Variation in Middle Pleistocene Homo Using Fourier Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2001     
File        : a0004193

Award Number: 0004193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10605              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik Trinkaus trinkaus@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The evolution of our genus during the Middle Pleistocene is a point of
              contention.  Some view geographically dispersed, morphologically differentiated
              populations as members of a single species.  Others interpret morphological
              variation among groups as signifying species level differences.  The frontal
              bone is an element that can provide significant data in attempting to decide
              between these two models as it provides data regarding alterations in two
              regions of the skull: the neurocranium and the splanchnocranium.  Additionally,
              traits of the frontal are used to distinguish Homo erectus and Homo sapiens. 
              

This research will utilize a morphometric procedure, Elliptical Fourier
              Function Analysis to quantify the morphology of the frontal bone in a sample of
              'archaic" Homo specimens (including Neanderthals) dated to the Middle
              Pleistocene.  Boundary outline data of coronal, mid-sagittal and parasagittal
              slices of the frontal bone will be collected and quantified. To establish
              temporal trends neighboring Early and Late Pleistocene frontal bones will be
              quantified.  Geographic variation will also be ascertained in twenty modern
              humans from each of nine populations coincident with the fossils.  Analysis of
              the  hypotheses will clarify how features of the frontal bone are interrelated
              as character complexes  and how these characters reflect potential sources of
              variation such as gender and size.  This research will contribute to more
              informed inferences about hominid evolution in the Middle Pleistocene.

