Title       : Imagining and Imaging the American Polity: Political Science and the
               Construction of Democracy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2001   
File        : a0004197

Award Number: 0004197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Gunnell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Although it is commonly assumed that the American political system is the
              epitome of a popular or democratic regime, Americans, from the late eighteenth
              century to the present, have had difficulty determining exactly what kind of
              political society they had created and what form of government they possessed
              -- or by which they were possessed. This situation has inspired many attempts
              both to give an account of democracy and to judge the extent to which the
              United States conforms to such an account.  From the time of the debates about
              the ratification of the Constitution to the present, Americans have imagined
              and imaged the American polity. The discipline of American political science
              from its conception and inception, has been a central and unique part of this
              dialogue, and its representations have profoundly influenced the accounts of,
              and assumptions about, American government and democracy at various levels of
              education and in the media. This project is devoted to reconstructing certain
              central dimensions of the evolution of the discourse of democracy in American
              political science, as well as to contributing, both substantively and
              methodologically, to the study of the history of political science and the
              history of the social sciences in general.  Most generically construed, this an
              exercise in the history of social science. Since such research is still a less
              than clearly defined scholarly genre, and since the relevance of these studies
              to practices such as political science is still a contentious issue, this
              project involves extensive reflection on the general character and purpose of
              disciplinary history as well as on issues peculiar to the study of the history
              of political science. More specifically, the PI will examine past literature
              devoted to recounting the history of American political science, and will
              explore the manner in which this literature raises certain methodological
              problems pertaining to the study of the history of the social sciences as well
              as to the practice of intellectual history in general.  Against this
              background, the PI will elaborate a particular approach to disciplinary history
              and to the study of conceptual change. The substantive core of the project,
              however, is an examination of the vision of democracy as it has evolved in the
              literature of American political science from approximately the beginning of
              the second third of the nineteenth century to end of the second third of the
              twentieth century. This study of the discourse of democracy in political
              science is organized around three pivotal concepts: state, pluralism, and
              liberalism. These concepts represent successive paradigms of democracy, and
              this project is devoted to reconstructing those paradigms and the processes of
              conceptual change involved in the transitions between them.
