Title       : An Isotopic Dietary Reconstruction of Texas Hunter-Gatherers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2000  
File        : a0004459

Award Number: 0004459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122971             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Hard   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey R. Francis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Robert Hard and Mr. Jeffrey Francis
              will coordinate the chemical analysis of a large series of prehistoric human
              skeletons excavated in a ca. 150,000 sq. km area of the coastal plain of Texas.
              Their goal is to use these data first to reconstruct diet and then to determine
              the relationship between subsistence strategy and settlement pattern. As the
              researchers note, the prehistory of the region is highly anomalous.  In most
              portions of the world, hunting and gathering peoples lived in small mobile
              groups and buried their dead in individual locations, presumably because their
              territories were so large that they could not quickly transport the newly
              deceased to a central location. When domestic plants and animals were
              introduced, population size increased, sedentary villages emerged and groups
              began to bury their dead in central locations. In this region of Texas however
              beginning about 4000 years ago organized cemeteries began to be utilized along
              the major drainages and bays by native American mobile hunters and gatherers.
              Cemetery use continued through the last millennium of the prehistoric period.
              The cemeteries are paradoxical as their emergence suggests increased
              population, reduced mobility, aggregation and increased territoriality. Despite
              these changes however archaeological evidence indicates a band-level, mobile
              hunting and gathering adaptation. Prehistorically, domesticated plants were not
              used despite the existence of farming economies in adjacent areas and a climate
              which would have supported dry-farming. This pattern is in contrast to the
              North American Southeast and Southwest where agriculture was quickly adopted.
              Several theories have been proposed to explain this phenomenon and they share a
              belief that rich local wild food resources allowed for reduced mobility and
              territory size. They differ however in just what mix of foods might be
              involved, some focusing on fish and other marine resources, and others on
              abundant wild plants such as pecans. Because bone is remodeled over the human
              lifetime and the carbon and nitrogen in bone derives from dietary sources, bone
              chemical composition indirectly reflects the type of foods consumed. The
              researchers will analyze carbon and nitrogen isotope values from a large series
              of skeletons drawn from different subregions within the area. They will also
              examine strontium isotopes because these reflect individual movement over a
              lifetime.

This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
              data of interest to many archaeologists and shed new light on a relatively
              unknown aspect of United States prehistory. It will also provide insight into
              the processes which shape social organization in relatively uncompelled
              societies.

