Title       : Saving Past and Future Irreplaceable Collections and Facilitating Future
               Archaeological Research in Central Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2000   
File        : a0004286

Award Number: 0004286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39563              (Estimated)
Investigator: George L. Cowgill Cowgill@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In 1986/7 the National Science Foundation awarded funds to Drs. George Cowgill
              and Susan Evans to construct an archaeological research center in Teotihuacan,
              Mexico. The northern basin of Mexico contains many large archaeological sites -
              of which Teotihuacan is the most famous - which document the rise of complex
              Mesoamerican cultures and these have been the focus of decades of NSF supported
              research. Because the Mexican government lacks adequate resources to store
              excavated materials and to provide work space for scientists, an NSF grant
              allowed the construction of a center which includes storage, work and living
              space. In over a decade of existence the center has provided base for many NSF
              supported projects. As a result, storage space is now filled to capacity with
              well over a million objects. The main storage/work unit was solidly built in
              the expectation that a second story would eventually be added and this award
              provides funds for this and other related improvements. The enlarged center
              will provide the infrastructure for archaeological and related research in this
              strategic region for many decades to come and will provide for the curation of
              materials that would otherwise be lost. Arizona State University has donated
              matching funds and Dr. Cowgill will continue to oversee center administration.
