Title       : Conference on Creating, Retaining, and Transferring Knowledge in Organizations,
               Carnegie Mellon University, September 7 - 9, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0004283

Award Number: 0004283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30032              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Argote argote@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray Reagans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bill McEvily  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the past decade knowledge management has become a subject of keen interest
              among academics and practitioners alike.  Book publications on the topic have
              increased dramatically as managers and executives from a broad spectrum of
              organizations have recognized the importance of creating, retaining, and
              transferring knowledge for firm survival and competitive advantage.  Academic
              journals have also published more on knowledge management by scholars from a
              variety of research traditions.   Areas of inquiry span levels of analysis
              (group, organization, network, population), substantive topics of interest
              (e.g., technology transfer, innovation and creativity), and intellectual
              traditions (e.g., organizational behavior and theory, strategic management,
              economics, psychology, and sociology).  As a result, we now have an eclectic
              mix of findings on knowledge management in organizations.  

Because research
              has tended to accumulate within focused areas of inquiry, there has been
              relatively little consideration for how developments in one area relate to
              another.  Consequently, important tensions exist between areas of inquiry and
              opportunities to leverage insights across areas remain unexploited.  The study
              of knowledge management is at a point where future research stands to benefit
              greatly from surveying existing research in particular areas and from
              integrating findings across those areas.  

To this end, a two-day conference
              on "Creating, Retaining, and Transferring Knowledge in Organizations" will be
              organized at Carnegie Mellon University on September 7-9, 2001.  The goals of
              the conference are to: (1) synthesize what is known about managing knowledge in
              organizations, (2) identify gaps and inconsistencies in our understanding of
              the management of organizational knowledge, (3) define future research
              directions on the management of knowledge in organizations, and (4) disseminate
              research findings about knowledge creation, retention, and transfer.

	The
              conference is being coordinated with a special issue of Management Science. 
              Authors of the most promising manuscripts after the first round of reviews will
              be invited to present their work at the Carnegie Mellon Conference.  The best
              papers from the conference will be published in the Management Science special
              issue.
	
	The conference will play a critical role in synthesizing existing
              knowledge and developing new knowledge about the creation, retention, and
              transfer of knowledge in organizations.  The conference will provide
              contributors with feedback about their work and thereby improve the quality of
              research in the area.  The interactions at the conference will also facilitate
              connections among researchers from different areas of inquiry and thereby
              stimulate future research on knowledge management.  


