Title       : Effects of Experimental Changes in Income and Employment on Middle-Childhood
               Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a0004076

Award Number: 0004076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392104             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hirokazu Yoshikawa hiro@xp.psych.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela Morris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa A. Gennetian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1358,1666,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Levels of learning and school performance among children in and near poverty in
              the United States continue to be of national import at the dawn of the
              twenty-first century. The public, policy makers, and researchers agree that
              concerted efforts to improve the educational outcomes of children in low-income
              families are required to further develop their potential to become productive
              citizens. Concern is particularly warranted for the achievement levels of
              racial/ethnic minority children in poverty. National studies show that
              differences in family income account for over half of the differences among
              Black and White children in IQ scores. Black and Latino children are exposed to
              particularly high levels of economic disadvantage, as well as differential
              treatment in school and other settings.

Issues of race, poverty, income and
              school performance take on a special urgency due to rapidly changing federal,
              state and local policy climates for low-income families. Welfare reform
              policies, following passage of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity
              Reconciliation Act of 1996 (P.L. 104-193), have produced profound changes in
              government incentives to move low -income parents off welfare and into work.
              The federal Children's Initiative has urged researchers to examine effects of
              variation in welfare reform policies on children (Office of Science and
              Technology Policy, 1997).

The current study examines how changes in income
              and employment might affect children's school performance differently for
              Black, Latino, and White families. The study aims to explore multiple mediating
              pathways through which changes in income and employment may affect children's
              school performance. The samples are drawn from 5 experimental welfare reform
              and anti-poverty policy programs, which have demonstrated short-term rises in
              income and employment, and which incorporate follow-up assessments of child
              school performance. The data will afford a rare opportunity to examine changes
              in income and employment which have been experimentally manipulated, rather
              than determined primarily by prior family selection factors.

The objectives
              of this study are threefold. First, it aims to answer the question: Do changes
              in income and employment in early childhood affect middle-childhood school
              performance differently for Black, Latino, and White single-parent families on
              welfare? Second, the study aims to explore differences among these groups in
              multiple mediating pathways through which effects of changes in income and
              employment on school performance may occur. Areas included are informed by
              psychosocial, lifespan, ecological, and human capital theories of child
              development, and encompass two principal microsystems, or proximal settings, of
              development (the home and child care settings). The mediators encompass child
              care use, including quantity and type; marriage; parenting practices, including
              authoritative parenting and cognitive stimulation; and parent aspirations for
              their children's school success. Differences in kind and strength of mediated
              relationships are hypothesized, depending on racial/ethnic group. Third, the
              question of how dimensions in current welfare and anti-poverty policy moderate
              these direct and mediated effects will be explored. Three primary dimensions
              across which current welfare reform programs differ are chosen for
              investigation: time limits, generosity of financial incentives (earnings
              disregards and supplements), and mandated employment-related activities.

The
              study utilizes data sets from programs which test approaches to encouraging
              employment and raising family income through anti-poverty and welfare reform
              policy. The programs differ considerably on the three policy dimensions, and
              reflect the current range of TANF programs. They cover a wide geographic range,
              including samples from four state policy contexts (Minnesota, California,
              Florida, and Connecticut). Moreover, the data sets incorporate subgroups of
              Black, Latino and White families of large enough size to enable comparisons of
              mediating pathways. The analyses proposed are distinct from the overall
              experimental impacts which have been and will be reported in the main
              evaluation reports for these programs. The study thus presents a unique
              opportunity to examine race/ethnicity-specific developmental effects of income
              and employment in the contexts of experimental designs, and variation in
              welfare and anti-poverty policy.



