Title       : Small Grant Program for the Advancement of the Discipline
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a0004488

Award Number: 0004488
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Felice J. Levine   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberta Spalter-Roth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Sociological Assoc
	      1722 N St NW
	      Washington, DC  200362983    202/833-3410

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project continues the partnership between the American Sociological
              Association and the National Science Foundation in supporting a highly
              successful program known as the Fund for the Advancement of the Discipline
              (FAD).  The program nurtures the development of scientific knowledge by
              supporting small, groundbreaking research initiatives and other important
              scientific activities such as conferences.  The awards made under this program
              provide seed money or venture capital for substantive and methodological
              breakthroughs that challenge the discipline or stimulate new lines of
              scientific inquiry, especially by scholars at the early stages of their
              careers.  In addition to investing in important research, these awards broaden
              the dissemination of scientific knowledge, facilitate new networks of
              scientific collaboration, provide leverage for acquisition of additional
              research funds, and enhance the discipline's data and bibiographic
              infrastructure.

FAS is a collaborative program in the sense that ASA and NSF
              contribute equally to the pool of resources that funds the small grants.  The
              program itself is led and administered by the ASA, with ASA assuming all direct
              administrative costs.  Through dollar by dollar match, the ASA and NSF double
              their investment in new science under the auspices of the FAD program. 
              Previous FAD grants resulted in strong publications, many presentations,
              significant student training, curriculum modification and development,
              improvements to disciplinary infrastructure, and innovative inquiry in the
              discipline.

