Title       : Peer-Led Team Learning: National Dissemination by the Workshop Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a0004159

Award Number: 0004159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $474791             (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Gosser gosser@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) This project is a supplement to the NSF supported
              project: "Peer-Led Team Learning: National Dissemination by the Workshop
              Project." It is designed to address more directly the barriers that confront
              fully effective implementation of this approach by two-year (community)
              colleges. It is important to address these barriers and achieve maximally
              effective implementation of this project in two-year colleges because nearly
              40% of U.S undergraduates enrolled in science, mathematics, engineering, and
              technology courses are attending these institutions, and many will take their
              basic science in this academic sector before transferring to 4-year colleges
              and universities to complete baccalaureate degrees. Given the size and
              diversity of the community college population, national dissemination of the
              workshop model of peer-led team learning can be greatly enhanced by successful
              implementation at the community college level. Some of the barriers faced by
              two year colleges are idiosyncratic to 2-year colleges, while others derive
              from the characteristics of students attending 2-year colleges. The barriers
              that will be addressed in this project are the high turnover of student leaders
              due to shorter spells of education, the high incidence of part-time (or
              full-time) employment among students, higher levels of family responsibilities
              which conflict with academic scheduling, the often weaker academic backgrounds
              of entering students which reduces the pool of potential team leaders, the lack
              of capability to carry out effective workshop leader training in many colleges,
              heavier teaching loads of faculty leaving less time to engage in adaptation and
              implementation activities, a lack of resources to pay student workshop leaders
              and less opportunity to offer academic credit to student workshop leaders, and
              difficulties faced by community college faculty in attending professional
              conferences. This project is supporting a variety of workshop activities for
              community college faculty, including a series of 12 one-day "drive-in"
              workshops at different sites around the U.S. specially tailored and shortened
              for faculty in two-year colleges. These 12 workshops will be managed by 2 teams
              of faculty, one East Coast and the other West Coast based, and are being held
              on the campuses of 2-year institutions across the nation. This project is also
              supporting special breakout sessions for community college faculty attending
              the longer workshops of the parent project and supporting the education of at
              least 25 WPAs (Workshop Project Associates). WPAs are a cadre of faculty who
              are prepared to engage in further dissemination activities.
