Title       : The Impact of Incarceration on Family Formation: The Fragile Families and Child
               Well-being Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a0004336

Award Number: 0004336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340012             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Western Western@lydgate.Princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sara M. McLanahan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-0004336
Western


This study examines the impact of incarceration on the
              family relationships of disadvantaged parents. Although the penal population
              now totals around 1.9 million inmates and an estimated 1.5 million children
              have a parent currently in custody, no national survey data are available to
              study the effects of incarceration on families and children. Under the auspices
              of the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study,  the investigators will
              complete a new data collection to examine the effects of incarceration. The
              Fragile Families survey is a national panel study of new parents that collects
              rich data on patterns of family formation, child wellbeing, and parental
              resources. The first follow-up survey - in the field in most sites until summer
              2001 - includes a criminal justice module that obtains a detailed incarceration
              history from male and female respondents.  Funds will support an update of this
              information in the third and fourth waves of the survey. In addition,  the 
              investigators will administer special modules for employment history, reasoning
              ability, and impulsivity. These modules are intended to measure stable
              propensities to criminal behavior that will help control for the nonrandom
              selection of offenders into the penal system.  Data will be analyzed to examine
              the effects of incarceration on men's employment and earnings, and the direct
              effect of incarceration on family formation.  It is hypothesized that
              incarceration negatively influences men's employment opportunities making
              ex-inmates unattractive partners for marriage or cohabitation. Regardless of
              their economic status, the stigma of incarceration signals unreliability,
              further diminishing the marriage prospects of men with prison records. While
              the study focuses on the link between incarceration and family formation, the
              data will be of broad interest to researchers interested in the economic
              position of criminal offenders, their mental health, involvement in parenting,
              propensity to violence or abuse and a wide range of other topics.

