Title       : Continuing Studies of Mesoscale Gravity Waves and Precipitation Bands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0004274

Award Number: 0004274
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498140             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Rauber r-rauber@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohan K. Ramamurthy  (Principal Investigator former)
              Brian F. Jewett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on two important mesoscale phenomena: mesoscale gravity
              waves and heavy snowbands in the northwest quadrant of cyclones.  Better
              understanding of both of these will allow better forecasts of various
              wintertime weather events.

Mesoscale gravity waves are wave disturbances
              with wavelengths that range from about 30 to 250 km, periods between 0.5 and 4
              hours, and amplitudes that can exceed several millibars.  While a number of
              studies have documented the occurrence of mesoscale gravity waves, there is
              considerable debate on how these waves form.  The Principal Investigators
              present a hypothesis developed under prior support that addresses the genesis
              of these waves.  The Principal Investigators will test and refine this
              hypothesis and address key questions concerning mesoscale gravity wave genesis
              via two distinct but complementary modeling methodologies.

Heavy snowbands
              typically occur in narrow regions in the northwest quadrant in cyclones where
              frontal structures and associated frontal circulations are modified by strong
              deformation flow. Many of these processes occur on scales smaller than can be
              observed with operational resources.  The Snowband Dynamics Project, carried
              out in the winter of 1997-98 near Lake Michigan, collected unprecedented data
              to document and understand the structure of these heavy snow bands.  The
              researchers will use these observations and complementary modeling studies to:
              1) examine the dynamic and thermodynamic structure of heavy precipitation bands
              in the northwest quadrant of cyclones and in the "reverse lake-effect" regions
              west of Lake Michigan, 2) determine the relative roles of isentropic ascent,
              transverse ageostrophic circulations associated with frontogenesis, gravity
              waves and boundary layer processes in forcing vertical motion to create the
              snowbands, and 3) evaluate the importance of convective and conditional
              symmetric instability in band organization and intensification.  An additional
              goal is to determine how boundary layer fluxes of heat and moisture from the
              lake modify frontal structure, stability and precipitation hand dynamics in the
              vicinity of the lake.
