Title       : Construction of nanosyringe arrays for inserting bimolecular motor-powered
               nanodevices in living cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2000  
File        : a0004499

Award Number: 0004499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlo D. Montemagno   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0004499
C. Montemagno, Cornell University

As current
              technology permits the production of nanostructures smaller than typical cell
              dimensions, it has become possible to consider useful applications based on
              their non-destructive, orderly injection inside the cells.  In this fashion,
              cells could be repaired or functionally modified.  Of special interest would be
              the possibility to inject biomolecular motors which could energize the
              self-assembly of nanostructures inside living cells.  This could be
              accomplished by developing arrays of nanosyringes, each of which to deliver
              chosen structures on preplanned location and time.

The proposed effort will
              unfold in three steps:
1. The fabrication of individual ("standalone")
              syringes with dimensions suitable for the injection of biomolecular rotary
              motors (e.g. flagella/ATP), capable of initiating a variety of modifications
              inside a cell.  Silicon wafers will be shaped by existing etching processes,
              yielding a 10nm diameter for the tips and a 1-micron diameter for the shaft. 
              Testing will be done with green fluorescence protein measurements.
2. Since
              many useful cell modifications may involve a number of different injections, it
              is desirable to produce, as a first step, a set of self-aligned syringe arrays.
               These will allow, given a line-up of cells, for simultaneous (and possibly
              different) injections, followed by other injection patterns if so desired. 
              Testing will be similar to the standalone case.
3. The syringes concepts
              discussed above will be refined: a suspension mechanism will make possible both
              vertical and horizontal controlled displacements of the syringe.  The motion
              will be tracked with the help of an optical microscope.

