Title       : SGER: The Morphosyntactic Basis of Crosslinguistic Variation in Event Encoding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2000   
File        : a0004437

Award Number: 0004437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31125              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beth Levin bclevin@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This SGER grant will permit exploratory investigations into the roots of
              crosslinguistic similarities and divergences in the linguistic encoding of
              events. This project takes as its starting point the hypothesis that chains of
              happenings in the real world are construed by all languages as events in the
              same way(s). If so, crosslinguistic differences in the ways that events are
              expressed are "superficial": they should be traceable to differences in the
              morphosyntactic and lexical resources available to languages to encode
              particular event representations. That is, in general crosslinguistic
              differences should not arise due to differences in how languages construe the
              underlying happenings in the world as events, as has sometimes been proposed.
              However, if a language lacks the morphosyntactic device needed to permit a
              particular event representation to surface, it might avail itself of a
              different construal, if one is available, to express the same happening.

The
              full-scale exploration of these ideas comprises a two-part research program.
              First, it requires determining which kinds of chains of happenings in the world
              may be construed as events and determining the appropriate linguistic
              representation of these events; this topic is the purview of a theory of event
              structure. Second, it requires uncovering the range of morphosyntactic and
              lexical resources used to encode events crosslinguistically and then
              correlating them with the typological traits of the languages manifesting them.
              These correlations are essential to the identification of the interactions
              between the type of event being encoded, the typological traits of the language
              it is being encoded in, and the morphosyntactic devices the language makes
              available for encoding the components of such an event. Together these
              determine how particular event structures are expressed or, possibly, prevented
              from surfacing in a given language. The formulation of a comprehensive
              crosslinguistically viable theory of event encoding, then, can build on
              previous work in lexical semantics and morphosyntactic typology. In so doing,
              this research program will bring together two lines of largely independent
              research.

The morphosyntactic basis of event encoding constitutes a large
              but underexplored area. A two-pronged approach will be pursued in this
              exploratory project. First, a small workshop will be held to explore
              foundational issues and discuss effective paths for further research. Second,
              we plan to extend an earlier pilot case study of directed motion events in
              order to more accurately delineate the morphosyntactic and lexical factors that
              affect event encoding. As part of this study, a database of properties will be
              designed that can be used in hypothesis exploration and can serve as a model
              for future research.

The larger research program set out here should lead to
              the deepening of existing typological generalizations and the discovery of new
              ones. It will allow a more refined understanding of the representation of
              events and the semantic determinants of grammatical structure. By clarifying
              and systematizing similarities and differences between languages, the research
              results should have practical applications to second language pedagogy and
              machine translation, both of which rely on the best available theoretical work
              on the relationships between languages.
