Title       : The Reflexes of Focus in Phonology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0004038

Award Number: 0004038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elisabeth Selkirk selkirk@linguist.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Elisabeth Selkirk and her
              colleagues will conduct three years of linguistic research on English,
              Japanese, and Tashlhit Berber. The project will investigate relations between
              prosody and semantically defined types of Focus. Prosodic variables include the
              presence and distribution of pitch accents, phonological phrasing, and relative
              pitch range. Semantic variables include whether a sentence involves a
              contrastive correction, a counter-assertion, or presentation of new
              information. Materials manipulating semantic variables will be read by actors
              and recorded. Computer-extracted pitch contours in the recorded materials will
              then be analyzed to establish correlations between semantic and prosodic
              properties. Listening experiments will test whether the prosodic contrasts that
              speakers produced as reflexes of different Focus types influence sentence
              comprehension. The cross-linguistic comparison tests for points of similarity
              in languages that differ in word and sentence prosody. While English makes no
              use of tones to differentiate lexical items, it does exploit tonal accents at
              the sentence level to mark Focus types. By contrast, Japanese makes no use of
              sentence level accents to mark Focus types, but it does differentiate lexical
              items with tone. Berber, unlike English and Japanese, indicates the contrastive
              status of a constituent with a special syntactic construction. The pitch
              contours of sentences with this construction will be compared to sentences
              containing other Focus types to see whether any special prosody occur when
              Focus is already indicated by other means. What's at issue is whether languages
              avoid redundancy between different systems for expressing the same semantic
              properties.

This cross-linguistic study of prosody and semantic Focus is
              significant for several reasons. First is the question of universal properties
              of language. The research asks whether an abstract phonology of Focus is common
              across these different languages (e.g., a system of phrasal stress prominence).
              Second, better understanding of how prosodic properties of a sentence influence
              its semantic interpretation or its appropriateness in a specific discourse
              would permit a deeper understanding of the interface between phonology and
              other domains of linguistic competence. In the practical realm, better
              descriptive generalizations concerning semantically or pragmatically relevant
              prosody would advance computer-based treatments of spoken language, uses of
              natural speech in research on human sentence processing, and the assessment of
              language impairments. The grant will also advance international collaboration,
              through cooperation with Dr. Abdelkrim Jebbour, a Berber scholar from Morocco.
              It will also contribute to the training of graduate students in the analysis of
              prosody and of syntactic, semantic, phonological, and phonetic properties that
              are relevant to prosody.

