Title       : Research on Surface Weather Map Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0004477

Award Number: 0004477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70710              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick Sanders fnmisander@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : F,Sanders
	      9 Flint Street
	      Marblehead, MA  019453716    781/631-3332

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Accurate and objective methods for diagnosis of surface frontal features is
              important to meteorological education, research and operations.  The goal of
              this project is to develop and validate a technique of surface map analysis
              that differs from present practice.  Current analysis practice places excessive
              reliance on the polar front theory.  This project plans to show that many, if
              not most, fronts now routinely shown on maps and used as the basis for
              understanding the weather pattern are lacking evidence for a
              quasi-discontinuity of density that is required for relevance to polar front
              concepts.  Instead, the Principal Investigator proposes: (1) to restrict
              identification of fronts to the occasional structures that do adhere closely to
              the theory; (2) to establish the importance of zones of pronounced horizontal
              temperature gradient lacking a sharp frontal wind shift at the warm edge, which
              are not now recognized in current practice; (3) to encourage denoting many of
              the structures now falsely designated as fronts instead as troughs of low
              pressure.  It is expected that the project will lead to improved understanding
              of processes in the surface boundary layer as well as in the free atmosphere
              above.

The research will rely on the database of routine surface
              observations.  Issues to be addressed are the relationships between the
              boundary-layer structures and synoptic-scale cyclogenesis, and the process of
              frontogenesis.  The research will develop the idea of frontogenesis as a
              two-stage process in which first a zone of relatively strong horizontal
              temperature gradient is created, and then this zone is acted upon by
              short-lived exposure to deformation and/or convergence. 

Successful
              completion of this research will result in changing the way surface map
              analysis is done and in providing a physically realistic way of explaining
              weather phenomena of various types.

