Title       : Biology Success!
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0004264

Award Number: 0004264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424877             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Grumbine Rgrumbine@landmarkcollege.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Hecker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Abigail Littlefield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Landmark College
	      RR 1, Box 1000
	      Putney, VT  053461000    802/387-6730

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # HRD-0004264 
Institution: Landmark College
Principal Investigator:
              Richard Grumbine
Title: "Biology Success!"

ABSTRACT

"Biology Success!"
              is an innovative project proposed by Landmark College to demonstrate that
              students with learning disabilities can succeed in high school and college
              introductory biology courses when the curriculum has been designed to respond
              to their learning needs.  The heterogeneous classes in America's schools
              parallel the national average for the presence of students with learning
              disabilities. Between 10% and 20% of the population is estimated to have
              dyslexia, attention-deficit disorder or other specific learning disabilities. 
              These students can learn along side traditional learners in the biology
              classroom and laboratory, if faculty are aware of strategies designed to
              present information and reinforce it in a way that benefits the learning styles
              of those with learning differences, while serving traditional
              learners.

Landmark College is uniquely qualified to undertake the
              preparation of a biology Teaching Manual.  Landmark is the only fully
              accredited college in the nation that restricts admission to students with a
              diagnosed learning disorder.  For the past sixteen years the College has worked
              to develop a specialized environment tailored to individual learning styles. 
              The College's External Program has been instrumental in providing other
              educators across the country with proven methodologies that foster success for
              those with learning disabilities.  The institution is eager to extend this work
              beyond the more traditional areas of reading, writing and communication and
              apply Landmark's six Educational Principle's to the four major components of
              the introductory biology curriculum, ecology, genetics.  evolution and cell
              biology.
 
To accomplish this goal, the project will work with faculty from
              Landmark College and four collaborating institutions: Marlboro College, Austine
              High School for the Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing, Bellows Falls Union High School,
              and Community High School of Vermont.  The collaborating institutions will
              develop curriculum, provide in-service sessions for faculty, field test
              teaching modules, assess available CD-ROM and on-line products and provide
              access to the Teaching Manual through Landmark's web site and in print.

The
              impact of this project will be felt in science instruction throughout the
              country.  It will provide faculty on the secondary and post-secondary levels
              with the methodology to apply proven teaching strategies to classroom and
              laboratory instruction advancing the success of those with learning
              disabilities in science by removing barriers to learning. 

