Title       : History of Educational and Public Broadcasting in the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0004223

Award Number: 0004223
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh R. Slotten   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : H,Slotten
	      39 Union Street
	      Piscataway, NJ  08903    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This three-year award supports research and writing of a book and related
              articles analyzing alternative systems of broadcasting in the United States
              that developed in opposition to the dominant commercial model based on
              advertising and private industry support.  Historians of technology have
              emphasized that the commercialization of broadcasting in the United States was
              not "inevitable" but depended on contingent circumstances, yet nearly all major
              studies of the broadcast industry and broadcast technology in the United States
              have analyzed the dominant commercial systems, obscuring the historical
              importance of alternative systems of broadcasting.   Dr. Slotten intends to
              examine the historical development of the most important form of noncommercial
              broadcasting in the United States, those with a primary public service
              commitment to education. This educational tradition dates from the 1920s, when
              large-scale broadcasting first developed. The federal government decided that
              because the radio spectrum was a public resource, broadcasters should
              demonstrate that they served the public interest in order to retain a license.
              Partly because some of the first radio stations in the United States were
              developed by land-grant universities, a commitment to education became a
              central means of defining the public interest standard. But the idea that a
              "great technology" should be used for "great purposes"--including educating,
              informing, and uplifting citizens-has been an essential historical theme that
              has existed alongside and in opposition to dominant commercial developments
              throughout the entire history of broadcasting in the United States. Promoters
              of the educational role of broadcasting emphasized the ability of radio and
              television to reach a mass audience and the potential to provide even the
              weakest or poorest schools with the best teachers and a high-quality
              education.

Dr. Slotten draws upon extensive archival research to analyze
              both educational broadcasting and the early development of "public
              broadcasting," a term developed by U.S. policymakers during the late 1960s who
              established the Corporation for Public Broadcasting as a way to support
              noncommercial forms of broadcasting. These policymakers sought to replace the
              traditional term "educational" in order to broaden political support, drawing
              upon arguments concerning cultural uplift and citizenship training through
              public affairs programming.  But by examining the history of educational and
              "public" broadcasting from approximately 1920 to the early 1970s, the project
              analyzes the different-and often contested--meanings of education, especially
              in relation to programming aimed at entertaining, uplifting, and informing
              different groups in different regions of the country, both urban and rural. The
              resulting publications are intended to provide an historical perspective for
              debates about "high-tech" innovations and education. Contemporary visions of 
              the internet as a commercial product serving a mass culture or as a public
              service/educational resource suggest that this is a central theme in the
              history of communications technology in the United States.
