Title       : U.S.-Hungary Grassland Comparisons: Biodiversity, Disturbance, and Landscape
               Mosaics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0004526

Award Number: 0004526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149229             (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra P. Peters debpeter@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Gosz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 5915,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This U.S.-Hungary ecological research project involves Debra Peters of New
              Mexico State University, James Gosz of the University of New Mexico, and
              partner Edit Kovacs-Lang from the Institute of Ecology and Botany of the
              Hungarian Academy of Sciences.  Their goal is to study the influence of
              disturbance and climate on the biodiversity of arid and semiarid grasslands.
              Multiple grassland sites in both countries will be examined that have varying
              species, composition, climate gradients, land use history, and soils. 
              Experimental manipulations, field studies, and simulation models will be used
              to evaluate effects of small-scale disturbances and climate on plant
              biodiversity, species composition, and dominance through time.

Specifically,
              the US-Hungary team intends to test their hypothesis that small-scale
              disturbances and climate interact to generate and maintain biodiversity at
              multiple spatial scales with disproportionate effects compared to the total
              amount of area disturbed. Their research plan features three components: 1)
              evaluation of the effects of small, animal-created disturbances on patterns in
              species dominance and biodiversity at patch and landscape scale; 2)
              identification of the key recruitment processes limiting recovery of vegetation
              following disturbance; and 3) prediction of long-term responses of vegetation
              to small disturbances in the presence of climatic fluctuations and directional
              changes in climate.  Results should improve our basic ability to predict
              changes in grassland structure using model simulations.  If successful, the
              generalizations developed may be applicable to dry grasslands located in other
              parts of the world.  Understanding such grassland structures and functions may
              help us manage these large and potentially fragile systems in the face of
              global climate change. 

This ecological research project fulfills the
              program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the
              United States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share
              research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. 
