Title       : Learning With Misspecified Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0004315

Award Number: 0004315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230906             (Estimated)
Investigator: In-Koo Cho inkoocho@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the agent who estimates a model that fits the observed
               data well, although he may never learn the  "true" equilibrium because his
              model is "misspecified"  in the sense that it misses one or more key parameters
              of the environment.  Even with a  misspecified  model, the decision-maker's
              belief can be self-fulfilled and he may end up using the model to choose a
              policy.  Although the idea of self-fulfilling belief is closely related to
              rational  expectations studied under equilibrium paradigm, it is called a
              self-confirming equilibrium to emphasize that the two different models interact
              to generate the observed outcomes: the agent's model, which is misspecified but
              used to select the action, and the true model that generates the  actual data. 
              The interaction between the true and the perceived models is the central part
              of this  research that differentiates this project from the existing learning
              models and the equilibrium models of economy. 

In an earlier collaboration
              with Thomas J. Sargent, the principal investigator examined the monetary policy
              model of Kydland and Prescott in which  the government chooses  a target
              inflation rate based on the
estimated short-term Phillips curve.   A high
              inflation rate is realized and remains stable under various conditions.  
              Although widely used in making monetary policy in real world, the short-term
              Phillips curve is a misspecified model of an economy, because it does not
              recognize the fact that the expectations of A private agent changes in response
              to the government's policy.      The key finding is that any slight suspicion
              of
the government about the stationarity of the underlying economy can
              generate an abrupt and significant drop of the target inflation rate, which the
              existing literature has proven stable under various conditions.  
              This
apparently paradoxical result can be explained through an endogenous
              switching mechanism of two fundamentally different dynamics within the same
              model: namely,  the "mean dynamics" that dictates the stability of the
              self-confirming equilibrium, and the "escape dynamics" that  pushes the economy
              away from the equilibrium.   While the existing literature has concentrated
              mainly on the "mean dynamics," the proposed research project investigates the
              "escape dynamics,"  which has been overlooked but can influence the dynamics of
              an economy significantly. 

The project generalizes the endogenous switching
              mechanism to a wider class of learning models in  order to apply this idea to
              important economic problems.   The project examines a class of  misspecified
              learning models that have a stable self-confirming equilibrium that is
              different from "true" equilibrium. This research starts by building a general
              theory that can be applied to a different class of models.   Applications
              include a monetary policy known as the Taylor rule that has attracted
              considerable interest from policymakers as well as economists.   An active
              Taylor rule changes the nominal interest rate more than one to one in order to
              control inflation.   Although the active Taylor rule is known to implement the
              inflation target under general conditions, a recent study indicated that the
              same policy might unintentionally lead to a "liquidity trap" equilibrium, in
              which the government can no longer stimulate the economy by lowering the
              nominal interest rate as was the case in the recent episode of Japanese
              economy. The proposed approach can offer a simpler, yet more realistic, model
              to explain the potential limit of the active Taylor rule.   The key idea is
              that even though the government is fully committed to a policy, a slight
              suspicion by the private sector about the government's  commitment will prompt
              the agent to learn about the government's policy rule, and this learning
              process alone could lead the economy to the "liquidity trap."

The second
              application uses the idea of escape dynamics to capture abrupt, and possibly 
              recurrent departures from the normal exchange rate in financial crises while
              maintaining the stability of the economy.  The monetary policy model is used as
               the foundation, while incorporating foreign investors who might have a 
              misspecified model about the  government's policy rule. 

