Title       : Analytical Studies of Global Warning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0004318

Award Number: 0004318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205849             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin L. Weitzman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Because the economics of climate change is so complicated, even the simplest
              multi-sector computer models that have been created to analyze the subject have
              themselves been relatively complicated. This research proposal is targeted at
              what is perceived to be a shortage of decent "super-simplified" analytical
              models of global warming. This project constructs a series of two- to
              three-sector sector referent models that will give simple sharp insights into
              the global warming problem and that a graduate student in economics would
              recognize and understand.  In its essence, the global warming problem is a
              problem in capital theory.  The core architecture of these new models is that
              of a dynamic optimal-growth production-stock externality having a special
              structure. This project answers such questions as: What is this special
              structure? Does it correspond to any standard "off-the-shelf' model of existing
              capital theory? What solution concepts does this special structure give rise
              to? And are such solution concepts useful for giving insights into the behavior
              of the more-complicated, more-realistic, multi-sector numerical models?

More
              particularly, the project centers analytical attention on the key reduced-form
              relation between the private and social rates of return generated by a
              global-warming-type dynamic externality. The project shows that what looks like
              some fairly complicated models of economic dynamics describing, very roughly,
              "the global warming problem," reduce down to a particular kind of
              capital-theoretic structure, which permits an unexpectedly simple way of
              thinking about the relationship between social and private rates of return on
              capital. Understanding the relation between social and private rates of return
              may be important here because, as the proposed project  shows, the "problem" of
              the dynamic global-warming externality and its "solution" can both be
              conceptualized readily when presented in this characteristic form. Social and
              private rates of return are important summary statistics, compressing down into
              two numbers a lot of information concerning levels of consumption or
              investment, concerning rates of growth, and concerning desirable government
              policy on emissions-abatement standards. So, if we understand or intuit well
              the relationship between social and private rates of return, we understand a
              lot, even if not everything, about the basic underlying problem and its
              solution. The proposed research shows when, how, and why a global-warming-type
              dynamic externality may collapse down to a relatively simple reduced- form
              relationship between social and private rates of return.

