Title       : Dissertation Research: The Gathering of the Clans: Understanding Migration into
               the Hopi Area, A.D. 1275-1400
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a0004543

Award Number: 0004543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Hegmon michelle.hegmon@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Michelle Hegmon, Mr. Wesley Bernardini will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. His research focuses on the late
              prehistoric period in the US Southwest (ca. 1200 to 1400 AD) and will test a
              theory of Hopi people's migration. Both archaeological and ethnographic data
              indicate that during this time interval extensive migration and population
              shifts occurred in the Hopi region of northern Arizona and that the present
              distribution of Hopi villages and people was determined during this period. Mr.
              Bernardini wishes to understand the mechanisms which underlie this process. The
              dominant archaeological view is that such population movements likely occurred
              at a macro scale in which all individuals in an entire village moved together
              in mass to a new location and most analytical units which researchers employ
              are defined at this scale. Hopi tradition itself paints a different picture and
              describes a more piecemeal process in which a very small group within a donor
              village would migrate to one host location while another group (clan) from the
              same point of origin would move elsewhere. As a result host villages were
              highly heterogeneous and villages in close proximity may have shared share
              fewer ties to each other than to villages further away. This issue is important
              to anthropologists who wish to understand historic, and present day, Hopi
              social organization.

Mr. Bernardini will focus on the chemical analysis of
              ceramics recovered from donor population villages. Prior research has indicated
              that a particular kind of pottery, "Jeddito Yellow Ware" was manufactured only
              by Hopi but then traded widely. Significant amounts have been recovered from
              sites in regions outside the immediate Hopi area and Mr. Bernardini
              hypothesizes that these trading ties established in pre-migration times
              provided the pathways along which migrants later moved. The analysis takes
              advantage of the geological variability within the Hopi region. Clay and temper
              sources are distinct between different Hopi subregions and often allow one to
              match a sherd recovered tens of miles away with the individual village at which
              it was produced. By examining chemical variability among Jeditto Yellow Ware
              sherds within individual donor villages and with specific Hopi regions, a
              network of linkages can be established. This in turn very likely set the
              template for movement of people as well.

This research is important for
              several reasons. It will provide insight into the basic process of migration.
              It will provide data of interest to many anthropologists, increase our
              understanding of the prehistoric US Southwest and assist in training a
              promising young scientist.

