Title       : Acquisition of an Ion Chromatograph for Multidisciplinary Water-Chemistry
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0004070

Award Number: 0004070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19988              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Mayer jmayer@westga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Leavitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Curtis L. Hollabaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Josseph J. Hendricks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : State Univ of West Georgia
	      
	      Carrollton, GA  30118    404/834-1311

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0004070
Mayer

This grant provides 50% support for acquisition of an ion
              chromatograph (IC) for water chemistry analysis at the State University of West
              Georgia (UWG).  UWG will provide the remaining funding.  The PI , James Mayer,
              is a hydrogeologist who joined the UWG faculty 5 years ago after receiving his
              Ph.D. from the University of Texas at Austin.  The IC will also be used by Joe
              Hendricks, Andy Leavitt, and Curtis Hollabaugh of the UWG Biology, Chemistry,
              and Geology departments, respectively.  The IC will reside in the Geosciences
              Department where it will complement existing equipment and allow rapid, precise
              and thorough analysis of major anion, cation and inorganic nutrient
              concentrations in water.  Addition of the IC to laboratory and field equipment
              already owned by the Geoscience Department will create a state-of-the art
              inorganic water-chemistry laboratory at UWG that will see extensive use by
              faculty and undergraduate students. UWG is a predominantly undergraduate
              institution with a strong tradition of student involvement in research.  The IC
              will greatly improve opportunities for students to learn modern, fundamental
              analytical techniques and produce scientifically valuable research results. 
              The IC will be used primarily for groundwater and surface water geochemical
              studies in the Piedmont, Valley-and-Ridge and Appalachian Plateau physiographic
              provinces of the southeastern U.S.  It will also be used in studies assessing
              net primary production implications of different forest management
              techniques.

***

