Title       : Late Prehistoric Social Complexity in Southern Amazonia (Upper Xingu, Brazil)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0004487

Award Number: 0004487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155099             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Heckenberger mheckenb@anthro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Heckenberger and his
              colleagues will conduct two seasons (eight months) of archaeological research
              in the Upper Xingu region, Brazil, situated near the southern peripheries of
              the forested lowlands of the Amazon basin.  The project aims to accurately
              characterize the regional distribution, variability, and articulation of late
              prehistoric (c. AD 1000-1600) habitation sites within a 900 km study area and
              to improve the overall chronology of prehistoric human occupation in the
              region.  Building on the results of previous NSF funded research, specific
              questions to be addressed include: (1) the initial appearance of circular plaza
              villages in the region, suggested to be c. AD 800-900; (2) the timing of major
              structural elaboration of the plaza villages, through earthwork construction,
              thought to have occurred c. AD 1400-1600; (3) the variability, in terms of
              size, configuration, and structural features, of these terminal prehistoric
              sites and their integration within the study area; (4) the degree of population
              nucleation, measured in terms of village growth, coincident with major
              earthwork construction; and (5) the overall environmental impacts of the large
              prehistoric villages on the surrounding landscape, in collaboration with
              specialists in  paleoecology, pedology, and ethnobotany.  The project will
              include the expansion of a geographic (GIS) database for this portion of the
              southern Amazon, utilizing satellite images and aerial-photos, as well as
              ground-based data recovery.  The research addresses pressing issues in regional
              anthropology, most notably debates regarding the nature and distribution of
              complex societies (chiefdoms) in late prehistoric times.  Although long felt to
              be inimical to the development of large, settled populations, recent research
              indicates that such societies did exist prehistorically in Amazonia.  Thus, the
              Amazon is one of the last major hearths for the emergence of chiefdoms to be
              recognized worldwide.  This research is particularly timely since, to date,
              very few systematic regional-level archaeological studies have been conducted
              in the Brazilian Amazon.  More broadly, scientific investigation of past
              settlement and land-use in different parts of the Amazon is critical to debates
              regarding pre-industrial adaptations to tropical forest environments and issues
              of contemporary economic sustainability and development in this ecologically
              sensitive region.  The project, sponsored by the Museu Nacional and Museu
              Goeldi in Brazil and composed of a team of Brazilian and American researchers
              and students, will strengthen scientific cooperation between Brazil and the
              United States and also promote cooperation between scientists and indigenous
              peoples.








