Title       : Testing a Symbolic Interactionist Theory of Deterrence, Informal Social Control,
               and Delinquency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0004323

Award Number: 0004323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96342              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross L. Matsueda matsueda@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project develops a symbolic interactionist theory of role-taking,
              deterrence, and delinquency. This perspective is used to integrate recent
              research on deterrence -- the ability of threats of punishment such as arrest
              and incarceration to deter individuals from crime -- and research on informal
              social control -- the ability of institutions, such as families, schools, and
              communities to prevent crime through informal controls. According to the
              symbolic interactionist theory of delinquency, organized groups control the
              behavior of members through role-taking. When ongoing lines of activity are
              blocked or interrupted, individuals engage in cognitive behavior, in which they
              consider the anticipated reactions of other to lines of action and most
              importantly views of self from the standpoint of others. This project, more
              specifically, will address the following issues. First, do individuals learn
              perceived costs and returns to crime based on a Bayesian learning model, in
              which prior beliefs about costs and returns influence behavior, but are then
              modified based on the consequences of that behavior? Second, do delinquent
              decisions follow a model of limited rationality, in which actors satisfice,
              rather than optimize? And can a symbolic interactionist model of
              decision-making specify the conditions under which delinquent decisions tend
              toward rationality? Third, are there specific conditions under which deterrent
              effects appear, and can a symbolic interactionist learning model identify those
              conditions? Fourth, by examining both future self-reported delinquency and
              present delinquent intentions, can we reconcile divergent findings in the
              literature? The project will employ two data sets. The National Youth Survey
              and the Denver Youth Study. The project will make important contributions to
              our understanding of delinquent decision-making, and the way in which informal
              social control and formal sanctioning operate to affect delinquent behavior.
              Moreover, the research will have implications for basic research on rational
              decision-making, and public policies intended to reduce crime by strengthening
              institutions versus investing in police, courts, and prisons.
