Title       : The Interaction of Language and Dialect Contact: Variable Expression of Spanish
               Subject Pronouns in Six Spanish Dialects in New York City
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a0004133

Award Number: 0004133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ricardo Otheguy rotheguy@gc.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ana Celia Zentella  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Graduate School
	      365 Fifth Avenue
	      New York, NY  100164309    212/817-7523

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Spanish speakers in New York City (NYC) are experiencing language and dialect
              contact on an unusually large scale. This project investigates the consequences
              of such contact through a sociolinguistic study of the alternation between
              presence and absence of subject personal pronouns (SPPs) with finite verbs in
              Spanish. We ask whether Spanish dialects are undergoing leveling or
              hyperdifferentiation and/or whether they are converging with English. Leveling
              may indicate the rise of a NYC Spanish, suggestive of a new NYC Latino
              identity; hyperdifferentiation may suggest the emergence of transnational
              identities that tie immigrants and language minorities to their distant
              communities of origin more than to speakers of other dialects in the immigrant
              setting.

The data come from interviews with informants from the six largest
              Spanish-speaking communities in NYC. Our informants have resided in NYC for
              varying numbers of years, have arrived in NYC at different ages, have varied
              levels of English and Spanish proficiency, and diverse educational and
              socioeconomic backgrounds. 

The study is conducted within the variationist
              sociolinguistic paradigm, and provides a detailed, explicit quantitative model
              of leveling, hyperdifferentiation, and English contact. We compare recently
              arrived Latinos whose activities are mostly within their own communities with
              more established Latinos who interact frequently with members of other dialect
              groups, distinguishing in the latter those who know little English from those
              that speak it well. We study the predictive power of membership in a particular
              dialect on the occurrence of overt SPPs in speakers with these different
              profiles, and ask how they differ in rates of overt SPPs, in the constraints
              that condition their use, and in the strengths of the constraints.
