Title       : Chicago Regional Data Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0004335

Award Number: 0004335
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Spencer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph G. Altonji  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The U.S. Bureau of the Census enters into a partnership with a Consortium. The
              new data center is called The Chicago Research Data Center (Chicago RDC) and
              would be housed in a secure site at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, in
              downtown Chicago. The member institutions of the Consortium have pledged space,
              administrative support, and funding of $1,063,000 for the first three years of
              the Center conditional on support from the National Science Foundation (NSF).
              We propose that NSF provide an additional $300,000 over three years to cover
              the remaining costs of establishing and operating the Center.

This award
              helps cover the costs of establishing and operating The Chicago Research Data
              Center (Chicago RDC).  The Chicago RDC was established through a partnership
              between the U.S. Bureau of Census and a Consortium consisting of the Federal
              Reserve Bank of Chicago, Argonne National Laboratory (ANL), the University of
              Illinois at Chicago (UIC), the University of Chicago, and Northwestern
              University to establish a Research Data Center in Chicago.  The Chicago RDC is
              housed in a secure site at the Federal Reserve Bank in downtown Chicago.  The
              member institutions of the Consortium have pledged space, and administrative
              support and most of the funding necessary to establish and run the center.  
              The extremely large and accomplished research community that is within easy
              commuting distance of the proposed location ensures the Center's high quality
              research output and long-term viability. In addition to important substantive
              results, the projects undertaken by these researchers should make substantial
              improvements in Census Bureau data programs. Furthermore, the Chicago Fed and
              other member institutions have a long track record in dealing with confidential
              data.  The Chicago RDC is positioned to attract large numbers of high-quality
              projects while adhering to the strict standards of confidentiality required of
              an RDC.  These projects include research on energy and the environment;
              corporate finance; labor markets; crime; health and childcare; and survey
              methods.

