Title       : Inequality and Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0004304

Award Number: 0004304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254928             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oded Galor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This research examines the dynamic evolution of the effect of income
              distribution on the process of development. It develops unified growth models
              that encompass the transition between distinct regimes that have characterized
              the relationship between income inequality and the process of development. The
              unified modeling of this long transition process is a significant research
              challenge facing economists interested in the understanding of the role of
              income inequality in the process of development and in the determination of
              long-run economic growth. Imposing the constraint that a single model would
              account for the entire evolution of the relationship between inequality and the
              process of development is a discipline that would improve the understanding of
              the underlying phenomena and would generate superior testable predictions and
              policy implications.

The research provides an intertemporal reconciliation
              between conflicting viewpoints about the effect of inequality on economic
              growth. It argues that the replacement of physical capital accumulation by
              human capital accumulation as a prime engine of economic growth has changed the
              qualitative impact of inequality on the process of development. In early stages
              of industrialization as physical capital accumulation is a prime source of
              economic growth, inequality enhances the process of development by channeling
              resources towards individuals whose marginal propensity to save is higher. In
              later stages of development, however, as the return to human capital increases
              due to capital-skill complementarity, human capital becomes the prime engine of
              economic growth and equality, in the presence of credit constraints, stimulates
              investment in human capital and promotes economic growth. As wages increase,
              however, credit constraints become less binding, the adverse effect of
              inequality on human capital accumulation and growth subsides, and the overall
              effect of inequality becomes less significant. 

The research hypothesizes
              that changes in class structure that have taken place in Europe since the 19th
              century reflect a deliberate transformation of society orchestrated by the
              Capitalists. Based on a careful examination of historical evidence, the
              proposed research will argue that contrary to conventional wisdom, the changes
              of this class structure could have been an outcome of a cooperative rather than
              a purely divisive process. The process of capital accumulation has gradually
              intensified the relative scarcity of labor and has generated an incentive to
              augment labor via human capital accumulation. Due to the complementarity
              between physical and human capital in production, the Capitalists were among
              the prime beneficiaries of the potential accumulation of human capital by the
              masses. They had therefore the incentive to financially support public
              education that would sustain their profit rates and would improve their
              economic well being, 

The research develops the hypothesis that in land
              abundant societies with a high degree of polarization education reforms would
              be delayed, due to the low degree of complementarity between human capital and
              land. Thus the research argues that, in contrast to a capital abundant society,
              in a land abundant society the process of development would be slower and
              polarization would persist longer. Hence, initial differences in land abundance
              may be the cause of persistence differences in the structure of society,
              institutions and economic performance across countries.

