Title       : Racial Heterogeneity, Neighborhood Controls, and Violence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0004324

Award Number: 0004324
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred C. Pampel                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross L. Matsueda matsueda@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Avery M. Guest  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charis Kubrin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Crutchfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the intersection of race, neighborhood social
              organization, and crime and violence in Seattle neighborhoods. Building on
              recent theoretical developments, the investigators will specify an integrated
              theory of racial heterogeneity, social disorganization, informal social
              control, and sub-cultures. This theoretical perspective specifies a causal
              mechanism in which community structure influ-ences neighborhood crime and
              violence through informal social control, neighborhood cultural codes and
              scripts, and routine activities. The project will field a new household
              telephone survey of neighborhoods and victimization in Seattle. The survey will
              include neigh-borhood measures included in two earlier household surveys of
              Seattle neighborhoods on victimization and community attachment. The survey
              will be augmented with personal interviews of nonresponding households and
              households with no phone or unlisted numbers. In addition, focus groups will be
              used to refine the quantitative measures of street codes, as well as
              neighborhood ties and informal control. Analyses will be carried out in several
              steps. First, exploratory analyses and confirmatory factor analyses will
              identify dimensions underlying neighborhood concepts such as informal control
              and cultural codes of violence. Second, neighborhood-level models of community
              attachment and social control will examine the effects of racial heterogeneity
              and community structure on neighborhood attachment and social control. Third,
              neighborhood-level models of crime and violence will examine the effects of
              racial heterogeneity and community structure on violence, and test whether
              these effects are mediated by informal social control and neighborhood cultural
              codes and scripts. Fourth, multi-level models will capitalize on the nested
              sampling design of households within census tracts, estimating random effects
              at the household-level, and then modeling neighborhood variation in those
              ef-fects. Fifth, change models will examine changes in racial heterogeneity,
              neighborhood organization and violence. Results will increase the understanding
              of the dynamics of neighborhoods and violence, provide refined measures of key
              concepts, allow comparisons between Seattle and other major cities, and provide
              baseline data for neighborhood interventions, such as community policing or
              neighborhood block watches.
