Title       : Fabrication of Integrated Polymeric Microfluidic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0004030

Award Number: 0004030
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $939920             (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Whitesides gwhitesides@gmwgroup.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Whitesides
0004030

The principal objective in this work is to develop
              functional microfluidic devices based on PDMS and related materials.  The
              strategic intent is to develop the simplest possible platform (meaning complete
              system, with components that accomplish sample introduction, preparation,
              separation, detection, disposal). We will fabricate integrated microanalytical
              systems using primarily poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS)  (and other organic
              polymers).

The work will require development of a number of subsystems and
              components.  The objectives of this work will be both to accomplish the task of
              developing a flexible platform technology, and to demonstrate new concepts. 
              More specifically, the work will include: i) establishing the capability of
              PDMS to make certain types of functions uniquely possible by virtue of its
              flexibility and low surface free energies, and ii) expanding the range of
              components available to designers of microfluidic systems.  The focus will be
              on proteomics rather than geonimcs.

The PI will explore these ideas or
              components: 
 
* Laminar flow and counterflow as the basis for separations,
              for patterning and dosing cells and proteins, and for in-channel
              fabrication.

* New types of functional components:  on-chip equivalents of
              filters, dialysis chambers, magnetic sorters, ion exchange adsorbers and
              membranes, and centrifuges (with no moving parts).

* Components with moving
              parts: new types of components with moving parts, taking advantage of the
              ability of PDMS to flex to eliminate hinges and other complex features that are
              required when using silicon.

* Systems for separation and analysis of
              proteins that are amenable to chip-scale realization.  




