Title       : A Theoretical and Emperical Study of Legislative Lobbying Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  2000  
File        : a0004419

Award Number: 0004419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133508             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Hall rlhall@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

Students of democratic institutions have long worried about the reach of
              private power into public affairs. Private inequalities inevitably get captured
              in the practice of interest group politics, giving rise to what Grant McConnell
              once called the "most serious and perplexing problems" of American democracy.
              In political discourse today, assertions about the corrupting influence of
              special interests are commonplace. Social scientific studies of interest group
              influence, however, are noteworthy for the non-cumulative, frequently
              inconsistent nature of their findings. What effect does lobbying have on the
              behavior of legislators? And to what extent does it magnify or otherwise
              contaminate the practice of representation.

One of the means by which
              interest groups achieve influence is by lobbying elected officials. A second is
              donating to candidates' campaigns. A third is mobilizing constituents at the
              grass roots. This study examines the effects of all three on the behavior of
              legislators, but the cornerstone of the project is a new theory of lobbying.
              The large literature on lobbying characterizes it as a strategy intended to
              change legislators' preferences, but this approach is undermined by several
              empirical puzzles. The principal investigator models lobbying as a form of
              legislative subsidy - a grant of staff time, policy expertise, political
              intelligence, and other legislative assets - selectively given to congressional
              allies so that they can more effectively pursue policy objectives that they
              share with the group. PAC contributions and grass-roots campaigns are recast in
              light of this theory. The model is simple in form, realistic in its
              assumptions, and counterintuitive in its implications. One of the main
              implications is that lobbyists should lobby those who already agree with them.
              A second is that they should lobby most those allies who are least likely to
              change their mind. The model also helps to clarify the conditions under which
              preference-centered lobbying should work.

The PI investigates the theory
              empirically, testing its main hypotheses and alternative hypotheses using data
              from the U.S. Congress. The main dependent variables are legislators' activity
              levels on specific bills and their interventions in specific agency decisions,
              which are modeled as a function of legislator expertise and capacity,
              constituency interests, and the interaction of group lobbying and member-group
              agreement. The nature of these data suggest that the models be estimated using
              zero-inflated poisson regression. Legislators' voting decisions, groups'
              lobbying choices, and group PAC contributions are analyzed using conventional
              maximum likelihood estimators for limited dependent variables. The data on
              lobbying and grass-roots campaign activity come from responses to a structured
              survey instrument, administered in face-to-face interviews with group
              lobbyists. Other data come from government documents, FEC databases,
              district-level census data, and various online sources.

The study promises
              to improve our understanding of lobbying and the factors that affect its
              behavioral impact, such as PAC contributions and grass-roots mobilization
              campaigns. But it also will have practical implications for the design of
              lobbying reforms and the development of standards of legislative ethics.
              Subsidizing already committed legislators is, in effect, helping them to do
              their job, which looks very different than buying off uncommitted ones.
              Accepting lobbyists help thus poses no ethical dilemma for the representative.
              However, the inequality among groups in lobbying resources will nonetheless
              distort representation in favor of moneyed interests. Indeed, this may
              contribute more to the legislative advantages of such groups than their
              contributions to congressional campaigns.

