Title       : Dissertation Research: Storied Shores: Environment, Society, and Culture in
               Monterey, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a0004231

Award Number: 0004231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7999               (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Gregory gregoryj@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project, "Storied Shores: Environment, Society and
              Culture in Monterey, California," explores the role of science and technology
              in the shaping of nature and society in Monterey from the late nineteenth
              century to the 1980s. "Storied Shores" charts how the individuals who converged
              on Monterey used their particular social and cultural values to evaluate,
              envision, and mold the natural environment. The research explores how material
              changes to Monterey reflected and shaped how people used and understood nature.
              Contests over shaping nature sharpened existing social divisions while
              affecting how individuals physically changed their natural surroundings.
              Scientific ideas and technological systems, moreover, helped to moderate these
              changes in the land. Working, playing, and studying in nature became the most
              prominent activities on the Monterey coastline. Labor, recreation, science, and
              technology, therefore, intersected in the shaping of Monterey's nature and
              society. This project proposes to add to a growing synthesis of environmental
              history and science and technology studies by examining the social construction
              of nature, science, and technology and exploring their effects on and
              implications for Monterey society and its coastline. The project will also make
              a more immediate contribution by assisting scientists and planners interested
              in the marine environment. The political, social, and economic activities of
              humans and developments in science and technology affect the natural world.
              This research intends to bring these impacts to light and provide important
              information for future research by creating a historical baseline for measuring
              human impact on the coastline.
