Title       : University of Michigan Research Data Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0004322

Award Number: 0004322
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew D. Shapiro shapiro@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yu Xie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Lam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George Kaplan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The grant provides funding to open a Research Data Center (RDC) within the
              Survey Research Center of the Institute for Social Research at the University
              of Michigan. The RDC would provide researchers access to source data collected
              by the Census Bureau and other agencies. These confidential data are placed
              within a secure facility at the Survey Research Center.  To gain access to
              these data, researchers with approved projects would obtain special sworn
              status within the Census Bureau.  Researchers can publish results of analysis
              carried out within the RDC subject to a rigorous protocol for protecting the
              confidentiality of the underlying data.  

The purpose of this access would
              be to conduct academic research using data on individuals and firms.  The
              ability to analyze the source data has enormous scientific benefits. These
              include the ability to make full use of the information collected by government
              agencies; to analyze the behavior of individuals and firms taking into account
              the heterogeneity of behavior and characteristics; and to combine sources of
              data at the individual level to study relationships obscured by more aggregate
              data.  This RDC promotes productive interaction between the data collection
              agencies and the research community. Typically, researchers using government
              statistics are passive consumers of the data, which is usually collected for a
              purpose other than academic research. By providing a vehicle for working with
              the source data in collaboration with the Census Bureau, the RDC allows the
              research community to participate effectively in improving Census data.

A
              Research Data Center would build on the University of Michigan's long-standing
              strength in social science research and in the processing and analysis of
              large-scale databases.  The Institute of Social Research and its Survey Center
              and Population Studies Center house substantial expertise in the management of
              such databases and for maintaining the confidentiality of information on
              individuals.  The University, the Institute, and the Centers have an
              established record in providing wide access to data and in improving quality
              data.

