Title       : Faculty Workshop on Teaching of First Courses on Power Electronics and Electric
               Drives.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0004201

Award Number: 0004201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47190              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ned Mohan mohan@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Robbins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant will support a Faculty Workshop on "Teaching of First Courses on
              Power Electronics and Electric Drives" in March 2001. This workshop will
              promote the following objectives:

1.	Provide the highest quality
              undergraduate education in this field,

2.	Motivate and attract talented
              students,

3.	Minimize lecture-preparation time for the instructors,
              and

4.	Facilitate teaching of these courses by EE faculty specializing in
              other fields.

Power electronics and electric drives have the potential to
              improve industrial productivity by means of robotics and factory automation,
              and of making the United States become a nation that uses electricity most
              efficiently. There is a looming crisis in the undergraduate education of power
              electronics and electric drives which, if not addressed, will leave the nation
              with far too few engineers to take advantage of these opportunities.  Power
              electronics will also be crucial to transitrtren, in the motor vehicle sector
              allowing more efficient use of energy.

The University of Minnesota has
              studied the restructuring of these courses since 1994. This effort received a
              strong impetus from funding by NSF, EPRI, and the local utilities in May 1997
              when a three-year project Innovations in Power Engineering Education there,
              including prior workshops on "Teaching of Electric Drives" and "Teaching of
              Power Electronics". Both of these workshops were highly successful, each
              attended by nearly one hundred participants.  The new workshop will build on
              the new experience resulting from this prior activity and also attempt to
              develop integration of the two areas.  The new workshop will build on the new
              experience resulting from this prior activity and also attempt to develop
              integration of the two areas.

As a part of the workshop proceedings, copies
              of completed lecture notes, lecture transparencies, and the simulation
              exercises discussed during the workshop will be distributed.  Ways of tightly
              coupling lecture material to simulations and hardware laboratory will be
              discussed.

