Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Race, Gender, Ethnicity,
               Class and the Spread of Suffrage in Democracies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a0004475

Award Number: 0004475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ted Gurr   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The major objective in this Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project is to
              fill a gap in the political science literature created by the difference in the
              definition and operationalization of democracy in the empirical literature.  
              Definitions of democracy stress the importance of participation and suffrage
              for all.  However,  when operationalized, suffrage, with the exception of
              gender, as it applies to groups separated from the dominant civic community by
              race ethnicity, and conquest has been either slighted or ignored.  This has
              meant that while the move from nondemocratic forms of government to elite
              democracy has been studied, the move from exclusive democracy to more inclusive
              democracy that allow most adults to vote has been ignored.   This dissertation
              research creates a database tracking the achievement of suffrage for different
              groups in democracies from 1800 to 1998.   The database is used to test a
              theory that explains the move from exclusion to inclusion in democracies
              through the interaction of material, political and normative power.  This will
              help to integrate theoretically the interaction of these different types of
              power that are usually dealt with separately in the literature.   The database
              also serves as an important resource beyond the current research to those who
              would explore the causes and impacts of the expansion of the basic right to
              participate that suffrage represents.

This dissertation research project
              promises to enhance substantially our understanding of the topic.




