Title       : Universal Virtual Laboratory (UVL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0004292

Award Number: 0004292
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448533             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian P. Butz bpbutz@astro.ocis.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # HRD-0004292
Institution:  Temple University
Principal Investigator:
              Bruce Butz
Title:  "Universal Virtual Laboratory"

ABSTRACT

The focus of
              the Universal Virtual Laboratory (UVL) project is finding new ways to
              accommodate people with severe motor impairments to an electrical engineering
              laboratory.  Any participants who are deaf or hard-of-hearing will also be
              accommodated.  The major goals of the project are to:

1) Develop a
              simulated, but realistic, laboratory that will enable students to name, place
              and interconnect various circuit elements, electronic devices, electrical
              systems, signal generators and measuring instruments.  

2) Enable users to
              manipulate virtual instruments, elements and devices either by direct
              manipulation, with a mouse or a headpointer, or by discrete actions with
              switches, keyboard, or speech recognition.  The system will maximize the speed
              with which the student can interact with the system by using rule-based
              algorithms. 

3) Develop novel input/output devices that will accommodate
              various disabled students.

4) Permit the student to connect in any
              physically feasible way the elements, instruments available in a typical
              laboratory storeroom, and obtain the same responses, including failures, that
              would be experienced in the laboratory.

5) Simulate the performance of the
              interconnected elements and objects by integrating them seamlessly with
              software application packages.  These packages will produce a data stream
              representing current, voltages, frequencies, power, etc.  The data stream will
              be used as inputs to the various simulated measuring instruments.

6) Provide
              the student with an intelligent laboratory assistant that will answer the
              student's questions in a way that simulates the role of an expert laboratory
              assistant who is expert in both the subject matter and accommodation of
              disabilities.

7) Place the resultant UVL modules on CD ROMS and make these
              modules completely functional on the World Wide Web.

8)  Disseminate the
              results over the World Wide Web, in appropriate journals and through
    
              presentation at notable conferences. 

The framework developed in this
              project could be used as a template for the design and implementation of
              realistic virtual laboratories in other engineering courses as well as in the
              physical sciences.

