Title       : SGER: Emissions from Biomass Combustion and Other Sources in the Indian
               Continent
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0004138

Award Number: 0004138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glen R. Cass   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1325,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              One of the findings from the NSF and DOE-supported Indian Ocean Experiment
              (INDOEX) is that unusually large black soot concentrations over the Indian
              Ocean produce low-level atmospheric column warming, a new finding with possibly
              profound implications for future climate change.   Heretofore, atmospheric
              aerosols were thought to cool.  This is still the case, however, we now know
              that in addition to aerosols that reflect sunlight back to space, e.g., "white"
              sulfates, soot - containing aerosols warm, and can potentially impact the
              climate and hydrological cycle.

During INDOEX, the PI and his students and
              colleagues documented the presence of high concentrations of large black soot
              aerosols over the Indian Ocean downwind (South-south west) of the Indian
              subcontinent.  Knowledge of the sources that contribute to these aerosols is
              currently lacking.

The PI will work with colleagues in India to
              produce:

This one year research initiation project, we hope to
              produce:

1. Source profiles for five or more biomass source types and one or
              more local 
coals that document the size and chemical composition distribution
              of primary particle emissions from those sources;

2. An improved  (but still
              preliminary) overall particulate matter emissions inventory for India;

3.	A
              research plan that identifies the major remaining gaps in the inventory and
              explains how those gaps can and should be filled through further experiments
              and data analyses.




This work is important because of its potential to
              increase knowledge about sources of man-made atmospheric pollution and its
              effect on climate.

