Title       : The Nature and Structure of a Frontier Mississippian Village: The Aztalan Site,
               Wisconsin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2000  
File        : a0004394

Award Number: 0004394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150385             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne G. Goldstein lynneg@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Lynne Goldstein and her students
              will continue their archaeological research at the site of Aztalan. Situated on
              the Crawfish River between Madison and Milwaukee Wisconsin, this large and
              unusual site covers approximately 21 acres. It was surrounded by a stockade or
              palisade with individual posts set into the ground and covered with clay
              plaster. Bastions or watchtowers were constructed at regular intervals and in
              addition to this outer wall, several inner palisade walls have also been
              identified. Excellent preservation of houses within the site has permitted
              identification of individual activity areas. Dating from the late prehistoric
              period, ca. 800-1300 AD Aztalan is unusual because it is associated with the
              Middle Mississipean culture which has its geographical focus in the southern
              Mississippi Valley. No other occurrences are known this far North and the site
              is an anomalous outlying frontier community. Dr. Goldstein wishes to understand
              the range of variability within the Middle Mississipean, how Aztalan was
              organized and how it interacted with other local communities. While clearly
              Middle Mississippean, preliminary data demonstrate that Aztalan's spatial
              organization differs significantly from its Southern counterparts. To address
              these questions three approaches will be employed. First, selective test
              excavations in four areas of the site will provide additional information on
              site structure. Secondly, abundant botanical and faunal remains will be
              analyzed. A pilot study demonstrates that such data will provide important
              information on the nature of food production and plant an animal use for ritual
              purposes. Finally a geographic information system will be expanded to include
              basic site data such as topography and modern features as well an information
              on individual features and houses excavated by Dr. Goldstein as well as past
              researchers. 

This research will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists. It will shed light on an important and poorly understood aspect
              of U.S. prehistory and increase scientific understanding of  chiefdom
              organization. It will also assist in training both undergraduate and graduate
              students.

