Title       : Current Distributions in Lightning Subsequent Return Strokes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0004372

Award Number: 0004372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59914              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Willett willettj@compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : J,Willett
	      4 Barberry Road
	      Lexington, MA  024218004    301/962-4882

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A cloud-to-ground lightning flash consists of a "leader" that progresses in
              steps from the cloud to the ground followed by three or four successive return
              strokes.  The total time for the process is several tenths of a second. 
              Currents measured in return strokes at the ground rise to a maximum of
              typically 20 kA in a few microseconds and decline more slowly. These currents
              are responsible for much of the lightning damage to structures.  The rise times
              and peak currents in lightning strokes as a function of the height above the
              ground have never been measured directly and are not quantitatively known,
              though the information is needed for understanding the lightning hazards faced
              by aircraft and for basic research on the physics of lightning.  These
              properties of lightning return strokes will be inferred from data collected on
              triggered lightning in Florida in 1987.  The data consist of the current and
              the electric field measured at the ground and stereo photographs of the
              flashes, from which the three-dimensional geometry of the lightning channels
              can be reconstructed with high spatial and temporal resolution.  The geometry
              of the lightning path is important in determining the time history of the
              electric field measured at the ground near the flash.  Given the channel
              configuration and the measured electric field, it is not possible to solve
              uniquely for the current distribution.  Instead, the approach is to assume a
              current distribution, to use the known path geometry, and to compute the
              electric field.  The results are compared with the observed field and iterated
              until acceptable agreement is reached.  It is anticipated that this will enable
              the determination of the main features of the return stroke currents, namely
              the variation with altitude of the peak amplitude, rise time, and propagation
              velocity. This information is needed for the efficient design of lightning
              protection for flying aircraft and spacecraft.



