Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Language Socialization in a Lanna Thai Bilingual
               Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2000   
File        : a0004134

Award Number: 0004134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elinor Ochs eochs@anthro.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation project investigates the language socialization of children in
              a Lanna Thai bilingual community into the use of two codes -- Kam Myang and
              Standard Thai. Before entering school, children are exposed to Kam Myang in the
              home and community settings, and they develop some competence in the speech
              styles and levels appropriate to those settings. When they enter public school,
              they encounter formal and literary varieties of Standard Thai, the language of
              the government and media in Thailand, for the first time. This project proposes
              to investigate how children are socialized into social and culturally
              appropriate uses of speech styles in these two languages in the educational
              settings of the family household and the public school. 

Through an
              ethnographic, discourse-analytic study of four Myang children's language
              development in naturalistic settings over the course of one year, the study
              will explore the following questions: (a) How do children move from competence
              in the situational varieties of their home language to competence in the
              varieties of a second language that they must master at school? (b) What
              strategies are employed by community members in socializing children to use
              these languages appropriately? (c) What are the local language ideologies
              regarding the cultural significance of, and the differences between, these
              various codes and varieties? By studying the children's participation in
              cultural routines in which they are expected to use honorific registers
              including status particles, person reference and address, and honorific
              vocabulary in ways which indicate an awareness of the cultural norms of use as
              well as the expressive potentiality of these forms in spoken discourse, this
              study will contribute to our understanding of how children are socialized to
              use the situational varieties of these two languages appropriately, and how
              they are socialized into the cultural norms, values and ideologies surrounding
              their use. This project will contribute to studies of language socialization
              and language development, sociolinguistic studies of situational variation, the
              study of honorifics, and studies of children's moral and social development.
              More broadly, the study will contribute to our understanding of language
              development and language socialization in multilingual societies, and how this
              development is interlinked with cultural values, social organization, and
              historical change.
