Title       : Collaborative Research: Business Organization and Network Relations of Foreign
               Manufacturing Ventures in the Yangtze Delta Region, China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2001     
File        : a0004357

Award Number: 0004357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89972              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yehua Dennis Wei weiy@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,9200,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The globalization of business activity is a central feature of the contemporary
              world economy; it is a significant force in the production and re-production of
              national and local economies.  Academic inquires concerning the causes and
              consequences of globalization of business activity have generally focused on
              meta-narratives of capitalistic mode of production or macro-explanations of
              global-local relations.  Systematic establishment-level studies pertaining to
              the local business organization and relations of foreign ventures in host
              economies with respect to their global/local constraints and opportunities are
              lacking.  This study aims to examine the ways foreign firms articulate their
              networks in China and the corresponding impacts on venture performance and
              local economic development.  Based upon a detailed investigation of the local
              business organization and relations of foreign manufacturing ventures in four
              cities in the Yangtze Delta region (Shanghai, Suzhou, Nanjing, and Hanzhou),
              the study also examines the differences in local business organization and
              relations of ventures with respect to major structural characteristics of the
              investments and the socioeconomic and institutional environments of the four
              cities.  The study will employ both postal survey and personal interview
              methods for gathering data, and a range of quantitative and qualitative methods
              will be used for analysis.  The underlying hypotheses are that the
              marketing/material/technology networks of the ventures are spatially more
              dispersed than the production networks, and that their extent of interaction
              with indigenous enterprises is limited.  It is further hypothesized that
              foreign ventures are active in securing cooperative local relations, and that
              the existence of harmonious local inter-firm and venture-authority
              relationships has positive impacts on venture performance and local
              development. 

The study will provide a better understanding of how foreign
              firms articulate their business networks in host economies with respect to
              their global/local constraints and opportunities.  It will lead to the
              development of a more comprehensive and integrated theoretical and empirical
              framework for the studies of globalization, business organization, economic
              networks, and global-local relations.  At a practical level, the study will
              provide important empirical information regarding the foreign investment
              environments in the Yangtze Delta region, which can serve as a basis for
              foreign firms to establish a set of criteria for successful ventures and
              business relationships in China.

