Title       : SGER: Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Multiphase Flows. An Approach Based on
               Hyperpolarized Nobel Gases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2000  
File        : a0004500

Award Number: 0004500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theofanis G. Theofanous theo@theo.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nam T. Dinh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dieter J. Schaefer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0081159
T. Theofaneous, University of California Santa
              Barbara

The current use of magnetic resonance imaging is mostly found in
              static medical situations where proton nuclear spin polarization is exposed to
              an applied magnetic field. The resulting changes in polarization yield, through
              reconstruction analysis, a mapping of the surrounding state properties,
              especially density and velocity fields. Limitations of this technique appear in
              the case of large, low density media, where signal to noise ratios become
              excessively low (e.g. gases, multiphase).
This proposal means to substitute to
              the protons (1H) a hyperpolarized noble gas (such as 129Xe), which will yield
              much stronger signals, and therefore better accuracy. Similarly, increased
              pressures (and therefore, densities) will help make gas-phase imaging a
              possibility. It is noted that strong applied magnetic fields are less critical
              in the hyperpolarized cases since their polarization is externally supplied.
              Thus the practicality of low field imaging would be another opportunity for
              large dimension systems.
The PI proposes to explore the potential of this
              hyperpolarization approach, as applied to multiphase, large size flows. The
              experimental effort will aim at establishing the broad limits of this
              technique. It will include in particular the design of a laser enhanced device
              for the optical pumping of highly polarized gases. There exists now, in the
              PI's lab, an extensive experimental apparatus, directly usable in the proposed
              research. The quality of the team under Dr. Theofanous is outstanding. It is
              expected that such work will lead to a clear definition of desirable directions
              for multiphase diagnostics research.


