Title       : Systems of Integrated Research, Assessment, and Decision Support for Global
               Environmental Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0004236

Award Number: 0004236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $662518             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Clark william_clark@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1317,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              After more than a decade of active, coordinated effort, researchers from a
              diverse set of disciplines as well as private-, semi-private-, and
              public-sector officials seeking to obtain insights regarding how to deal with
              global environmental change have begun examining the relative efficacy of
              different research approaches and strategies.  This project seeks to design and
              evaluate strategies with which the next generation of national and
              international global environmental change programs might more effectively
              integrate and support its research, assessment and decision-support activities.
               In particular, an interdisciplinary team of investigators intends to catalyze
              and contribute to three interrelated lines of work:  (1) Broadening the global
              change agenda to engage more directly the agenda of the other big new
              environmental idea of the last twenty years: sustainability.  The team's goal
              is to promote a reframing of the global change agenda in terms that will help
              to keep its research broadly but strategically engaged with a wide range of the
              world's most pressing development challenges.  (2) Developing a place-based,
              integrated understanding of global change effects and vulnerabilities.  The
              team's goal is to combine natural and social science perspectives to develop
              and test common conceptual frameworks and analytic approaches for the
              integrated regional study of multiple, cumulative, interactive stress effects
              and multiple time scale responses related to global change.  (3) Designing,
              supporting, and managing systems that can better integrate research, assessment
              and decision support activities on problems of global change.  The team's goal
              is to evaluate alternative models for such integration, with special emphasis
              on the trade-offs and tensions between centralized and distributed systems,
              stability versus adaptability of design, curiosity-driven versus problem-driven
              priority setting, and governmental versus nongovernmental and hybrid
              institutional settings.  The investigators will contribute to the evolution of
              strategies for meeting these challenges through an international collaboration
              among a small set of leading scholars and program managers involved in the
              production, assessment, and application of knowledge relating to global change.
               These include natural scientists, social scientists, and policy analysts as
              well as individuals from several countries with substantial experience in
              running or advising research and assessment programs.  Using a group of
              collaborators and shared postdoctoral students supported through the project,
              the team will conduct research on each of the main themes noted above providing
              a series of critical reviews and state of the science papers.  Work in progress
              will be reviewed at a monthly electronic colloquium, which will experiment with
              different approaches for bringing together program principals and invited
              guests in an intense, collaborative, and cumulative dialog without requiring
              extensive travel for all participants.  In addition, ad hoc workshops and an
              extended summer study will be used to assure interaction and integration across
              program components.  Products of this project, including reviews, papers, work
              in progress and summaries of the colloquium sessions, will be posted on an
              open-forum web site to encourage and facilitate a wider discussion of the
              program's issues.  This project is jointly supported by NSF and by the National
              Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

