Title       : Foreign Lobbies and United States Trade Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  2001  
File        : a0004302

Award Number: 0004302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66102              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pravin Krishna Pravin_Krishna@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The idea that economic policy is determined not by a benign government acting in
              isolation but rather by continual interactions between politicians and
              organized special interest groups is by now well understood and accepted. In
              formal studies of this phenomenon, economists and political scientists have
              mostly emphasized the link between domestic lobbies and the government. Recent
              events, however, have shifted the focus in popular perception (as well as in
              the consequent policy discussions related to campaign finance reform) to
              foreign lobbies and to the extent of their involvement in the political
              process, the presumption being that this interaction has a deleterious effect
              on the home economy. 

In a trade policy context, however, it is easily seen
              that bending policy in a direction that would suit foreigners may not in fact
              be harmful: If the policy outcome absent any lobbying by foreigners is
              characterized by welfare-reducing (or sub-optimal) trade barriers, lobbying by
              foreigners for reductions in such barriers may move policy in a direction that
              improves home and US consumer welfare. But, is it so? Do foreign lobbies have
              impact on US trade policy? If so, is this welfare improving? These are the
              questions that this project investigates theoretically and empirically. 

The
              empirical study we conduct, of studying foreign lobbying activity and its
              impact -- in the context of a rigorously specified economic model - is the
              first of its kind. A substantial component of the research effort involves the
              collection of data on foreign lobbying activity which are available from U.S.
              Government's annual Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA) reports. Our
              econometric analysis yields estimates of the impact of foreign lobbying on
              trade policy and thus provide indications of the welfare impact of the presence
              of foreign lobbies. 

 

