Title       : Special Science Teams Continues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0004476

Award Number: 0004476
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Powlik                            
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268738             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yakov M. Epstein   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sami Kahn  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # HRD-0004473
Institution: Rutgers University
Principal Investigator:
              Yakov Epstein 
Title: "Special Science Teams (S ST)
              Continue"

ABSTRACT

The Center for Mathematics, Science, and Computer
              Education (CMSCE) at Rutgers University proposes the expansion, refinement, and
              institutionalization of Special Science Teams (SST), a model professional
              development program for teachers of students with special needs.  Previously,
              SST developed as a model project that integrates exciting hands-on
              environmental science activities, equity-focused cooperative learning
              strategies, and physical and pedagogical modifications in an effort to provide
              teachers with the skills and knowledge necessary to encourage all children in
              science, regardless of disability.  SST currently targets grades 3-5 teachers
              (general education teachers, science teachers, and special education teachers),
              and exists as a self-contained summer institute. Future activities include
              creation of a model, for-credit course in environmental science for teachers of
              students with disabilities, while expanding the curriculum to include
              extensions for teachers of grades K-6.  The first step in insuring that all
              students have ample opportunities to enjoy science is ensuring that all
              teachers have the confidence and competence in science themselves. 
              Unfortunately, elementary school general education and special education
              teachers rarely have strong science backgrounds.  Traditional college science
              courses lack the pedagogical strategies needed by teachers, and science
              education courses lack solid core content.  To fill this gap, SST Continues
              will provide practicing teachers, as well as prospective teachers, a strong
              college level environmental science course taught by college faculty, using the
              newly-developed SST curriculum, that incorporates modifications for students
              with disabilities as the laboratory experience.  By providing general and
              special education teachers and future teachers with strong core science
              content, specific strategies for modifying hands-on activities, and
              standards-based environmental science curriculum, SST Continues will ensure
              that students and teachers realize the many possibilities for persons with
              disabilities. During Year 1of this three-year award, the current SST
              professional development model will be expanded from grades 3-5 to grades K-6
              in order to serve larger audiences.  During Year 2, a credited, one semester
              course at Rutgers University that combines extensive core content in
              environmental science with the curriculum and strategies developed in the SST
              program will be offered.  SST Summer Institute alumni will serve as laboratory
              instructors for the course.  During Year 3, a course guide which includes
              lectures, overheads, and assessments for the college-level course in
              environmental science, in combination with the revised SST laboratory
              component, will be prepared so that it can be readily disseminated to both
              community and four-year colleges throughout the nation. 

