Title       : Absolute Quantities in Theories of Space and Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2001   
File        : a0004375

Award Number: 0004375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69117              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nick Huggett huggett@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Philosophical analysis of the nature of space traditionally starts by
              considering mechanics theories of matter in motion in space - and so contrasts
              space with matter. Opinion then crudely divides into those -substantivalists -
              who take space to be a distinct substance from matter and those - relationists
              - who deny that space has any existence separate from matter. Historically, the
              dialectic between these two positions has been a fruitful source of innovation
              in physics; conversely, arguably all the most important thought in the field
              has paid careful attention to the role played by space in mechanical theories.
              Contemporary historiography in philosophy of physics holds that central to such
              thought is the analysis of absolute quantities and structures: e.g.,
              Aristotle's theory held a crucial role for absolute place (namely the center of
              the universe) and Newtonian mechanics requires an absolute standard of constant
              motion. Further, many contemporary philosophers hold that theories which demand
              such absolute structures commit one to substantivalism.

While agreeing with
              the importance of absolute structures, Dr. Huggett has argued that such an
              inference to substantivalism is unjustified in Newtonian mechanics - where it
              is most explicitly articulated - and in mirror symmetry violating quantum
              theories. He has also written on the nature of absolute structures in
              Aristotelian physics. This project extends his work to two areas
              under-investigated in this way. First, Kant argued that the distinction between
              left and right required absolute space; a modernized argument claims that the
              topological properties of space are absolute, and exceed the reach of
              relationism. This project will construct and investigate concrete relationist
              theories of topology, and consider whether they meet Kant's challenge. Second,
              contemporary theories of quantum gravity will be studied in the same framework.
              What absolute structures - if any - do string theory and canonical quantization
              require, and how do they bear on the substantival-relational issue?

The Dr.
              Huggett proposes to study further theories of topology and quantum gravity and
              to investigate the role and meaning of the absolute structures they entail. He
              intends to write a chapter (or paper) on each for a book on the topic currently
              in progress - his prior work on Newtonian mechanics, mirror symmetry breaking
              and Aristotle constitute the remainder of this work. The research leave brings
              the project close to conclusion. The primary goal of the project is to increase
              understanding in the philosophical and historical community of the nature of
              space according to physical theories, ancient and modern. More generally, as
              that understanding is disseminated by the community, the work increases
              appreciation for the world discovered by physics, ancient and modern, and the
              role of philosophical considerations in science.

