Title       : The Role of Randomness in Science: An Interdisciplinary Course for Nonscience
               Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9555194

Award Number: 9555194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. E. Stanley hes@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal responds to the national need for  interdisciplinary science
              courses for nonscience students in  universities, colleges, community colleges,
              and adult  education centers.  The course will also be suitable for  meeting
              the science requirements of elementary/early  childhood education majors.It is
              proposed to create a new  undergraduate interdisciplinary course in which
              students  explore the key role of randomness in biology, chemistry,  physics,
              and earth science.  By placing the student in the  position of an independent
              investigator, it is hoped to  convey a feeling for "what science really is" to
              individuals  who may never enter scientific careers themselves.  A  version of
              these curriculum materials experiments,  simulations, and data analysis
              software has already been  developed as individual modules for high school
              science  classes.  These materials have been used successfully in  many
              schools, including suburban and urban high schools in  the Boston area and the
              classes of 35 teachers trained in a  two-week summer workshop.  These materials
              have also been  tested as part of a course for liberal arts undergraduates  and
              to augment existing physics, chemistry, and biology  courses.  These modules
              must now be recast into a coherent  one-semester course that is sufficiently
              challenging to  liberal arts undergraduates.  The significant feature of the 
              high school version, i.e.,  a balanced combination of hands-  on activities,
              experiments, and use of computers for  modelling and data analysis, will be
              retained.  However, new  topics will be incorporated, and those high school
              modules  that are retained will be upscaled in content,  will include  more
              challenging exercises, and will have a wider scope of  application.  More
              algebra will be incorporated into all  modules to allow deeper presentations of
              physics, chemistry,  and biology.  Preservice students will participate in the 
              development of course materials. Training workshops will  assist interested
              faculty from other institu tions to  incorporate these materials into new or
              existing courses.  In addition to conventional dissemination channels, selected
               portions of the teaching materials will be made available on  the internet,
              along with student research reports, software,  and teacher advice.  Students
              and their teachers can share  ideas and participate in a mutually supportive
              nationwide  community.
