Title       : Using Autonomous Robots and the Perception-Action Problem to Enhance
               Undergraduate Technical Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1996  
File        : a9555033

Award Number: 9555033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89659              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Livingston livingst@vassar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher A. Welty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vassar College
	      124 Raymond Avenue
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  12604    845/437-5490

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this project is to develop a series of laboratory exercises
              that use the broad appeal of actual  behaving robots to draw students into a
              deeper understanding of several key technical concepts of importance in 
              cognitive science.  These concepts include key ideas from computer programming,
              hardware design (including A to  D and D to A conversion and basic DC
              electronics), as well as some of the more technical concepts in the study of 
              perception and action in biological systems.  Both of these areas often seem
              daunting to students precisely because  they require levels of technical
              sophistication beyond those reached by most beginning undergraduates at liberal
              arts  colleges.  This project is designed to provide students with a simple,
              autonomous robot and a user interface for  communication with the robot.  The
              basic strategies for the design of the robot itself have been well explored by 
              others; the innovative feature of this project will be in the design of the
              interface for communicating with the robot.   This will be a multi-layered
              system capable of taking the student from a very intuitive point-and-click
              interface for  programming the robot through layers of increasing technical
              depth and culminating in an understanding of both the  software and the
              hardware that implement the student's instructions.  The materials to be
              prepared by the conclusion  of this project will be designed in modular fashion
              so that they may be incorporated into courses other than cognitive  science
              courses.  In particular, psychology and computer science curricula at many
              institutions would benefit from  inclusion of this laboratory.   NSF FORM 1358
              (1/94) i v
