Title       : Process Workshops for General Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1995  
File        : a9555142

Award Number: 9555142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Hanson david.hanson@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The  process  skills  needed by students  will  be  addressed  by  developing
              innovations in both content and methodology to replace  recitation  sessions 
              associated with large  lecture  courses  by  process   workshops,  specifically
               for  introductory   chemistry  courses.  The  novel  format  involves  process
               skills,  student  participation,  and  active learning at the  forefront. 
              Students  will  work in cooperative-learning groups on lessons that involve 
              discovery   learning,   critical   thinking,   problem   solving,  reporting,
              and assessment. Computer-based technology will be used  to provide personalized
              quizzes, and the workshop lessons will be  transported to a computer network,
              multi-media format.        The  objectives  of  this project are to  develop 
              teaching  strategies   that   support  a  successful   cooperative-learning 
              environment,  develop lessons that enhance the  understanding  of  concepts and
              promote learning and problem solving through the use  of  higher  order
              thinking skills, develop lessons  incorporating  interdisciplinary and real
              world perspectives,  enhance  learning  with  computer-driven technology,
              develop process skills  in  key  areas,  promote positive attitudes toward
              chemistry and  science,  help  students develop confidence in their ability to 
              learn  and  perform  well, create a supportive social environment  that  will 
              encourage   students   to   involve  themselves   seriously   and  successfully
               in  learning,  and  promote  a  culture  where  the  university is a community
              of learners.        The  transformation of recitation sessions  into  workshops
               introduces  the  missing element in large  lecture  courses.  The  lectures 
              structure  information and make  it  available  to  the  students,   and  the 
              workshops  complement  that  component   by  facilitating  the construction of
              understanding, the  application  of  knowledge,  and  the  development  of 
              process  skills.  Such  development   is   extremely  significant  because  
              intro ductory  chemistry  courses  involve large numbers of  students  early 
              in  their college careers.       Among other things, summer teaching and
              authoring institutes  will  be  held to excite the interest of others in this 
              approach  and  to  share ideas on the methodology, strategies,  and  lesson 
              content.
