Title       : LDAPS: An Innovative Solution for a Low-Cost, Exciting Laboratory Class in
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1995   
File        : a9555181

Award Number: 9555181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99705              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris Rogers Crogers@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha N. Cyr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The  goal  of  this   project  is to  develop  a  curriculum  for  engineering 
              students  and  liberal  arts  majors  on  laboratory  experimentation.   The  
              curriculum   spans   two   courses:   an  introductory  class  geared  for
              liberal  arts  students  (mainly  pre-service teachers engaged in teacher
              preparation programs) and  first-year  engineers,  and  a required 
              junior-level  mechanical  engineering   course.  In  the  introductory  
              course,   students  concentrate on simple experimentation techniques, learning
              how to  interface  a  computer  to an experiment and  how  to  do  simple 
              statistical  analysis of the data. Students  in  the  upper-level  course learn
              the electronics behind the data acquisition systems,  learn  more  in-depth
              signal processing, and  work  on  oral  and  written skills.    The  curriculum
              is based on the LDAPS, or LegoTM Data Acquisition  and   Prototyping  System, 
              which  is  a  pedagogical   technique  originally developed  for K-6 science
              education. The LDAP  System  uses LegoTM building blocks and a LabVIEWTM
              computer interface to  provide the tools for students to design, build,
              instrument,  and  execute their own experiments. The LegoTM blocks give the
              student  the  freedom  in designing the experimental setup  and  LabVIEWTM 
              gives   the  signal  processing  freedom  needed  to  effectively  interrogate 
              the  data.  For example, students  learned  advanced  digital  filtering 
              techniques by building  a  LegoTM  gray-scale  scanner and active control
              through building a car which tries  to  drive   around   obstacles.   This 
              pedagogical   technique   was  successfully implemented in a pilot study, with
              excellent student  reviews.
