Title       : Low-Cost Virtual Reality as an Educational Tool: Application to Undergraduate
               Chemical Engineering and Development of Pedagogical Implementation Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1998    
File        : a9555094

Award Number: 9555094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169140             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Scott Fogler sfogler@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Learning occurs through many different mechanisms, each of which is better
              suited to different students' learning   styles.  Optimal learning occurs when
              teaching methods match learners' styles, and when multiple learning  
              mechanisms are employed.  Experience is one of the most powerful learning
              mechanisms, and has a higher memory   retention rate than other forms of
              learning.  Unfortunately, not all students have equal opportunities to acquire
              that   experience, and certain experiences are not available to any students at
              any cost, due to physical or safety limitations.   For example, students are
              not allowed inside of electronics manufacturing clean rooms or operating
              chemical   reactors. At-risk students in particular do not have equal
              opportunities for experiential learning, and often have   learning styles which
              do not match traditional teaching methods.  Virtual reality has the potential
              to deliver   experiences which are not accessible to students in the real
              world. Recent and continuing technological advances are   bringing VR within
              the reach of educational and student budgets. However the knowledge base of how
              to effectively   apply VR to technical education must first be established. 
              This project proposes to improve undergraduate   engineering education
              nationwide by producing:  1. A series of VR based educational simulators for
              use in chemical   engineering, and  2. A knowledge base concerning the
              technical, representational, interfacial, implementational and   hardware
              issues surrounding the application of VR to technical education.  A major focus
              of this work will be to   produce student affordable computer modules, which
              will run on student affordable equipment, and to also support   more advanced
              equipment if the user has it available. A prototype module has already been
              developed using Pentium   based personal computers. Module distribution will be
              conducted through the non-profit corporation CACHE, to   chemical engineering
              departments nationwide at minimal cost.
