Title       : Visual and Interactive Tools Incorporated into the Mathematical Foundations of
               Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1995   
File        : a9555084

Award Number: 9555084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69844              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan H. Rodger rodger@cs.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical foundations provide the basis for computer  science, yet many
              undergraduates obtain a superficial  understanding of these concepts due to the
              pencil and paper  environment in which these concepts are currently taught. 
              The main objective of this proposal is to provide an  environment for
              presenting and communicating abstract  computer science concepts in a more
              efficient, visual and  interactive manner. It is crucial that students
              understand  this material early on, at the sophomore or junior level, as  they
              will continue to build on this material in courses on  programming languages,
              algorithms, and compilers. For the  past five years, the PI  has been designing
              and developing  interactive and visual software tools (FLAP. LLparse,  LRparse)
              that allow students to experiment with concepts in  formal languages and
              automata, receiving immediate feedback.  The PI is currently using these tools
              in the classroom in an  interactive lecture format with a projector displaying
              the  computer screen. In this lecture style we solve problems  during class on
              the computer with input from students, and  answer questions by showing the
              answer. The PI  plans to  continue to shift the format of this class away from 
              lectures to an all lab (no lecture) format to provide the  maximum interaction.
              Each lab period will introduce a  concept and give students time to think and
              experiment with  this concept. The material to be developed includes 
              manuscripts for the lecture and lab presentation formats,  problem sets, and
              software tools. This material will be  disseminated through computer science
              education conferences  and journals, and news groups and web pages on the
              Internet.
