Title       : Teaching Neuroscience in the Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9555095

Award Number: 9555095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Hoy rrh3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce R. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Neurobiology is an emerging interdisciplinary study that  attracts world-wide
              attention in popular media.  There is  genuine curiosity abroad to understand
              the dynamic linkage  between one's brain and one's behavior that should be part
               of the education, of not only scientists, but the lay  public.  Yet the
              teaching of neurobiology, especially in a  laboratory setting, has badly lagged
              the demand.  In part,  this is because of the lack of availability of "teacher 
              friendly" instructional exercises as well as easy  availability of ethically
              and environmentally acceptable  experimental animals.  This project addresses
              these problems  by providing teachers of physiology, neuroscience, and 
              introductory biology, at the college and the high school  level, with a new
              curriculum of laboratory exercises in  neuroscience.  We are teaching teachers
              how to use these  exercises in their own labs by: (1) conducting a series of 
              summer workshops in our teaching laboratory at Cornell; (2)  producing an
              instructional videotape of our teaching  exercises, aimed at teachers; and (3)
              setting-up an  electronic bulletin-board service that  permits us to stay  in
              close contact with any teacher who is using or wants to  use our teaching
              modules in his/her own laboratory  instruction.  Our teaching labs are based on
              an integrated  set of classroom-tested labs that use the crayfish as the 
              experimental animal.  The crayfish is ideal because it is  very hardy and easy
              to dissect.  In terms of laboratory  logistics, it is cheap, commercial, and
              easy to maintain.  Pedagogically, the crayfish is ideal because it permits the 
              instructor to select from simple lab exercises dealing with  fundamental
              cellular properties of neural tissue to  intellectually stimulating and
              challenging exercises that  deal with the integrative properties of neural
              networks,  synaptic computations, and learning and memory.  These  teaching
              modules thus cover basic neuronal properties, such  as the ionic basis of
              bioelectric potentials to synaptic   transfusion to elementary forms of
              learning and synaptic  plasticity.  They take advantage of the fact of the
              unity of  neural function, the neuronal computations that lead to  behavioral
              change are similar, whether occurring in the  brain of a crayfish or a college
              freshman.  The crayfish is  therefore a suitable replacement for vertebrate 
              preparations, which are becoming controversial as laboratory  subjects.  This
              project not only provides teachers with a  set of conceptually-rich yet
              technically simple lab  exercises, but it provides direct instruction to
              relatively  inexperienced teachers via a "see and do" methodology.  The 
              proposal has two parts.  First, a hands-on workshop for  laboratory instructors
              at Cornell.  Second, and very  importantly, an instructional videotape for
              instructors  showing step-by-step how to make each preparation is being 
              produced.  The intended target of these exercises include  liberal arts college
              and university teachers, but our  experience tells us that high-school teachers
              are perfectly  capable of learning and employing these labs in their  classes,
              and the workshop provides opportunities for them,  as well.  In summary, this
              proposal seeks to disseminate a  thoroughly tested set of laboratory teaching
              exercises,  proven to be stimulating to undergraduate students in many 
              settings, to any teacher who wants to bring neuroscience  content into his/her
              laboratory.
