Title       : Teaching Digital Integrated Circuits in a Simulated Industrial Environmental
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1995  
File        : a9555148

Award Number: 9555148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet C. Rutledge                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34313              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer T. Ross jross@uop.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary R. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Rosselli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Turpin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of the Pacific
	      3601 Pacific Avenue
	      Stockton, CA  952110110    209/946-2011

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this project is to develop course material for  a Junior/Senior
              level Electrical Engineering course (Digital  Integrated Circuits) which will
              expose students to all  aspects of integrated circuit design and fabrication,
              and to  implement the course in a "simulated industrial  environment." The
              course will be developed based on input  from an  industrial advisory board
              consisting of engineers  and managers from IC-related companies. The goals of
              the  proposed  course are to change the standard instructional  environment,
              consisting of lectures and individual homework,  to one  which will 1) provide
              practice gathering technical  information from various sources; 2) develop
              problem solving  skills; 3) emphasize teamwork; and 4) provide numerous 
              opportunities to refine oral and written communication  skills.  In the
              proposed course students will participate as  "employees" of an integrated
              circuit design company  working  in small teams in the different divisions of
              the company  (Design, Test and Fabrication) to solve a common  problem. 
              "Project-chips" will be created by this proposal allowing  students to compare
              the design, simulation and  actual  measurements of integrated circuits.
              Students will evaluate  the problems, define potential solutions, form their 
              own  plan of action, and communicate their ideas with both peers  and superiors
              in written, oral and electronic form  (e-  mail). The company framework will be
              created using an  existing local area network (LAN) loaded with the  software 
              an IC company would use (word processing, presentation,  circuit simulation,
              circuit layout, and e-mail).  Existing  measurement equipment will be used to
              test the companies  "products."  An introductory integrated circuit  course
              that covers basic  IC fabrication and design is present in most every 
              electrical engineering curriculum in the  country. The  material generated from
              this project ("project-chips" and  all supporting computer files) will be in 
              standard formats  such that it is pla tform independent, and thereby applicable
               to the widest possible audience. The  effectiveness of this  simulated
              industrial environment and project-centered  approach will be critically
              evaluated by the  industrial  advisors, faculty, and student participants.
