Title       : Creating and Evaluating Interactive Formal Courseware for Mathematics and
               Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9555162

Award Number: 9555162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Constable rc@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a proposal to produce a new medium for teaching  college-level
              mathematics and computing. The basis for this  medium is an on-line interactive
              data base of hypertext  integrated with formal reference material built with a 
              modern proof development system (Nuprl1). This hybrid of  text and formal
              material animated by a computer system  provides  an entirely new kind of
              courseware; it also  presents new opportunities for teaching those mathematical
               problem solving skills found to be fundamental in the  educational literature.
              By connecting the new medium to the  emerging information infrastructure, the
              possibilities for  educational innovation are unprecedented.  Funding is 
              requested to create an example of this medium, explore its  educational value,
              and disseminate it. The material will be  deployed first in discrete
              mathematics courses (offered in  Mathematics, Computer Science and Electrical
              Engineering  departments). In such courses these tools will enable more 
              relevant and effective teaching of computational mathematics  and of the
              increasingly sophisticated mathematics of  software engineering--both critical
              to U. S. technology.  The proposal includes a detailed technical case for the 
              feasibility of what is proposed and a pedagogical case based  on the extensive
              teaching experience of the investigator and  on prior experimental efforts with
              limited examples of the  medium. The introduction summarizes the entire case
              whereas  the subsequent two sections elaborate. Section two details  the new
              research technology, and section three details the  pedagogical basis for the
              proposal.  Pronounced "new pearl".
