Title       : Cryptography, The Science of Secret Writing: An Innovative Approach to
               Introductory Mathematics for Non-Science Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1999   
File        : a9555113

Award Number: 9555113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri E. Lindquester tlindquester@rhodes.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rhodes College
	      2000 North Parkway
	      Memphis, TN  381121624    901/843-3850

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to refine a course and develop a text in  cryptography,
              the science of designing methods to disguise secret  messages.  The  goal is to
              provide an innovative  alternative  in  introductory mathematics for beginning
              nonscience majors as  well  as  students preparing for certification in
              elementary  and  high  school   mathematics.   Through  this  thematic  
              approach,   the  objective is to sharpen students' critical thinking skills and
              to  stimulate  their interest in the use of mathematics in the  daily 
              operations  of  society. This course is serving to  replace  more  traditional 
              beginning  courses  such  as  college  algebra   and  trigonometry and finite
              mathematics, and is appropriate  for  all  entering  college  students.  The
              course covers classical  cipher  systems (systems used during the World Wars,
              for example), modern  encryption  systems,  and error-correcting  codes.  Some 
              of  the  topics  being  presented  in the text are  substitution  ciphers, 
              transposition ciphers, the RSA Algorithm, digital signatures, the  Knapsack 
              Algorithm, and one-way functions used for PIN security.  Mathematical  topics
              to be presented at the beginning  level  are  modular   arithmetic,  
              probability   and   statistics,    matrix  arithmetic,  number  theory,  and 
              combinatorics.  In  an  active  learning  environment  utilizing technology, 
              these  mathematical  tools  are  used  to guide students in breaking and 
              constructing  cipher  systems, and in determining the strength and  utility  of
               ciphers.  The radical difference in this course and the "sampler"  courses 
              that  have  been  taught  in  the  past  is  that   many  mathematical  notions
              can be introduced under the one  canopy  of  cryptography,  with its obvious
              historical significance  and  its  critical modem-day importance.  The project
              is being disseminated  via  a preliminary manual for the course to selected
              institutions  that are beta testing the materials in classes, presentations  at
               national  meetings,   and preparation of  a  text  for  commercial 
              publication.  An  experienced evaluation  team  is  providing  an  intensive
              evaluation of the project.
