Title       : Evaluating the Application of Virtual Realities in Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1998        
File        : a9555682

Award Number: 9555682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1440827            (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Bowen Loftin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Dede  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brenda Bannan-Ritland  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Houston Downtown
	      Number One Main Street
	      Houston, TX  770023313    713/221-8000

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9555682  Loftin    The major emphasis of this project is optimizing, evaluating,
              and  porting to classroom settings the immersive environments already  created.
              An overarching theme in this ScienceSpace research is to  develop a theory of
              how multisensory "immersion" aids learning.  These virtual worlds can
              simultaneously provide learners with 3-D  representations; multiple
              perspectives/frames of reference; a  multimodal interface; simultaneous visual,
              auditory, and haptic  feedback; and types of interaction unavailable in the
              real world  (e.g.,seeing through objects, flying like superman). With careful 
              design, these capabilities all can synthesize to create a profound  sense of
              motivation and concentration conducive to mastering  complex, abstract
              material. Studying this new type of learning  experience to chart its strengths
              and its limits is an important  frontier for cognitive science research and
              constructivist  pedagogy.    All ScienceSpace virtual worlds are built using a
              polygonal  geometry. Colored, shaded polygons and textures are used to produce 
              detailed objects. These objects are linked together and given  behaviors
              through the use of NASA-developed software that defines  the virtual worlds;
              connects them to underlying physical  simulations; and handles graphics
              rendering, collision detection,  and lighting models. Interactivity is achieved
              through the linkage  of external devices (e.g., head-mounted display, 3-D
              mouse).    The investigators have developed extensive assessment methodologies 
              and instruments, literally hundreds of pages in length, for  studying how and
              what users learn in the worlds we have created.   Researchers are videotaping
              the hours of time spent with each  subject, then studying these records for
              additional insights. This  careful evaluation strategy is generating detailed
              data from which  a comprehensive picture is being constructed of how
              multisensory  immersion can enhance learning, as well as how virtual reality's 
              usability can be enhanced. In addition,  the strategies underlying  these
              assessment methodologies and instruments are generalizable to  a wide range of
              synthetic environments and virtual worlds.    This project makes a significant
              contribution to knowledge and  learning for at least three reasons:   *    the
              next step in the evolution of constructivist pedagogy is  the usage of
              multisensory in synthetic environments  *    virtual reality interfaces provide
              a unique testbed for  transferring to educational settings capabilities from
              data  visualization, sonification, etc.; and  *    learning through
              multisensory immersion could leverage a huge  installed base of videogame
              technology as a means for the delivery  of education outside of school
              settings.  ***
