Title       : EPWG: The Turnage Science, Math and Technology Scholars Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a9555817

Award Number: 9555817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $888916             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia Gibbs pjgibbs@mail.ecsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah C. Fontaine  (Principal Investigator former)
              James A. McLean  (Principal Investigator former)
              Sandra C. Hardy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George Thigpen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shirley Turnage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cheryl Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Patricia Dobbin  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Joseph S. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Elizabeth City State Univ
	      1704 Weeksville Road
	      Elizabeth City, NC  27909    919/335-3230

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9555817  Fontaine  Elizabeth City State University and five rural, economically
              disadvantaged, predominately African-American public  school systems will
              implement a comprehensive regional project, entitled the Dr. C.D. Turnage
              Science, Math and  Technology Scholars Program for Girls. The goals are to
              create positive and permanent changes in academic, social,  and scientific
              climates in order to allow the interest and aptitude women and girls display in
              science, engineering,  and mathematics (SEM) to flourish and to add to our
              knowledge about interactions between gender and the SEM  infrastructure. The
              program will include: teachers, counselors, and central office staff, female
              eighth graders,  parents, business and industry. The project will train 300
              educators, 200 teachers, 50 administrators, 25 counselors,  and 25 central
              office staff members in the areas of enhancing access to equity education and
              equitable opportunities,  gender equity expectations for student achievement, 
              EQUALS Training, multidisciplinary mathematics and science,  constructivism in
              science and mathematics, and  alternative assessment. 240 eighth grade girls
              will participate in  after school clubs, a Saturday academy, and a summer
              enrichment institute designed to enhance their education and  careers in the
              fields of science, mathematics, and technology. Parents will attend activities
              with their daughters to  provide input in their educational programs.  A
              Scholars Program manual will be made available to each state's  division of
              science, math and technology to help them replicate this program.          A
              partnership among university, public school and local businesses will work to
              create a positive climate for  mathematics and science learning among middle
              school students. Led by Elizabeth City State University faculty,  school
              personnel will examine how to deliver equitable education to all students. This
              will result in more students  enrolling and succeeding in upper level math and
              science courses.  ***
