Title       : Project Inter-Math
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9555414

Award Number: 9555414
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank R. Giordano   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald B. Small  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Consort Mathe/Its Applic
	      57 Bedford Street
	      Lexington, MA  02420    781/862-7878

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1047,7348,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The nation's undergraduate education system has often labeled the mathematics
              curriculum as a "filter" that removes many motivated and talented students from
              further study in science, engineering, and technology. At the institutional
              level, this filter is built by an interdisciplinary culture with poor
              communications among departments, lack of support for curricular activity,
              different and distinct expectations of the curriculum, and lack of plans for
              student growth and learning across the curriculum. To transform the ''filter''
              into a "pump', for student success, a change in the culture of the mathematics,
              science, and engineering teaching communities must occur. The activities in
              this project which are affecting the necessary change build on successes of
              schools comprising the consortium. Workshops are being conducted that enable
              faculty to use projects, design curricula, model student growth, and present
              "lively" pedagogy.      The project is developing programs where students learn
              skills in computing, writing, reasoning, and problem solving. The project
              vision is to establish environments conducive to interdisciplinary cooperation
              for designing and presenting instruction in all "partner" disciplines.
              Interdisciplinary projects are being used as a vehicle to move in stages from
              disconnected mathematics courses to a fully integrated experience in all
              partner disciplines. Teams at each institution consisting of faculty from
              several disciplines are collaborating to develop course materials, termed
              Interdisciplinary Lively Applications (ILAP). A core set of ILAP material has
              already been developed primarily at West Point and implemented over the past
              several years.  Several types of ILAPs are envisioned beginning with the basic
              ILAP Project and culminating in ILAP Carry-Through Projects.     The consortium
              is representative of all types of the nation's undergraduate institutions:
              two-year colleges, liberal arts colleges, engineering schools, historically
              black colleges, and research universities . Through these joint efforts of the
              institutions involved, the project is affecting thousands of undergraduate
              students by making a lasting cultural change through national dissemination of
              our activities. The ultimate goal is to develop an interdisciplinary culture
              that acts like a "pump" sending students into mathematics, science, and
              engineering.
