Title       : Long Island Consortium for Mathematical Sciences Throughout the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  2000   
File        : a9555401

Award Number: 9555401
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2799820            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan C. Tucker atucker@notes.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Dawes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Ferguson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1032,1047,7348,9178,9269,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A consortium of faculty at ten colleges and universities on  Long Island, in
              conjunction with the State University of New  York (SUNY) system, is designing
              a comprehensive, multi-  faceted project to develop an environment for
              interconnected  learning in mathematics courses and in mathematically based 
              disciplines. The consortium is headquartered at the State  University of New
              York at Stony Brook. The other consortium  institutions are: C. W. Post
              College, Dowling College,  Nassau Community College, New York Institute of
              Technology,  St. Joseph's College, Suffolk Community College, SUNY 
              Agricultural and Technology College at Farmingdale, SUNY  College at Old
              Westbury, and CUNY-York College. The model  for interconnected learning
              developed on Long Island is  being extended to  SUNY-wide implementation (64 
              institutions), and actively disseminated to other  institutions inside and
              outside New York state.    The enhanced learning environment has three
              components: (i)  systemic change in instructional practices, (ii) creation of 
              new courses and curricular materials, and (iii) development  of human
              resources. The interconnections in this project  involve:    Collaboration and
              cooperation in instruction among faculty  across quantitative disciplines; 
              Regional interconnectivity of energized faculty at different  types of
              institutions; and  The enhanced effect of combining change in modes of 
              instruction with curricular reform, educational technology,  and coordination
              of instruction among departments.      Major project activities include:    *
              Changing modes of faculty instruction and student  learning;    * Day-to-day
              and general coordination of instruction across  the curriculum;    * Extensive
              use of educational technology across the  curriculum;    * Completing reform
              throughout the calculus sequence and  undertaking reform before calculus;    *
              Reworking all aspects of the curriculum for future  mathematics teachers to
              reflect the needs of the NCTM  Standards;    * Developing new multidiscipl
              inary courses;    * Addressing student needs in Advanced Technological 
              Education programs such as engineering and science  technology through the
              development of appropriate  mathematics courses and other mathematically
              oriented  materials;    * Assisting groups that are underrepresented in
              quantitative  disciplines;    * Developing unified courses in statistics and
              other  mathematical sciences topics now taught in multiple  departments.   
              This project for systemic change involves an extensive  organizational
              structure with (I) departmental teams at each  institution, (ii) institutional
              coordinating committees;  (iii) Consortium-wide disciplinary committees; and
              (iv) task  forces for specific projects such as development of new  courses.
