Title       : Workshop Physical Science: Project Based Science Education for Future Teachers,
               Citizens, and Parents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9555188

Award Number: 9555188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183249             (Estimated)
Investigator: Priscilla W. Laws lawsp@dickinson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Jackson  (Principal Investigator former)
              Ronald K. Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Workshop Physical Science Project is a major effort to  increase the
              effectiveness of science education for our  future K-8 teachers, parents, and
              citizens by developing a  sequence of introductory laboratory courses in
              physical  science.  We seek to integrate guided inquiry with student-  directed
              projects in order to help students acquire a better  understanding of what
              practicing scientists actually do.  This hands-on approach is aimed at changing
              the focus of  introductory science courses from covering a large number of 
              topics-which promotes memorizing facts and formulae- to  helping students
              develop science process skills that will  give them the confidence to undertake
              future investigations  independently.  A modular design of the curricular
              materials  will provide ample flexibility for instructors at other  colleges
              and universities to adapt the program to their own  environments.  These
              materials will be developed for use  in  teacher preparation programs, general
              studies courses for  non-science majors, and courses designed to inspire 
              freshmen and sophomores to pursue science as a major.  This  proposed four-year
              project began in September 1994  under a  three-year grant from the Charles A.
              Dana Foundation, with  the expectation that additional funds would be 
              solicited  for its completion.  We are asking FIPSE to underwrite 
              approximately half of the costs for project years two  and  three, and all of
              the costs for year four.  This will allow  us to create and evaluate cutticular
              materials for a two-  semester course sequence and to complete a two-year pilot
               test of the materials at three different institutions,  Dickinson College, the
              University of Nebraska, and Moorhead  State University in Minnesota.  In
              addition, a portion  of  the funds will be used to initiate an active
              dissemination  program in the fourth year of the project involving talks, 
              articles, and workshops, as well as consultations with  several institutions
              interested in using the materials.
