Title       : The Bigger Picture: A Project-Based Course on Environmental Geophysics and
               Geochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1998   
File        : a9555230

Award Number: 9555230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47047              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn D. Ruppel cdr@piedmont.eas.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philippe Van Cappellen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A  project-based  course in environmental field methods  will  be  developed 
              for  students  in the second  year  of  earth  science  programs,  creating a
              new context for students'  first  encounter  with  more complex, and in
              particular, more quantitative  science  topics.  By  teaching geophysical and
              geochemical  field  methods  through  a  sequence of in-depth studies of
              current environmental  problems,  presented in their historical and social 
              context,  we  hope  to keep students, especially women and minorities,  in  the
               quantitative science pipeline and make clear their own  potential  for   such 
               work.  Students  will  work  through   environmental  "case-studies", or
              project modules, on topics such as salt  water  intrusion in coastal Florida,
              uranium mining remediation  in  the  Navajo  Nation, and eutrophication in a
              Georgia estuary. Students  will process a subset of the data, combine data
              sets, analyze and  interpret  the data, define limits to their interpretations,
               and  make  and  justify  policy decisions. The course  will  be  built  around
              six or seven sequential modules, with each module designed  to follow a
              classroom introduction to the relevant field methods.  We plan to add
              supporting materials to these modules so that they  can  also  `e  used  as
              individual case studies in  environmental  geology,  hydrology,  geophysics,
              and geochemistry  courses,  and  will  be  in a form that can be disseminated
              on the WWW,  CD-rom,  and hardcopy.    This  work  will  be a collaborative
              effort by  four  faculty  at  disparate  institutions  (College of  William 
              and  Mary,  Navajo  Community College, and Georgia Tech). Each of us will
              design  one  or   two  modules,  working  with  undergraduates  at  our   home 
              institutions.  We  will collaboratively review  and  revise  each  module  as 
              we develop the course as a whole. Thus students  will  encounter a wider range
              of both geographic settings and  cultural  contexts  for environmental problems
              than is currently  found  in  qua ntitative geoscience courses.
