Title       : Interactive Video Resources for Learning Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1997    
File        : a9555233

Award Number: 9555233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51598              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Velleman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through this project, interactive video resources are being developed to enhance
              a package of multimedia resources for learning statistics.  Key  components of
              this package, developed under our previous NSF funding, are already in place:
              An Electronic  Encyclopedia of Statistical Examples and Exercises (EESEE) and
              an on-line Data Archive and Story Library  (DASL). Students today are used to 
              learning about the world from television. News broadcasts routinely provide
              information that is statistical in nature.  Graduates of an introductory
              statistics course should be able to assess the quality of such information.
              Unfortunately,  students are not used to thinking critically about what they
              learn from television news or special broadcasts. Worse  yet, there are
              essentially no current systematically-assembled resources available to help
              students learn to recognize  and critique statistical issues in material that
              they see or hear. The purpose of this project is to introduce  current video
              clips from news shows  or special broadcasts on television to create a unique
              set of resources for learning statistics.   Closed  captioning of the video
              quotes will  support hearing-impaired students, those for whom English is a
              second language,  and others who may prefer to read the narrative script.  The
              methods and organization developed  for EESEE and DASL will allow quick
              development and implementation of methods and standards for sifting through 
              current events video in search of suitable stories and data, and for
              integrating the results into EESEE and DASL.
