Title       : Course and Curriculum Design of Environmental Science Baccalaureate Degree
               Program Incorporating Native American Wisdom, Traditional Knowledge and
               Scientific Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a9555239

Award Number: 9555239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $502994             (Estimated)
Investigator: George L. Godfrey ggodfrey@ross1.cc.haskell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry A. Lucas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Haines  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haskell Indian Nations Uni
	      155 Indian Avenue
	      Lawrence, KS  660464800    913/749-8404

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Haskell Indian Nations University (HINU) will develop and implement a
              comprehensive, interdisciplinary courses for a BS degree  program in the
              Environmental Sciences for Native Americans.  This new program will have three
              primary goals: (a)  to help Native Americans attain mastery of the field of
              environmental sciences, (b) to provide an opportunity for  students majoring in
              other disciplines to acquire basic knowledge of the natural sciences, and (c)
              to help preserve  Native American culture by incorporating historical and
              traditional knowledge into course content.  Student  participation in designing
              course content and pedagogy through summer student-faculty teams will be a
              major part of  the development of the new Environmental Science Curriculum. 
              This facet of the program will foster mentoring and  the development of a
              strong peer teaching nucleus.  Participating students will include
              Environmental Science as well  as Elementary Education.  This curriculum will
              be unique because it will integrate traditional Native values and  knowledge
              into the western scientific method.   Courses to be developed within the next
              two years will include Applications of Mathematics for Scientists and Engineers
              I/II, Geographic Information Systems, Geographic Information Systems
              Applications, Watershed and Landscape Development, Water Quality and Water
              Chemistry, Native American Geography, and Ethnobotany.  Future courses  will
              include Introduction to Ecological Chemistry, Environmental Policy and Law,
              Indian Environmental Law,  Ethnoentomology, Native American Ecosystem
              Management, Cultural and Archeological Resources, Resource Economics and
              Environmental Policy, and Restoration and  Conservation Ecology.
