Title       : Teaching for Mathematics Learning: K-12 Teacher Enhancement in Jones County,
               North Carolina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a9555644

Award Number: 9555644
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Spresser                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $518583             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norma Sermon-Boyd   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee V. Stiff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeane M. Joyner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gwendolyn Clay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jones County Schools
	      320 W Jones Street
	      Trenton, NC  285857572    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9555644  Sermon-Boyd    In a three-and-a-half-year project which builds on a
              prior planning grant, Jones County Schools (NC) targets all 85 teachers of
              mathematics and mathematics-related disciplines in grades K-12 throughout the
              school district in a teacher enhancement program designed to improve their
              mathematical content and pedagogical knowledge.  With assistance and support
              from the North Carolina Department of Public Instruction, the project assists
              teachers and administrators (a) to develop a shared vision of mathematics
              learning that empowers students in making sense of mathematics, (b) to become
              knowledgeable about instructional materials developed by the NSF curriculum
              development projects, (c) to build networking in the district to sustain
              improvements in mathematics instruction, and (d) to build a cadre of lead
              teachers to provide ongoing support for the network.      During the first two
              years of the project, the focus is on increasing teachers' content and
              pedagogical knowledge and on familiarizing all teachers with some of the major
              curriculum projects supported by NSF.  During 1997-98, teachers actually teach
              selected units from 2-4 curriculum projects and prepare reflection papers of
              their successes with the units, prior to selecting new instructional materials
              for district adoption during late winter 1998.  During the third year, a group
              of fifteen lead teachers receives additional enhancement on the curriculum
              projects and on leadership.  During the final half year, the lead teachers
              receive continued support and project evaluation is completed.   Over the life
              of the project, the fifteen lead teachers receive 423 hours of teacher
              enhancement and all other mathematics teachers receive 303 hours.  An
              additional ten teachers of mathematics-related disciplines receive 147 hours of
              professional development.      Project evaluation addresses several key
              indicators of mathematics instruction:  (a) teachers' knowledge, attitudes, and
              beliefs about mathematics content and pedagogy, (b ) nature of the mathematics
              instruction delivered to the students, (c) quality of workshop sessions, (d)
              student performance, and (e) view of parents and school administrators about
              mathematics instruction in Jones County.         Project partners with the
              Jones County Schools are the North Carolina Department of Public Instruction,
              Math Education Network, the North Carolina Science and Mathematics Alliance,
              and the North Carolina SSI.  Estimated cost-sharing from partners represents
              59% of the NSF award amount.
