Title       : Biology in a Human Context: A New Course for Non-Science Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9555023

Award Number: 9555023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl A. Huether carl.huether@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary C. Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Spille  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald M. Meismer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet L. Stein Carter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              It is increasingly obvious that today's citizens must be biologically literate
              to make informed decisions affecting us individually and collectively.  Too
              often they are not.  The aim of our project is to address this challenge by
              improving undergraduate biology education for non-science majors in two-year
              and four-year colleges.  This will first be effected in our own two and four
              year colleges, and then expanded to encourage other colleges and universities
              by sharing what we have learned and accomplished.  The specific goal is to
              create, fully develop, and implement a new and innovative year long
              introductory biology course for non-science majors entitled: Biology in a Human
              Context.  To meet this goal, an already existing team of faculty from all six
              academic units at the University of Cincinnati which offer biology courses are
              working with faculty and staff from the University Center for Academic
              Technologies, the College of Education, the Office of Writing Across the
              Curriculum, and the General Education Council.  The course will be taught by
              the biology faculty in their respective units, and will fulfill both the
              Collegiate and General Education natural science requirements.  Included are
              four, two-year and two, four-year colleges involving over 1,000 undergraduates
              annually, including many pre-service teachers who are preparing to teach grades
              K-8.  Pre-service secondary teachers who are also biology majors will act as
              instructional assistants.  The new course will be a significant departure in
              both content and pedagogy from the existing traditional one, which it will
              eventually replace if determined to be successful through careful evaluation.
