Title       : WWW and Internet Dissemination of Biology and Computer Labs for Prospective
               Elementary Teachers and of a Biology Test for Conceptual Understanding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1999   
File        : a9555089

Award Number: 9555089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202531             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen M. Fisher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The goals of this project are to:    1) Disseminate biology lessons that have
              been developed  for prospective elementary school teachers.  Each of the 
              lessons includes a hands-on laboratory activity, a computer-  based knowledge
              construction activity, and a Teachers Guide;    2) Develop and disseminate a
              multiple choice test for  conceptual understanding of biology that will be
              useful for  assessing learning among prospective elementary school  teachers,
              other non-science majors, and biology majors so as  to measure progress within
              a course and comparisons among  courses; and    3) Develop, refine and test
              several new biology lessons  designed to provide tools to elementary school
              teachers for  teaching about evolution through in-class studies of  population.
               The biology lessons are organized into three laboratory  manuals: Molecular
              Biology; Organismal Biology; and 3)  Population Biology.  Each biology
              laboratory is accompanied  by  "knowledge construction exercises" supported by
              the  SemNet software.  These exercises provide guidelines for  organizing
              knowledge in the form of active, working mental  models and include a mix of 
              individual and collaborative  work.  Laboratories will be made available in
              both printed  and electronic form.  Potential users include undergraduate 
              instructors of prospective elementary teachers,  undergraduate education
              majors, pre-service and practicing  teachers, and other interested persons. 
              The project will  develop a two-tiered, multiple-choice test to measure 
              conceptual understanding of biology.  The first part of each  question will
              assess student knowledge about a biological  phenomenon such as ability to
              predict the outcome when a  carrot is placed in saturated salt water.  The
              second part  of the question asks the student to explain the reasoning  s/he
              used to make that prediction.  The test will be  developed using items that
              typically  provide a brief  description of a laboratory exercise with results
              (including  graphic representation), and that as k students for 
              interpretation.  Open-ended responses obtained initially  will be converted to
              multiple choice items in which  distracters represent common misconceptions.
