Title       : An Interactive Computer Graphics System for the Teaching of Undergraduate Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9555053

Award Number: 9555053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Foley jtf1@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Banks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of our project is to develop an interactive  computer graphics
              system to be used in upper-level optics  courses taught in physics departments
              and various  engineering departments.Currently physics and engineering 
              students learn about optics from textbooks which illustrate  the basic
              principles by means of two-dimensional black and  white drawings, and from
              lectures in which figures are drawn  on the board or presented on overhead
              projectors. These  traditional methods for communication are less than ideal 
              for imparting a comprehensive and intuitive understanding of  many optical
              phenomena. What is needed is a system in which  the user (be it the professor
              lecturing or students working  on their own) can call up the phenomenon of
              interest, enter  the parameter values they are interested in, and then watch  a
              three-dimensional, animated visualization of the  phenomena. The goal of our
              project is to develop such a  system, and we have already made significant
              progress  towards it. Our system, which we call The Optics Project  (TOP), is
              written in the C programming language, and it uses  the OpenGl and Motif
              libraries for, respectively, the  graphics and the user interface. When
              completed, TOP will  contain eight modules which address eight topics typically
               covered in a junior/senior optics course and two additional  modules which
              cover important topics which are usually  omitted in a one-semester course due
              to lack of time. Each  module will contain several options which investigate 
              different phenomena. TOP will have a system of "help"  screens to aid the user
              run the visualizations and give  him/her information on the phenomenon being
              studied. These  help screens will be similar to Mosaic and/or Netscape in  that
              they will be written in HTML and contain hypertext  links. Our project will
              have an advisory board of six optics  and computer graphics experts who will
              look at the modules  and give us suggestions. Physics departments from seven 
              universities in the Southeast have agreed  to look at TOP and  consider it for
              use in their optics courses.
