Title       : Development of an Activity-Based Introductory College Physics Curriculum Using
               Calculator-Based Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9555158

Award Number: 9555158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68793              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Trecia Markes markest@platte.unk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska Kearney
	      25th Street & 9th Avenue
	      Kearney, NE  68849    308/865-8441

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Studies have indicated that the lecture/laboratory method of  teaching
              introductory physics is not as effective as many  teachers would like for it to
              be. Some non-traditional  methods have recently been developed in an attempt to
              remedy  this problem; however, they depend heavily on the use of  computers.
              Many colleges and universities have neither the  funds nor the facilities for
              computer-based programs.  There  is an even more pressing need for low-cost
              innovation and  new technology in high school physics classes. A comparable, 
              but less expensive, program is needed.  The goal of this  project is to improve
              the quality of algebra-based  introductory physics at the college level (and
              eventually at  the high school level) by providing a more cost-effective  way
              of utilizing the benefits of new technology within an  activity-based format.
              This project will develop and test  the effectiveness of an activity-based
              approach to teaching  algebra-based introductory college physics that makes 
              extensive use of the new calculator-based laboratory (CBL)  system from Texas
              Instruments to collect and analyze data.  This approach results in considerable
              cost savings compared  to computer implementation. For twelve computer-based 
              stations the cost is approximately $50,000 compared to about  $10,000 for
              twelve calculator-based stations.  The results  of the evaluation will show the
              effectiveness of the  activity-based CBL approach to teaching introductory
              algebra-  based physics as compared to the traditional  lecture/laboratory
              method. These results will be submitted  for publication to appropriate
              periodicals. The written  materials will be published in workbook form. The
              software  that is developed will be available on the internet through  Texas
              Instruments' archives and the department's WWW site.
