Title       : Design First: A Multimedia Freshman Engineering Design Experience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9555032

Award Number: 9555032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99329              (Estimated)
Investigator: Morton B. Friedman friedman@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Black  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony A. Renshaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony C. Webster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. Zukowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert McClintock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A substantial restructuring of the required first  year "Introduction to
              Engineering" course at Columbia University is proposed that emphasizes
              multimedia design  case studies and projects.  Such restructuring is needed to
              improve the computer, organizational, teamwork, and  design skills taught in
              the course and also to attract, motivate, and retain as many students as
              possible.  This proposal  adds three important and innovative features to the
              notable restructuring efforts at other institutions. First, the course  and the
              design problems will be presented and executed in a virtual, multimedia
              environment. Although significant  work has been done to reformulate the
              freshman design experience and to develop multimedia tools, these two thrusts 
              have not previously been combined into a single sustained effort. We believe
              this combined effort will improve the  content and portability of the course.
              We also believe this is how design needs to be and eventually will be taught. 
              Second, both formative and summative evaluations will be conducted by
              experienced professionals from the Institute  for Learning Technologies at
              Columbia's Teachers College as an integral part of the development and
              assessment of  the course. This activity will ensure that the multimedia tools
              developed are effective educational tools. Third, the  social and historical
              aspects of the art of engineering design will be contextualized through
              extensive multimedia case  studies. This third aspect of the proposal will give
              students a meaningful exposure to real-world, interdisciplinary  design
              problems that is often neglected in engineering curricula and may be
              instrumental in attracting non-engineering  students to the course.  This is a
              joint proposal between Columbia's School of Engineering and Applied Science and
               Columbia's Teachers College that gives equal weight to curriculum development
              and assessment. The curriculum and  multimedia tools will be incorporated,
              tested, and evaluated in the first year and a half at Columbia  and in the
              second  and third years at several other institutions. Drexel University has
              already committed itself to the project and further  commitments are being
              sought.  NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)
