Title       : Optics and Photonics for the 21st Century An Innovative Interdisciplinary
               Modular Laboratory Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1996  
File        : a9555048

Award Number: 9555048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. James Mallmann mallmann@msoe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Bray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Milwaukee School of Eng
	      1025 N. Broadway
	      Milwaukee, WI  532023109    414/277-7300

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Photonics is the use of photons to work with or replace  electrons in
              communications, computing, control, imaging,  and information processing. 
              Milwaukee School of Engineering  has initiated a significant program to
              incorporate the  principles and applications of modern optics and photonics 
              into the introductory and intermediate physics and  engineering courses.  An
              important part of this program is  the continuing development of new
              laboratories in  Undergraduate Applied Optics, Photonics and Sensors, and  High
              Speed Vidography.    The main goal of the proposed curricular development
              program  will be the creation of a set of modern optics and photonics 
              laboratory Modules for use in undergraduate physics and  engineering programs.
              Modules will be developed for 20  topics including beam splitters, Fabry-Perot 
              interferometers, fiber optics, speckle optics, high speed  videography, and
              spatial ffltering. Some of these modules  will include associated
              computer-multimedia software  packages.  The modules will be designed to
              stimulate  students' enthusiasm and interest and to optimize their  conceptual
              understanding of the most important and  fundamental concepts in optics and
              photonics.  In accord  with the most recent pedagogical research, the concepts
              will  not only be embedded in the frameworks of basic principles  and history,
              but will also give students practical  experience with the tools and apparatus
              of modern optics and  photonics.  The design and evaluation of the modules will
              be  accomplished by an interdisciplinary team of professors and  selected
              students with advice and guidance from Professor  Arthur Western of Rose-Hulman
              Institute of Technology and  Professor David Van Baak of Calvin College.  After
              a period  of testing and revision, the modules will be used in  Undergraduate
              Faculty Enhancement programs that we will  offer as part of our dissemination
              plan.  Later we will use  the modules in outreach programs for pre-college
              teachers  and for engineers from industry.  The modula r approach will  provide
              the flexibility and adaptability that should ensure  use of the modules by a
              wide variety of institutions, since  each school may incorporate one or more
              modules into their  existing courses, or may use a collection of modules as 
              substrates to develop their own new courses.
