Title       : Development of a Science Writing Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9555044

Award Number: 9555044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Beveridge dbeveridge@wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne F. Greene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We propose the development, offerings and assessment of a series of
              writing-intensive, interdisciplinary science  courses and related activities
              constituting "The Wesleyan Science Writing Program" (WSWP), designed to 
              complement department-based undergraduate science instruction by emphasizing
              the development of effective oral  and written communication skills as
              methodologies for the discovery of ideas and critical exploration of scientific
               topics.  The program will also provide opportunities for both science and
              non-science majors to investigate critically  and collaboratively the practices
              of science by "teaching the conflict" on various scientific topics and cultural
              studies  of science, and establishing a cross-disciplinary community of
              learning among students and faculty from diverse  disciplines.  Students may
              pursue a "Science Writing" major and senior thesis in the WSWP.  Additionally,
              students  with career interests in scientific and technical writing will
              receive instruction and credentialing appropriate at the  appropriate
              undergraduate level.  Courses will also be open to non-science students to
              fulfill Wesleyan University's  general education expectations.  The WSWP will
              also serve as a structure within which research-active science  faculty with a
              background and interest in writing and the liberal arts, as well as humanities
              faculty and writing  professionals, can apply innovative teaching strategies
              such as active, cooperative and collaborative learning, case  method teaching,
              and discussion-based instruction, and expand the ways in which state-of-the-art
              electronic  technologies are utilized to enhance instruction.  The results of
              the program will be disseminated through both printed and electronic media.  In
              this manner, and to the extent that it is demonstrably successful, the WSWP
              will provide a  model for programs at other institutions interested in
              establishing a similar program.
