Title       : Secrets and Promises: A Course on Cryptography for Nonmajors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1996   
File        : a9555081

Award Number: 9555081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56326              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip N. Klein pnk@cs.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project proposes to design and teach a course on modern  techniques for
              cryptographic protocols and their  ramifications. The course would be
              accessible to students  with no special mathematical background or talent. The 
              primary goal of the course is to expose students to  fundamental concepts in
              mathematics and theoretical computer  science, using cryptography as a vehicle.
              A second goal is  to give students a background in an area that will be 
              increasingly important as use of the Internet grows and as  our economy becomes
              more heavily based on trade in  information (including software, audio, video
              and film,  marketing data, etc.). Finally, the potential for widespread  use of
              cryptography and digital signatures brings into focus  such controversial and
              important issues as the conflict  between privacy and law enforcement; the
              course would  provide a forum for discussion of such issues. The intention  is
              that the course would serve both to educate non-science  majors and to attract
              prospective majors to the sciences.  Because there is currently no textbook
              that addresses the  subject at a level accessible to students that are not 
              mathematically oriented, this project will develop suitable  course materials.
              Such materials include course notes and  homework assignments. In addition, the
              PI will develop a  small programming language and visual environment in which 
              even a novice programmer can develop and experiment with  cryptographic
              protocols. As part of the course, students  will have "lab assignments" in
              which they are led through  such experimentation. The PI wil make the course
              materials,  the programming language and environment, and the lab  assignments
              widely available to prospective teachers of  similar courses at other colleges.
