Title       : EPWG: Plugged In: An Interactive Program Designed to Advance the Scientific,
               Mathematic and Computer Literacy of Girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9555724

Award Number: 9555724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $603073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne C. Metzler   (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Kraemer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan D. Harmison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hattie Grace  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Lawrence J. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Girl Scouts  Mid-Continent
	      8383 Blue Parkway
	      Kansas City, MO  64133    /   -

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9555734  Frierson    The Valencia BRIDGES program (Building and Replicating an
              Innovative  Demonstration Model to Facilitate Gender Equity in Science) will
              focus on  activities that increase students, faculty, and counselors
              understanding of   the relationships between gender and the study of science.
              The project will  increase the academic, retention, and completion success
              rates of female  community college students enrolled in science courses, 
              develop a new  instructional approach to better prepare females for upper
              division study and  careers involving scientific research, and increase the
              percentage of female  students enrolled in science courses by helping female
              students make  informed career choices and better course selection decisions. 
              Curricular  changes include a new lower division research methods course,
              enriched  lower division biological and physical science courses with
              strategies and  content that are free of gender bias, mentoring opportunities
              for students,  hands-on internships in research laboratories at the University
              of Florida,  scientific and equity workshops targeted at the female student
              population,  new recruitment and promotion materials to targeted students, and 
              specialized counseling and mentoring interactions which focus on personal, 
              transfer, career, and financial aid issues.    Community college students are
              less likely to have research and mentoring  experiences that lead to
              research-based scientific careers.  This project will  reform lower level
              science courses to be more accessible for all students and  will partner with
              the state land grant institution to prepare community  college students for
              university-level science courses.  Mentorships will act as  an informal network
              to increase student success.  ***     9555807  Ash    The Chabot Observatory &
              Science Center (COSC) will develop an  environmental curriculum implementation
              project called FIRST: Female  Involvement in Real Science and Technology.  This
              comprehensive,  sequential scientific initiati ve will be developed and
              produced in collaboration  with local school districts, colleges, museums, and
              professional societies.  FIRST will involve students in grades 5 through 8, and
              their teachers,  administrators, care givers, and the families.  The
              participants will explore  critical environmental issues, envisioning
              themselves as effective shapers of  their environment now and in the future. 
              The program will reach 60  elementary schools and 15 junior high/middle
              schools, with over 35,000  students total, and 1,200 teachers will receive
              training each year.  This  project unites and builds upon the systemic reform
              begun by previous NSF-  funded projects at Mills College and Department of
              Energy-funded  collaborative education programs.        Interactive
              environmental studies allow middle and high school students and  their families
              to enrich their knowledge by discussing real life science  questions.  Teaching
              and learning in both formal and informal settings will  help teachers,
              students, and community members of an urban multilingual,  multicultural
              population explore environmental issues that effect their lives  on a daily
              basis.  ***   9554188  Austin    This project will determine how transactional
              writing, i.e., writing used to  develop, construct and express mathematical
              understanding, effects  females' achievement in, and attitude toward, their
              college and middle  school mathematics classes.  The project will target three
              different groups of  student participants in the basic and intermediate college
              algebra sequence,  as well as in one group of participants in a three-year
              middle school  mathematics sequence.  College level achievement will be
              measured by the  Elementary Algebra Skills test; the Stanford Achievement Test
              will measure  achievement on the middle school level.  Attitude toward math
              will be  measured by the Revised Mathematics Attitude Scale.    Teams of
              mathematics and English faculty investigators, and their female  students, from
              a large, urban two-year college and  participating middle  schools from a
              large, urban public school system will create an academic  community through
              the use of the college's electronic bulletin board. The  project will intervene
              at the two critical points that hinder girls staying with  and succeeding at
              mathematics and hence, women successfully pursing  mathematics-based careers
              and reaching higher income levels: lack of  achievement and poor attitude.
              Transactional writing can be an instrument in  the construction of knowledge
              and the reshaping of beliefs.    Writing about math helps students more easily
              learn mathematical concepts.   Students from middle schools and a community
              college will use a technique  called transactional writing to make them active
              learners. This, along with  mentoring and career counseling, will help them
              become more interesting in  math and science careers.  ***                     
                                9555817  Fontaine        Elizabeth City State University and
              five rural, economically disadvantaged,  predominately African-American public
              school systems will implement a  comprehensive regional project, entitled the
              Dr. C.D. Turnage Science, Math  and Technology Scholars Program for Girls. The
              goals are to create positive  and permanent changes in academic, social, and
              scientific climates in order  to allow the interest and aptitude women and
              girls display in science,  engineering, and mathematics (SEM) to flourish and
              to add to our knowledge  about interactions between gender and the SEM
              infrastructure. The program  will include: teachers, counselors, and central
              office staff, female eighth  graders, parents, business and industry. The
              project will train 300 educators,  200 teachers, 50 administrators, 25
              counselors, and 25 central office staff  members in the areas of enhancing
              access to equity education and equitable  opportunities, gender equity
              expectations for student achievement,  EQUALS  Training, multidisciplinary
              mathematics and science, constructivism in  science and mathematics, and 
              alterna tive assessment. 240 eighth grade  girls will participate in after
              school clubs, a Saturday academy, and a  summer enrichment institute designed
              to enhance their education and  careers in the fields of science, mathematics,
              and technology. Parents will  attend activities with their daughters to provide
              input in their educational  programs.  A Scholars Program manual will be made
              available to each  state's division of science, math and technology to help
              them replicate this  program.        A partnership among university, public
              school and local businesses will work  to create a positive climate for
              mathematics and science learning among  middle school students. Led by
              Elizabeth City State University faculty,  school personnel will examine how to
              deliver equitable education to all  students. This will result in more students
              enrolling and succeeding in upper  level math and science courses.  *** 9555724
               Kraemer    Girl Scouts in grades K-12 will learn and apply science,
              engineering, and  mathematics principles using interactive computer systems in
              conjunction  with math and science badge work. PLUGGED IN! is a collaboration
              of  Ottawa University and Mid-Continent Council of Girl Scouts. Girls will 
              advance in computer and science literacy by completing age-appropriate 
              computer assisted modules to develop skills in computer science, problem- 
              solving, research and critical thinking; explore Internet communication and 
              international perspectives of scientific data gathering; experiment with 
              microscopes, telescopes, weather station output technology, and computer- 
              interfaced data analysis; explore careers in science, engineering and 
              mathematics through mentoring; and completing Girl Scout science and  math
              activities from mobile units, as well as at remote sites. This project will 
              serve as a model for Girl Scouts of the USA, which serves a membership of  3.5
              million.    Ho
