Title       : The Design of an Integrated Core Curriculum for Mathematics,Physics, and
               Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1997  
File        : a9555202

Award Number: 9555202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359958             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela Mills pmills@shiva.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Marino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra P. Clarkson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William V. Sweeney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will integrate two semesters each of General  Chemistry, College
              Physics and Precalculus Mathematics into  one four-semester pre-professional
              science course, including  both lectures and laboratories.  This dramatic
              restructuring  experiment with the introductory level science courses is 
              motivated by the enormous failure rates in our standard  introductory courses. 
              At present, these failure rates in  our inner-city campus exceed 60%.  A
              disproportionate number  of these students are women and/or minorities. 
              Although we  attribute these failure rates to a multitude of factors, the 
              salient feature appears to be the students' inability to  transfer and apply
              their knowledge among topics within one  course and between topics across
              disciplines (such as  mathematics and chemistry).  The primary goal of an 
              integrated sequence is the explicit transfer and application  of knowledge
              common to the analytical sciences and  mathematics.  This approach will empower
              students to become  effective problem-solvers and critical thinkers in the 
              physical sciences.  The objectives of this integration are  1) to take
              advantage of the natural connections among  mathematics, physics, and chemistry
              in order to reinforce  the physical concepts and the mathematical techniques 
              employed in the quantitative sciences; 2) to promote the  development of
              effective learning strategies common to all  quantitative sciences; 3) to use
              the context of chemistry  and physics to motivate students to learn, apply,
              reinforce  and transfer mathematical methods; 4) to introduce the  fundamental
              physical concepts that underlie chemistry in a  unified, logical and coherent
              fashion; and 5) to create a  block learning environment that maintains a
              unified student  population throughout the quantitative sciences.  We are  well
              aware that the persistence of an integrated,  interdepartmental course is a
              major challenge.  However, a  solution to the problem of high failure rates has
              clear  advantages for the College and for each  of the three  departments
              involved.  We have received enthusiastic support  from the Chairs of all the
              involved disciplines and from the  College Administration.  A careful
              assessment and  documentation of improvement in the quantitative reasoning 
              skills of students are integral parts of the proposal.  Evidence of improvement
              can clearly have far-reaching impact  on undergraduate science education in the
              quantitative  sciences.
