Title       : Addressing Software's Chronic Crisis in the Undergraduate Computer Science
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9555062

Award Number: 9555062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Long long@cis.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce W. Weide  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Murali Sitaraman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Since its inception, the software industry has languished in  a perpetual state
              of crisis.  Academic computer science  departments have contributed to this by
              largely failing in  their responsibility to appropriately educate and prepare 
              software professionals. We propose to address this failure  with the following
              three-pronged effort:  A comprehensive  and integrated four-semester
              software-development curriculum  will be created and installed within the
              undergraduate  computer science programs at The Ohio State University and  at
              West Virginia University. Fundamental to this curriculum  is the guiding
              philosophy that software is properly  conceptualized and constructed in terms
              of carefully  engineered reusable software components. A software  composition
              workbench, consisting of an integrated set of  software tools, will be
              developed. The workbench will be  capable of guiding and supporting students
              and software  developers in their use and application of the methodologies 
              taught in the software development curriculum.  The proposed curriculum and
              workbench will be rigorously  evaluated through content-oriented, performance-
              oriented,  and attitude-oriented studies. Central to this effort will  be
              development of appropriate, longitudinal evaluation  instruments for each of
              the courses in the curriculum and  for the workbench.  The goal of this project
              is to create a  system capable of producing software professionals with 
              greater awareness and understanding of the technical issues  faced by the
              software industry, and with measurably better  software design and development
              skills.
