Title       : The Restructuring at SUNY Cortland of Science, Mathematics, and Pedagogy
               Experiences for K-6 Pre-Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1999     
File        : a9555152

Award Number: 9555152
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $850000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott W. Anderson andersons@cortland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bonnie B. Barr  (Principal Investigator former)
              Steven C. Good  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn S. Krussel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Cortland
	      P O BOX 2000
	      Cortland, NY  13045    607/753-2201

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              During the past academic year, fourteen faculty from the  sciences, mathematics
              and education departments at SUNY  Cortland participated in an NSF Development
              Grant.  During  this project, course outlines were developed for a 
              restructured math/science/pedigogy/composition program for K-  6 pre-teachers,
              SUNY Cortland has the largest elementary  teacher preparation program in the
              State of New York.  The  proposed project would develop the curriculum and 
              instructional materials to implement a 27 cr. hr, block of  experiences. in
              addition to the fourteen SUNY Cortland  staff, science/math faculty from five
              regional Community  colleges would be involved in the curriculum development
              and  implementation phases of the proposed project, A  research/assessment team
              from Cornell University would  evaluate all aspects of the project.  The Level
              One block  contains content courses specifically designed for the K-6 
              pre-teachers and will be taught utilizing a conceptual  change approach,
              Composition 101 will be taught in  conjunction with the Level One Science
              course.  Pedagogy  courses in both science and math will be taught in 
              conjunction with the Level One content courses.  In both  pedagogy courses, the
              pre-teachers will be involved in  experiences with elementary school-aged
              students.  The Level  Two block is an integrated and interdisciplinary 
              math/science experience in which students will be introduced  to problem
              solving strategies and will utilize the  strategies to investigate six
              significant real world science  problems, The mathematical concepts will be
              developed  through the context of science content, During the Level Two  block,
              pre-teachers will work with elementary-aged children  in a math/science lab
              setting.  In a culminating  math/science experience, the pre-teachers will
              participate  in a Science, Technology and Society (STS) block in which  they
              will be engaged in conducing real world STS research  under the guidance of a
              faculty facilitator and a  business/industry mentor.  Each c urricular block
              will be  pilot tested three times before the curriculum is integrated  Into the
              academic program of the host institution and that  of the five satellite
              campuses.
