Title       : EP/WG: CIC WISE Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a9555812

Award Number: 9555812
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $512542             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Girves jgirves@columbus.rr.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy C. Rich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Z. Daniels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine Olmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cinda-Sue G. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly Marshall-Goodell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD 95-55812  Girves    The CIC WISE Initiative proposes a comprehensive set of
              collaborative activities to help achieve  gender equity on the 15 campuses of
              the Committee on Institutional Cooperation (CIC), targeting  upper division
              undergraduates, graduate students, and faculty women in science, engineering, 
              and mathematics (SEM).  The objectives are to enlarge the pool of undergraduate
              women  pursuing SEM graduate study; to increase the number of female graduate
              students who pursue  faculty careers; to increase the numbers of women who
              advance through the faculty ranks; and  to improve the educational and
              professional climate for all SEM women.  New activities include  providing
              student leadership development workshops, professional development and
              socialization  experiences (e.g., attending professional conferences), adapting
              and institutionalizing practices  to enhance the campus climate for women
              (e.g., gender-equitable teaching workshops),  facilitating electronic
              communication through creating a WISE web with resource materials,  databanks,
              etc., and establishing an implemented electronic inter-institutional mentoring
              model.    The goals are to be achieved by integrating a set of new activities
              with a series of existing, yet  autonomous, CIC and institutional programs and
              plans.  The project will expand opportunities  for women students and faculty,
              focus attention on women in science issues, and add coherence  and continuity
              to existing activities.
