Title       : Multimedia Mathematics: Across the Curriculum and Across the Nation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a9555404

Award Number: 9555404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $966394             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Dunbar sdunbar@math.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benny D. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce Crauder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Fuller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 1047,7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this consortium project led by the University of Nebraska and
              Oklahoma State University is to integrate the teaching and learning of
              mathematics and its applications in science, engineering, and quantitative
              subjects. This will be accomplished through a modern curriculum that provides
              students with a holistic view of mathematical science coherently tying together
              fundamental concepts from many disciplines. A critical success factor is a
              communications structure bringing together educators from many disciplines to
              share ideas, goals, and strategies. The project will also put in place services
              and materials that encourage experimentation with and development of curricular
              innovations as well as new modes of presentation. From the outset the program
              will focus on the needs of many students from many disciplines and backgrounds.
              An especially important group will be those students preparing for careers in
              K-12 teaching. The implementation plan provides for students who change majors
              or institutions, and it will be easily adaptable to other colleges and
              universities.    The primary product of the Oklahoma-Nebraska Consortium will
              be an enduring  integrated core math, science and engineering curriculum based
              on a collection of cross-curricular, multimedia mathematics learning module
              clusters. Each module would be a topic or application in itself, but it would
              also be part of a larger vertical and horizontal structure. The idea is to draw
              together and focus horizontally on fundamental concepts from other disciplines
              that fit naturally with fundamental mathematics concepts learned at the same
              time. Vertically, students will revisit topics on more than one occasion and in
              more than one course, showing the power of mathematics as it unfolds. Thus in a
              given course, the student will witness several applications of a single
              mathematical idea, but over several years he or she will also encounter a
              particular application several times with increasing mathematical
              sophistication. This structure wil l provide motivation for mathematical
              development, an appreciation for topics students are currently studying, and an
              understanding of how fundamental ideas from many disciplines fit together.   
              Multimedia, defined broadly to include computer algebra, graphing software,
              graphing calculators, television, interactive digital video, CD-ROMs, and
              Internet connections serves both as a device for focusing attention on changes
              that are needed and as a vehicle for making them. The Consortium schools will
              combine their strengths in this area throughout the program to establish new
              and more effective presentations and expand the range of applications that are
              accessible to students.
