Title       : Proposal to Develop and Implement a Model Integrated Introductory Science Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1996     
File        : a9555216

Award Number: 9555216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gothard C. Grey g-grey@whitewater.wcslc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan A. Gardner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A.Tyrone Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher A. Cline  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Westminster College
	      1840 South 13th East
	      Salt Lake City, UT  841053617    801/484-7651

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 7348,7410,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Science education faces a number of problems today: separating science into
              discrete disciplines; mixing majors and  non-majors in the same courses;
              creating an adversarial, competitive climate which repels minority, female, and
               learning disabled students; ignoring the need for special science preparation
              for elementary education majors; failing  to teach science skills and processes
              directly; and passive lecture/demonstration teaching without students 
              experiencing much "real" science.  The Natural World: Explorations in
              Science--an introductory, integrated science  course for non-science and
              elementary education majors is laboratory-based and experientaly driven.  It is
              designed  around four major concepts matter and energy, change and constancy,
              diversity and order, and interactions with  the following goals:  To provide
              broad, integrated science knowledge  To foster the development of effective 
              process learning skills in science  To prepare future elementary teachers  * To
              create a continuing interest in science  Methods include extensive writing,
              concept mapping, guided discovery laboratory experiences, reading in the
              history  of science and popular journals, collaborative teams, library/Internet
              research, quantifying, computer modeling,  problem solving, and critical
              thinking skills.  Collaborations include teaming physics, chemistry, and
              biology faculty  and a writing specialist to create the course with university
              science education faculty for project evaluation.  The  integrated course may
              serve as a model for introductory science courses at similar small colleges and
              teacher  preparation institutions.  Researchers plan to write articles, make
              presentations, and collaborate on producing the  guided discovery materials for
              publication.
