Title       : Geology and People: Toward New Paradigms for Undergraduate Science Education and
               Curriculum Dissemination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9555117

Award Number: 9555117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Verosub verosub@geology.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Recent concern about the declining interest in science on  the part of students
              and the need for increased science  literacy on the part of the general public
              has led to  recognition of the importance of making special efforts to  reach
              non-science majors and future teachers. One possible  approach to this problem
              is to develop courses that have a  reduced emphasis on terminology and
              equations and a greater  emphasis on those aspects of the science that are
              tangible  and relevant to students' lives and experiences. For the  past five
              years, I have been teaching a General Education  course entitled Geology and
              People. The goal of the course  is to draw students' attention to some of the
              many ways in  which geologic factors have been and still are influencing 
              societies, civilizations and cultures. The material in the  course is drawn
              from a variety of fields including history,  economics, political science, and
              archaeology as well as  art, music and literature. I believe the material that
              I  have gathered for the course can make a useful contribution  to the
              development of new paradigms for introductory earth  science courses for
              non-majors and teachers.    The interconnections between different components
              make it  inappropriate to disseminate the material through a text or  a reader.
              To overcome this problem, I propose to establish  an Internet site on the World
              Wide Web.  The Website would  be available free to anyone wishing to access the
              material  pertaining to the influences of geology on people's lives..  The
              Website would be constructed in a way that emphasized  pathways and linkages
              between information. Individuals would  use the Website to find information
              that they could  incorporate into their own courses. This approach represents 
              a new paradigm for the dissemination of curricular material.
