Title       : Molecular Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9555605

Award Number: 9555605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2425000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Orville L. Chapman olc@argon.chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arlene A. Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick A. Wegner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1032,1046,7348,7427,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The UCLA-CSUF-Community College Alliance (24 area community colleges that have
              worked together for more than 15 years) proposes a sweeping restructuring of
              the lower division chemistry curriculum and the auxiliary learning and
              assessment processes. In forming our new curriculum, we reject the positivist
              approach to science education in favor of a constructivist approach that
              emphasizes problem solving and exploratory learning.  We make this change in
              order to focus on the developing key skills, traits, and abilities of our
              students.  Our new curriculum, the Molecular Science Curriculum, cuts across
              departmental and disciplines to embrace all activities that involve the study
              of atoms and molecules.  In particular, environmental science, materials
              science, and molecular life science, have important positions in the
              lower-division chemistry curriculum.  The new curriculum reflects accurately
              current practice in research and the chemical industry where growth in
              occurring in these new fields.  Today information-technology-based learning
              enables a practical approach to discovery learning, which educational theorists
              have long favored.  Students can learn science by doing science.  In
              particular, we will produce problem-based modular learning units that define
              the molecular science curriculum; data sets organized for exploratory learning;
              prepackaged molecular, mathematical, and schematic models illustrating
              important principles and phenomena; and a client/server system that manages
              education.  Client/server technology enables individualized courses and frees
              students from rigid time constraints.  The learning units will be used
              immediately by several of the community colleges in technology programs, such
              as those for science technicians and hazardous materials technicians at Mount
              San Antonio CC.  New assessment vehicles including cumulative electronic
              portfolios of group and individual work provide new insight into student
              development and potential.    The project also addresses the preparation of 
              primary and secondary science teachers by involving them as active participants
              in the lower division courses of molecular science curriculum.  At both UCLA
              and CSUF, these students will gain experience with the modules, associated
              learning methods, and electronic delivery system.  These experiences should
              result in teachers with a practical perspective on science teaching as well as
              the ability to utilize current technology to direct learning activities.  The
              electronic delivery system will allow students at UCLA to work with the science
              education faculty at CSUF to obtain certification.  Since 1990 two high schools
              (Aliso Niguel and Crossroads) have become members of the Alliance.  These
              schools have the facilities to expose students, experienced teachers, and
              future teachers to both the content and learning methods of the molecular
              science curriculum.
