Title       : Implementing the Standards for Introductory College Mathematics Before Calculus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1998  
File        : a9555059

Award Number: 9555059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120014             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn E. Mays   (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen Sharp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Darrell H. Abney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cheryl S. Cleaves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William N. Thomas Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Math Assoc Two Yr Col
	      State Tech at Memphis
	      Memphis, TN  38134    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1032,7348,7419,9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Standards for Introductory College Mathematics Before  Calculus was developed
              with funding from the National  Science and the Exxon Education Foundations to
              address the  special needs of, establish standards for, and make 
              recommendations about introductory college mathematics below  the level of
              calculus. The standards provide goals for  introductory college mathematics and
              guidelines for  selecting content and instructional strategies for 
              accomplishing these goals.    The goal of the project proposed is to facilitate
              the  implementation of the Standards.  This will be accomplished  by holding
              four regional workshops. The purposes of these  workshops include the
              following:     to inform a wider audience of the reform issues and  proposed
              patterns and models for improving curriculum and  instruction,     to encourage
              the formation of consortia of two- and four-  year colleges and universities in
              each of several regions  which will continue to work on implementation projects
                  to review current exemplary programs, materials, and  activities at the
              introductory college mathematics level as  well as relevant secondary programs
              based on the NCTM  Standards     to provide workshop participants information
              on relevant  research in mathematics education, effective approaches to 
              change, and suggestions for working with their  administrations to provide a
              meaningful mathematics  education for their students.     to prepare a
              compilation of reports on the implementation  projects begun as a result of the
              regional workshops and to  make this available to all members of the
              mathematics  community.    Introductory college mathematics is the mathematics
              that  most of our students study. It is mathematics for the  workforce, for
              future teachers and for those who plan to  major in mathematics or a
              mathematics-dependent field but  who enter college unprepared to study
              calculus. It is also  the gate-keeper or critical filter for the majority.
              Greater  numbers of students are entering the mathematics "pipeline "  at some
              point in introductory college mathematics but no  more are continuing to
              calculus and higher level courses.  Mathematics education at this level must
              change. Providing  faculty with development opportunities is essential if 
              change is to occur. The workshops proposed will enable  faculty and
              administrators to learn about successful  programs that embody the Standards,
              to have an opportunity  to observe or experience the process of learning
              through  working in groups, in a laboratory setting, or using  technology, or
              to engage in any of the active learning  processes recommended by the
              Standards.
