Title       : AT-SLICE: Advanced Technologies and Simulations for Learning about Interactions
               in Complex Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1997   
File        : a9555211

Award Number: 9555211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $456547             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jayshiro Tashiro tashiro@jan.ucc.nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael H. Ort  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael M. Kelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven C. Semken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We recognize systemic science education problems: The  majority of science
              courses, grades K-16, offer only the  "products" of science and sparse teaching
              of the "process"  of doing science.  Due to this emphasis on products,  college
              introductory science courses often fail to retain  students in science,
              mathematics, and engineering majors,  and fail in pre-service training for
              teachers, and minority  populations.  Systematic change is problematic.  The 
              different  academic standards in different schools,  colleges, and universities
              prohibit real articulation among  faculty at these  different levels and
              places, and there are  few real systemic approaches to curriculum that are 
              empirically derived or driven.  Our objective is to provide  a
              multi-institutional process of empirically driven  curriculum development that 
              emphasizes real-world scenarios  in environmental science.  We will develop
              three research-  rich, inquiry-based  courses and laboratories that will help 
              students develop abilities to identify environmental  problems, to design and 
              implement research to study  environmental problems, to develop functional
              literacy in  the analysis and interpretation  of data, to attain  functional
              literacy in the application and use of advanced  technologies, and to draft
              technical reports.   These  courses and laboratories are based on societal
              environmental  focal points: Nuclear Waste Storage, Coal Power  Plants, and 
              Solid Waste Landfills.  Our consortium of five institutions  will form an
              Interdisciplinary Faculty Institute  to review  and implement the simulations. 
              The Institute would create  an across-institution infrastructure of 
              professional  development and collaboration through curriculum seminars  and
              practical workshops for faculty.  Our  use of an outside  review panel of
              industry and government content experts  grounds these courses in the real
              world  processes, and the  model we will develop and quantify will be used at
              other  institutions, especially those with  populations o f native  Americans
              and hispanic-Americans.
