Title       : Enhancement of Geographic Information System (GIS) and Remote Sensing Curriculum
               and Development of "Across Discipline" Lab Exercise Manuals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1996     
File        : a9555035

Award Number: 9555035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50166              (Estimated)
Investigator: Francisco C. San Juan juanfs@alpha.ecsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Elizabeth City State Univ
	      1704 Weeksville Road
	      Elizabeth City, NC  27909    919/335-3230

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the proposal is the enhancement and improvement of the recently
              developed and approved Minor   Program in Geographic Information System (GIS)
              and Remote Sensing.  This goal will be accomplished by course   content changes
              and the development of "across discipline" laboratory exercise manuals for the
              introductory courses   in GIS and Remote Sensing.  Through enrollment in
              workshops, conferences, and courses in GIS and Remote   Sensing, the Principal
              Investigator will be able to continually improve the course content and
              subsequent syllabi of the   two courses in GIS and one in Remote Sensing. 
              Consultants with expertise in these fields will be used as information   source
              and as evaluators.  The second goal, the development of an "across discipline"
              laboratory exercise manual   each for Introduction to GIS and Introduction to
              Remote Sensing that includes exercises and case studies for the   various
              disciplines (the sciences, business, sociology, criminal justice and others)
              targeted for these courses will be   accomplished through several means.  The
              expertise gained in attending the above workshops, conferences and   courses
              will be an important resource that will be taken advantage of.  The use of
              consultants, and the review of   existing laboratory exercises from various
              institutions, and organizations such as the U.S. Forest Service and the  
              National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis (NCGIA) will be some of
              the methods that will be used for   producing these lab manuals.  The resulting
              curriculum and laboratory manuals will hopefully be used by other  
              institutions that have these general introductory courses in their programs
              that attract students from various   disciplines.
