Title       : The Complete Geography: A Model Curriculum for Pre-Service in Cultural,
               Physical, Techniques, and Regional Geography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1999        
File        : a9555091

Award Number: 9555091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miriam K. Lo miriam lo@msl.mankato.msus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cecil S. Keen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward L. Babel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dorothy Engan-Barker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minn State Univ, Mankato
	      Research and Sponsored Programs
	      Mankato, MN  56001    507/389-5275

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Educate America Act of 1994 names geography as one of nine subject areas in
              which high school graduates must  achieve competency.  The new competency
              requirements necessitate a broader, more complete education of our  nation's
              pre-service social studies teachers.  To date, very few comprehensive
              curriculum materials have been  developed to facilitate teaching pre-service
              geography students.  This proposal requests NSF funds for the  development of a
              four-volume manual of module exercises covering each of the four core areas of
              geographic  education-cultural, physical, geographic techniques, and world
              regional geography.  The manual will be developed by  teams of geographers,
              education faculty, technology consultants, and an advisory committee, with the
              goal of  producing the Cultural and Physical volumes in year 1, and the
              Techniques and World Regional volumes in year 2.  The manual will be ultimately
              tested by an advisory committee for its consistency with the philosophies and
              objectives  of GEO-Teach, a pre-service geography education program funded by
              FIPSE and currently being implemented at  Mankato State University.  GEO-Teach
              strives to model for students successful approaches to interdisciplinary 
              teaching and a content- and process-based pedagogy that integrates up-to-date
              technology instruction into the  curriculum; it is expected that the same
              principles will be integrated into this four-volume manual.  Two external 
              evaluators will conduct testing in large and small university classes outside
              Mankato State University.  It is anticipated  that the final product will be
              available for distribution to other pre-service geography/social studies
              programs in the Spring of 1998.
