Title       : The Cheche Konnen Center For Science Education Reform For Language Minority
               Students, K-8
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2001   
File        : a9555712

Award Number: 9555712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Clark                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $813336             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann S. Rosebery Ann_Rosebery@TERC.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beth Warren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              10        Physical Sciences                       
              60        Life Sciences                           
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9555712  Rosebery    TERC in collaboration with 13 school districts nationwide
              has created the Cheche Konnen Center for Science Education Reform,  The mission
              is to spearhead a five-year national reform initiative in K-8 science education
              for students whose first language is not English.  The Center will be built on
              a strong foundation of prior research and development:  specifically, TERC's
              well-known work on inquiry-based approaches to teaching science to language
              minority students and teacher professional development, and their long record
              of innovation in science and mathematics education.    Language minority
              students represent the fastest growing segment of the school age population and
              typically receive an impoverished education in science.  Science teachers too
              often have little or no background in understanding issues of cultural and
              linguistic diversity in relation to science teaching.  With these concerns in
              mind, the Center will focus on teacher professional development that integrates
              inquiry and reflection on science, teaching and learning, culture and language.
               The Center's work will emphasize technical support to school districts that
              seek to include language minority students in their ongoing reform efforts, a
              "national conversation" on issues of equity in science education reform, and
              development of products, practices and knowledge to support fulfillment of the
              Center's mission.  The products will include articles, videos, and other
              professional development materials.    The outcomes of the Center's work will
              be:  long-term, inquiry-based professional development programs that are an
              ongoing, integral part of teachers' professional work; vastly improved
              opportunities for language minority children to learn science; an informed
              nation conversation on education policy on equity in science education; and
              human, material and conceptual resources to support districts nationwide that
              are engaged in reforming science education for language minority students.
