Title       : EPWG: Geology In A Social and Historical Context: Preforming Earth Science
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9555721

Award Number: 9555721
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $659426             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret N. Rees rees@unlv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maralee Mayberry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9555721  Rees  This project is designed to transform both earth science courses
              and pedagogy for the  teaching of the social science of geolog" will be
              developed and implemented.  The  new courses and pedagogy will help to reform
              the earth science courses, teaching  methods, and the classroom environment to
              make science inviting for traditionally  marginalized students, particularly
              women; place the study of earth systems in a social  and historical context;
              examine the race, class, and gender dynamics that shape  scientific knowledge;
              illuminate the relationship between science, politics, and social  policy;
              develop truly interdisciplinary social science of geology courses by 
              incorporating the knowledge of the natural and social sciences.    The goals of
              the reformed curricula and pedagogy are to (1) attract and retain 
              underrepresented groups m earth science programs, (2) place the study of earth 
              systems in a social and historical context from high school through university,
              (3)  enhance both educators' and students' understanding( of natural and social
              systems  and their inter-relatedness and (4) increase social and scientific
              literacy. New  resources will be incorporated into newly created thematic
              modules that will illuminate  natural and social systems and their
              inter-relatedness; examine the race, class, and  gender dimensions of
              scientific inquiry and knowledge; and stimulate students to apply  their
              personal knowledge of the natural and social sciences to local and
              environmental  issues and policy making endeavors.  The modules will contain
              pedagogical  recommendations and suggestions; suggested readings, laboratory
              exercises,  community-based activities, and field-trip localities; and
              extensive resource guides.    In order to recruit and retain more women to
              science disciplines, new classroom  resources and teaching methods should be
              used.  This project will enhance the  teaching of earth sciences by looking at
              the interelatedness of nature and society and  at the ways science is rel evant
              to the lives of a diverse student population.  Teaching  materials and plans
              will help high school, community college, and university faculty  improve the
              content of their courses.  ***
