Title       : Ionomer-Containing Binary Polymer Blends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9400862

Award Number: 9400862
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Weiss rweiss@mail.ims.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9400862  Weiss  An ionomer blended with another polymer represents a special 
              class of copolymer/homopolymer blends in which one of the  components carries a
              charge.  The presence of the ionic species  may permit very strong, attractive
              intermolecular interactions  with another polymer and/or strong intramolecular
              repulsions  within the ionomer.  Either phenomena may induce miscibility of 
              two otherwise immiscible polymers.  This research is directed at  the
              characterization of the interactions and phase behavior of  ionomer/homopolymer
              blends and specifically the following three  objectives:  1. to understand the
              macrophase and microphase  behavior of blends in which miscibility results from
              attractive  intermolecular interactions or respulsive intramolecular 
              interactions; 2. to define the role of the ionomer counterion,  ionic
              concentration and polymer molecular weight on the phase  behavior and
              properties of the blends; 3. to determine the effect  of strong attractive or
              repulsive interactions on the spinodal  decomposition kinetics and the
              resulting morphology of critical  mixtures.  Two systems will be investigated:
              (1) blends of  lightly sulfonated polystyrene (SPS) and a methylated polyamide 
              and (2) SPS and bisphenol A polycarbonate.  The former is an  example of a
              blend with specific attractive intermolecular  interactions, and the latter is
              a blend for which miscibility  occurs due to intramolecular repulsive effects. 
              Model systems  using low molecular weight compounds will also be used.  The 
              specific experimental techniques that will be employed include  Fourier
              transform infrared spectroscopy, solid-state nuclear  magnetic resonance
              spectroscopy, light scattering, small angle  neutron scattering, small angle
              x-ray scattering, differential  scanning calorimetry and dynamic mechanical
              analysis.  %%%  The work in this proposal will advance the field of polymer 
              blends.  This will lead to tougher, stronger plastics for use in  aerospace,
              automotive, and household applications.
