Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computing Science and Statistics; Symposium on the
               Interface Theme; Research Triangle Park, N.C.; June 15-18, 1994
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1994       
File        : a9400023

Award Number: 9400023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sallie Keller-McNulty                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Sall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Interface Fdn N Amer Inc
	      P.O. Box 7460
	      Fairfax Station, VA  220397460    703/993-1691

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400023  Sall       The Interface Conference was designed to bring together 
              professionals from different fields that share a need for better  statistical
              computing methods. Originally focused on the  interface with numerical analysis
              and computer science, in more  recent years it has been involved with a broad
              range of  scientific and technical areas, particularly hot areas such as 
              biotechnology and quality engineering. Computing is currently a  very active
              area in the statistics profession as desktop  computing power has made a huge
              advance in the last 5 years. For  example, Bayesian statistics used to be
              mostly theory and little  practice, because it was saddled with difficult
              numerical  integration issues. Today, the emergence of Monte Carlo methods 
              coupled with fast machines has made the techniques suddenly  practical.
              Researchers are asking for the distribution of  estimates, rather than just
              approximate standard errors, and a  number of resampling-based methods have
              emerged to provide those  answers. Exact significance levels are replacing
              approximate  ones. Smooth curves are replacing straight line fits. Statistical 
              graphics is helping researchers make discoveries. The Interface  Conference
              will have the specialized sessions on the  state-of-the-art,  and also a number
              of tutorial sessions and  short courses to help bring the new technology to a
              general  technical audience.       The Interface conference is the one annual
              conference  dedicated to statistical computing issues. Statistical computing 
              has emerged as a particularly important field in the last few  years because
              the arrival of cheap and fast desktop computers has  opened up a lot of new
              opportunities that were only dreamed of a  few years ago. A generation ago, the
              best statisticians could do  with limited computing resources was to get a
              statistic if the  data was organized a certain way, and look that statistic up
              in a  table. Then computing and numerical techniques improved enough to  handle
              more general models and get  significance levels. Now we  have progressed to
              where we can analyze very general models that  require fewer assumptions, have
              a more flexible functional form,  provide details on the distribution of the
              estimates in the  model, use interactive exploratory techniques to make new 
              discoveries, and present the results with graphical visualization  techniques.
              With further refinements in statistical computing  tools, the statistical
              community has a chance to really serve the  scientific and technical world much
              better at a time when the  Quality Movement, the Biotechnology Revolution, and
              the  Environmental mandate has made statistics and experimentation  more
              critically important. The Interface conference provides the  forum for
              presentation and discussion of the latest breakthroughs  in statisical
              computing.
