Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Complex Dynamical Systems and Mobius Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1994      
File        : a9400999

Award Number: 9400999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aimo Hinkkanen aimo@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400999  Hinkkanen       This award supports mathematical research on problems 
              arising in the study of complex dynamical systems, Mobius groups  and their
              topological counterparts.  The work focuses on complex  functions of a complex
              variables and the domains on which these  functions are defined.  The first set
              of problems concerns sets  of rational functions and the semigroups they
              determine via  composition.  These semigroups are natural extensions dynamical 
              systems derived from iterations of a single function.  The theory  leads to a
              great many dynamical, combinatorial and  algebraic questions and exhibits a
              rich structure  involving properties and dynamical behavior of the set of 
              normality and the Julia set. another reason for studying these  semigroups is
              that certain polynomial semigroups are closely  connected to moduli spaces of
              discrete Mobius groups.  The  dynamical systems point of view offers a new tool
              for studying  and understanding such moduli spaces.  A second line of 
              investigation involves the question of characterizing a  convergence group on
              the circle in terms of fixed points, as well  as with the problem of
              determining under what circumstances a  convergence group in the plane is
              topologically conjugate to a  Mobius group.  In dimensions two and higher,
              there are a  considerable number of convergence groups, not all of which are 
              conjugate to Mobius groups.  It is important that efforts be made  to determine
              the constraints necessary to guarantee that a group  have the same topological
              properties as a Mobius group.       Classical function theory has introduced
              geometric  techniques which have proved to have far wider applicability than 
              first imagined.  The subject exploits the interplay between  geometric
              interpretation with powerful analytic techniques to  yield some of the most
              complete mathematical results in the  field of analysis. In this project,
              variational techniques and  geometric reasoning are expected to lead to results
              of valuable  physical significance.   ***
