Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Classical Homotopy Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9400587

Award Number: 9400587
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick R. Cohen cohf@math.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel Gitler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400587  Cohen       F.R. Cohen intends to consider problems in classical 
              homotopy theory and offshoots to other subjects involving  cohomology of
              discrete groups, certain moduli spaces, and a  further study of the Whitehead
              square.  One of the main projects  is to extend his recent partial solution of
              M.G. Barratt's finite  exponent conjecture to the general case.  He intends to
              continue  an analysis of the groups appearing in this work together with  their
              connections with other parts of mathematics involving  classical homotopy
              theory and their connections to certain moduli  spaces.  He will continue his
              study of the Whitehead square  involving an interplay between Cayley-Dickson
              algebras and spaces  of rational functions.  F.R. Cohen and S. Gitler will
              continue  joint work in a study of characteristic classes for spaces of 
              embeddings which are implicit in their earlier work and which are  related to
              invariants of knots defined by Vassiliev.       This project is a study of how
              large dimensional spheres  can be wrapped around smaller dimensional objects at
              least up  to continuous deformations.  This type of geometric problem  occurs
              ubiquitously in mathematics and other related areas such  as physics.  Some of
              the basic structure is given by the  geometric and algebraic consequences of
              particles which move on a  surface and which are parametrized by a time
              coordinate.  At  various times, the particles may return to their original 
              position.  The algebraic analogue of this geometric property is  known as
              torsion.  Bounds on the growth of torsion for various  naturally occurring
              spaces which are analogues of surfaces is one  of the main subjects of this
              project.  One goal of this work is  an attack on an outstanding problem in the
              subject known as  Barratt's finite exponent conjecture.  A second and
              unexpected  offshoot is that this work overlaps with work of some others who 
              are interested in physics.   ***
