Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Emergence of Cooperation in Exchange
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1994      
File        : a9400718

Award Number: 9400718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7437               (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Markovsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400718  Markovsky         This is an award under the Grants for Improving
              Doctoral  Dissertation Research Program.  It is an experimental laboratory 
              study of the emergence of cooperation in exchange networks.   Previous research
              has focused on positional power, and on how  those actors in high power
              positions can gain resource advantages  despite the actions of other actors in
              the network.  However,  power advantages in some networks require a degree of 
              coordination between actors in different network positions in  order to be
              realized.  Some network structures induce this  coordination; other inhibit it.
               The present research will: 1)  test a new theoretical extension of network
              exchange theory based  on this idea of interactive power; 2) investigate the
              effects of  structural variations and levels of communication on the  emergence
              of cooperation between self interested actors in  exchange networks, and 3)
              test a measure of relational power that  shows the temporary effects on power
              of the pattern of use of  different relations in a network.  %%%       This
              experiment contributes to structural social psychology,  developing and testing
              additions to a widely-accepted theoretical  approach.  Although the research is
              abstract, the theoretical  principles are believed to apply to work groups,
              families, and  decision-making bureaucracies, so scientific advances may 
              contribute indirectly to improvements in administrative and  management
              techniques.  In addition to the scientific gains to be  achieved by the
              research, this award will materially assist a  highly promising student in
              completing research for the Ph.D.  dissertation.  Thus it contributes to the
              future scientific  manpower of the nation and the thorough training of the next
               generation of social scientists.    ***
