Title       : Magnetic - Resonance Studies of Layered Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9400553

Award Number: 9400553
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald L. Dunifer dunifer@hal.Physics.Wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ratna Naik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matlub Ahmad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory W. Auner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9400553  Dunifer    Technical abstract:  Magnetic Resonance techniques will be
              used to  investigate the electrical and magnetic properties of multilayered 
              films consisting of alternating magnetic and nonmagnetic metals.   The spin
              polarization of the conduction electrons in the  nonmagnetic metal, induced by
              the adjacent ferromagnetic neighbors  will be studied by microwave transmission
              spectroscopy (MTS),  ferromagnetic resonance (FMR), and nuclear magnetic
              resonance (NMR)  of the nuclei of the nonmagnetic metal.  The influence of the 
              induced spin polarization of the spacer metal on the magneto-  optical Kerr
              effect (MOKE) of the films will also be studied.  A  comparison of the optical
              characteristics with those determined by  magnetic resonance will assist in
              understanding the basic physical  processes underlying the enhancement of the
              MOKE and in fabricating  new materials with improved characteristics for data
              storage and  magnetic sensors.    Non-technical abstract:  This project is a
              multidisciplinary  investigation of the properties of materials used in devices
              such  as read-write optical data storage disks, sensors, and magnetic  memory. 
              This technology has a major impact on the scientific  advancement of computer
              technology and communication. A clear  understanding of the mechanisms involved
              in enhancing the  properties of data storage materials and devices is needed
              for US  industries to remain competitive in this vital area.  The project  will
              investigate the fundamental mechanisms underlying the  enhancement of
              magneto-optical storage and sensor devices.  The  materials to be investigated
              are multilayered films consisting of  alternate layers of magnetic and
              non-magnetic metals.  This  investigation could enhance the ability to
              fabricate new materials  with improved characteristics for the critical
              technological area  of data storage devices.  ***
