Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Regularity Properties of Nonlinear Wave Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9400258

Award Number: 9400258
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergiu Klainerman seri@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400258  Klainerman       A central theme of this mathematical research in the
              theory  of nonlinear partial differential equations of evolution is that  of
              regularity or break-down of solutions to the important  examples which model
              the physical world.  The work concerns not  only what is meant by a solution
              but also understanding from a  physical point of view the very limits of
              validity of the  corresponding physical theories.  This research is directed at
               specific goals in this regard - the development of relevant new  techniques
              such as global stability of the Minkowski  space-time and the analysis of the
              Einstein and other classical  field theories.  A primary goal is to study and
              lower, where  possible, the regularity requirements on the initial data sets 
              which assure that the initial value problem is well posed.   Examples from
              simpler field theories suggest that the question of  finding the optimal norm
              assuring well-posedness is intimately  connected to the issue of break-down and
              regularity of solutions.   A related direction this work will pursue concerns
              the question  of nonlinear stability of the Minkowski metric relative to 
              perturbations in the limited regularity class of the Einstein  vacuum
              equations.       The primary area of this project's research,  nonlinearpartial
              differential equations, is central to the  mostfundamental work currently under
              investigation within  mathematical analysis.  Solutions to nonlinear equations
              have  been shown to posses considerable regularity and the equations 
              themselves exhibit far more structure than was once thought  possible.  This
              project continues some of the most  promising avenues of investigation in the
              field.
