Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic Cycles and the Homotopy Theory of Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1997        
File        : a9400235

Award Number: 9400235
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric M. Friedlander eric@math.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stewart B. Priddy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400235  Friedlander       Friedlander plans to continue his investigation of
              algebraic  cycles, using techniques from algebraic geometry and algebraic 
              topology.  The program of Friedlander and others holds promise in  that it
              introduces a new perspective and imports techniques of  algebraic topology. 
              Several specific avenues of research appear  ripe for further exploration:
              topological filtrations on  algebraic cycles and homology, duality between
              Lawson homology  and morphic cohomology, motivic complexes in the guise of 
              algebraic cycle homology, and Chern classes in the context of  algebraic cycle
              spaces.  In addition to this study of algebraic  cycles, Friedlander will
              continue his efforts to study the  geometry implicit in the cohomology of
              infinitesimal algebraic  groups.  Priddy plans to continue his program to study
              the  homotopy type of classifying spaces of groups and related  constructions. 
              Many of the most important questions in homotopy  theory are related to
              classifying spaces of finite or compact Lie  groups.  Recently there have also
              developed interesting and  powerful connections between topology and group
              theory,  especially the cohomology and modular representation  theory of finite
              groups.  With the solution of the Segal and  Sullivan Conjectures, this area
              has developed rapidly in recent  years to the point where fundamental questions
              are being  answered.  Perhaps the most important of these is to determine  the
              exact relationship between the stable and unstable homotopy  types of a
              classifying space, completed at a prime p, and the  p-local structure of its
              underlying group.       Algebraic geometry is the study of solution sets of 
              polynomial equations (i.e., algebraic varieties) using geometric  techniques. 
              Partial answers to questions in algebraic geometry  have led to progress in
              fields ranging from complexity theory of  computer science to geometric
              topology to number theory.   Friedlander intends to study algebraic varieties,
              using methods  borrowed from algebraic  topology, as well as modern techniques
              of  algebraic geometry.  The use of topology involves the study of 
              continuously varying families of structures, which have  traditionally been
              considered by other means.  The hope is that  these new techniques will offer
              insight into deep and  long-standing problems of algebraic geometry.  Algebraic
              topology  is the study of geometric objects by means of algebraic  techniques. 
              Exciting new developments have led to advances in  group theory, using
              algebraic topology, thus reversing the  direction of the usual flow of
              information.  Groups are the  fundamental symmetries occurring in all sciences,
              including areas  involving codes, and structures in physics.  Priddy hopes that
               this new approach will lead to a better understanding of the  relationship
              between these fields.  ***
