Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1998      
File        : a9400334

Award Number: 9400334
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19835500           (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Silbey silbey@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc A. Kastner  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1039,9146,9161,9163,9164,9178,9218,AMPP,CVIS,HPCC,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The   Materials  Research  Science  and  Engineering  Center  (MRSEC) at the
              Massachusetts Institute of Technolgy supports  interactive   research  in  five
               interdisciplinary   groups  spanning a wide area of materials research..   
              The   group   investigating  microphotonic   materials   and  structures aims
              to explore the fundamental nature, synthesis  and properties of photonic
              bandgap materials, and to exploit  these  properties  for the design and
              fabrication  of  novel  structures  and  devices  for the creation  and 
              control  of  electromagnetic radiation.  The molecular and supermolecular 
              engineering group is developing  the chemistry and molecular  level  processing
               needed  to  control  and  manipulate  the  organization of macromolecular
              systems with novel electronic  and  optical  properties.  The  group 
              investigating  phase  behavior  in the presence of quenched randomness is
              carrying  out experimental and theoretical studies of phase changes in 
              disordered  systems.  Such changes may underlie  fundamental  mechanisms in the
              life sciences, and may have application in  the information sciences.  The
              group studying the structure,  chemistry and  transport  properties  of 
              intercrystalline  interfaces  seeks a unified and comprehensive  understanding 
              of  the role of atomic-level structure, chemistry, and local  electronic 
              structure in determining the physical properties  of   interfaces  between 
              crystals.   The  fifth  group is  investigating the properties of transition
              metal  oxides  in  order  to  guide the development of a theory  of  correlated
               systems  and  ultimately  explain  the  mechanism  of   high  temperature
              superconductivity.    The   MRSEC   supports   the  development, operation and 
              maintenance of shared experimental facilities for  materials  research.  It 
              provides  seed  funding  for exploratory  research, and fosters research
              participation by  undergraduates.    The   center  is   associated  with an 
              educational outreach program with emphasis on attracting  and  retaining women
              and underrepresented minorities in materials  science.  It  also supports a
              science and engineering day  camp  which  is  directed toward seventh  and 
              eighth  grade  students  from  underrepresented  minorities.  The  center 
              administers an  industrial  outreach  program    The  center  currently 
              supports 37 senior investigators, 13 postdoctoral  research associates, 10
              technicians, 39 graduate students,  and 13  undergraduates  who perform
              research as  summer  interns. The MRSEC is directed by Professor Marc A.
              Kastner.
