Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis on Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1994      
File        : a9400772

Award Number: 9400772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Krantz sk@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400772  Krantz       This award supports mathematical research on problems 
              arising in two related areas.  The first concerns the study of  Hodge theory
              for the de Rham complex using different inner  products that the usual
              quadratic one.  The work should provide  new insights into the regularity
              theory for elliptic problems as  well as insight into the structure of the
              harmonic space.  The  Hodge theory for the de Rham complex has important
              geometric  interpretations.  A second project involves the development of 
              special function spaces adapted to specific boundary  value problems on
              specific domains.  Along with recent advances  in operator theory, the idea of
              designing functions for  particular applications should have far-reaching
              applications.   In another direction, work will be don on basic elements of 
              harmonic analysis and function theory on domains in complex  Euclidean space.  
              This includes the theory of hardy spaces,  functions of bounded mean
              oscillation, the corona problem, and  Lipschitz spaces.  An important theme in
              the work focuses on the  geometry of the boundary of the domain and how it
              determines the  function theory on the interior.  In particular questions of 
              boundary uniqueness and rigidity for holomorphic functions and  mappings will
              be taken up.       Partial differential equations form a basis for 
              mathematicalmodeling of the physical world.  The role of  mathematical analysis
              is not so much to create the equations as  it is to provide qualitative and
              quantitative information about  the solutions.  This may include answers to
              questions  about uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In addition, analysis 
              often develops methods for approximation of solutions and  estimates on the
              accuracy of these approximations.  When the  equations are defined over domains
              in several complex variables,  as they are in this project, the scope of the
              work increases  considerably to take into account the large body of existing
              work  available in the study of holomorphic functions of seve ral  complex
              variables and the corresponding domains.  ***
