Title       : Low Temperature Cascade Arc Torch Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9400725

Award Number: 9400725
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hirotsugu Yasuda yasudah@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1049,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              LOW TEMPERATURE CASCADE ARC TORCH POLYMERIZATION    Abstract    Proposal Number:
              CTS-9400725  P.I.: Yasuda  Institution: University of Missouri, Columbia    Low
              temperature plasma polymerization can be utilized in interface engineering to
              create an optimum transition between two different materials.  An excellent
              protection of steel has been achieved by applying a cathodic electrocoating
              (E-coat) primer on an interface-engineered steel panel (plasma polymerization
              of trimethylsilane by means of DC discharge with a pair of anode magnetrons),
              outperforming a zinc phosphated galvanized steel with the same E-coat in a
              corrosion test.  This research is an extension of such an approach to a larger
              scale operation by means of low temperature cascade arc torch (LTCAT)
              polymerization, that delineates many technical limitations of (conventional)
              plasma polymerization processes which hamper applications in large scale
              operations.  The proposed fundamental research is a preparatory step to the
              robotic spray coating of plasma polymers by LTCAT polymerization, which would
              enable engineers to coat large size, complex shape substrates with high
              uniformity  and reproducibility.  The advantages of this approach are that (1)
              the process is capable of coating a large surface area without scaling-up
              problems; i.e., the laboratory scale operation is essentially the same as that
              in a large scale operation, (2) the method can be applied regardless of nature
              and shape of substrate; i.e., it can be used in the surface treatment of
              plastics such as bumpers, and also in interface engineering of steel automobile
              bodies, etc., (3) the application of interface engineering can eliminate many
              conventional (pollution-prone) wet chemical processes such as galvanizing and
              phosphating processes, (4) the interface engineering process does not create
              non-recyclable materials and maintain high recyclability of final products. 
              Fundamentals of cascade arc torch polymerization and the transitional interface
              structure which provides the  maximum benefits of composite materials will be
              investigated at the level of a laboratory pilot scale reactor which employs
              moving (rotating) substrates.  This is an Industry/University Cooperative
              Research Project in which the Marshall Research Laboratory (Automotive
              Products) of the E.I. duPont Company is collaborating with the principal
              investigator at the University of Missouri, Columbia.    REU Supplement   
              Proposal Number: CTS-9442632  Institution: University of Notre Dame    Support
              in the amount of $5,000 is requested in order to support a female undergraduate
              student, Ms. Allison A. Barbeau, who has completed her sophomore year in
              chemical engineering at the University of Notre Dame with a 3.75/4.00
              cumulative grade point average.  She is interested in obtaining research
              experience with Professor Joan F. Brennecke since she is considering going to
              graduate school.  this supplement is in line with the objectives of the REU
              program and ,hence, is recommended by the program officer.
