Title       : Carbohydrate Structure-Function Relationships/Group Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1994  
File        : a9400633

Award Number: 9400633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vernon N. Reinhold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9400633  Reinhold  This  program will address the growing interest in
              carbohydrate function into one administrative  mechanism to address the needs
              of structure.  The collaborating groups have defined functional roles  for
              carbohydrate samples that fall into four research areas: (1) plant
              oligosaccharides involved in  nitrogen fixation and signal transduction; (2
              microbial cell attachment and/or cell activation: (3)  carbohydrate and protein
              anchors: glycolipids and GPI-anchors; and, (4) N-and O-linked  glycoproteins. 
              This Group project consolidates cross-disciplinary problems in carbohydrate
              structure  and involves personnel with analytical expertise and dedicated
              instrumentation for a comprehensive  approach to function.   %%%  Contemporary
              biology is placing greater attention on factors that relate to the interplay of
              cells with  their environment.  Symbiotic nitrogen fixation, plant defense
              mechanisms, immune surveillance,  angiogenesis, cellular differentiation and
              adhesion are events associated with multi-cellular systems.  Here, cell-cell
              interactions, the integrated development and differentiation so characteristic
              of living  tissues, is manifested within an extracellular matrix which depends 
              on membranes, tissue surfaces and  the ordered transport of signals by and
              through these barriers.  Close examination of this complex  cellular milieu
              reveals that they are resplendent with a vast array of glycosylated molecules. 
              The need  to know the detailed structural features of these molecules is
              compelling.  An  understanding of  compound class or component composition has
              little meaning when one is trying to unravel the  biochemistry of cellular
              events or to mimic, stimulate or retard these processes.  This glycosylation is
               fundamental to the proper function of multi-cellular organisms and consistent
              with physiological  demands for greater biological specificity. This Group
              consolidates cross disciplinary problems in  carbohydrate structure and
              involves personnel with analytical expertise  and dedicated instrumentation 
              for a comprehensive approach to function.  ***
