Title       : CRB: Conservation Genetics of Tropical Forest Trees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1997        
File        : a9400147

Award Number: 9400147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kamaljit S. Bawa kamal.bawa@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard V. Kesseli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9400147  Bawa  The overall aim of this proposal is the examine the effect of
              deforestation and forest fragmentation on genetic diversity, gene dispersal,
              and mating patterns in tropical lowland rain forests of Costa Rica. The
              specific goals are to: (1) measure the amount of genetic differentiation in
              tropical tree populations over relatively small spatial scales, (2) ascertain
              if a matrix of fragmented populations possesses the same level of genetic
              diversity as a large forest area of equal size, (3) calculate the levels of
              gene flow in a large contiguous forest, among small fragments, and between
              fragments and large forest reserves, (4) assess the level of inbreeding for
              trees in small fragments and compare this to trees in large contiguous forests,
              and (5) determine if a decline in outbreeding is associated with inbreeding
              depression. Genetic variation will be studies using a variety of genetic
              markers and morphological traits. Simple Sequence Repeats (SSR's) that have
              been developed by the PI for tropical tree species will be used to estimate
              levels of gene flow and inbreeding. SSR's loci are highly variable with a
              tremendous discriminatory power, but have not been used in the study of natural
              populations of plants.  %%%  Deforestation and forest fragmentation are
              ubiquitous in the tropics and are presumed to result in loss of biodiversity,
              including genetic diversity within species. However, there are no estimates of
              loss of genetic diversity within species of tropical forest trees. One reason
              for this lack of knowledge is that the population genetics of tropical trees is
              poorly understood. Moreover, the genetic consequences of forest fragmentation
              depend on the levels of gene exchange among fragments and between fragments and
              large continuous tracts of forest.  The information attained from this research
              will be useful in assessing the impact of deforestation on genetic diversity.
              This research will also provide information about the comparative utility of
              various markers for estimating pop ulation genetic parameters.
