Title       : Preliminary Research on Common-Code Spread-Spectrum Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1994   
File        : a9400628

Award Number: 9400628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Aubrey M. Bush                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Scholtz scholtz@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9400628  Scholtz       Spread spectrum (SS) communications, once a military
              approach  to jam-tolerant modulation design, is now being considered  seriously
              for commercial purposes.  The typical military design,  using a form of SS
              modulation called code-division multiple access  (CDMA), requires that each
              multiple access channel be assigned a  distinct spreading code that makes a
              user's transmission look like  wide-band noise to a receiver attempting to
              listen to another  user's transmission.  This noise, called multiple access
              noise, is  generated in the receiver's correlator, and is related to the cross 
              correlation properties of the signals employed by different users.  It is a
              primary limitation to the multiple access system's  capacity.  Recently
              research has been directed toward a common code  multiple access (CCMA) system
              in which all of the users employ the  same wideband noise like carrier which is
              repeated every baud  interval.  Signals are separated at the receiver simply by
              their  arrival times, because wide bandwidth signals have inherently a  high
              time of arrival resolution capability.  Hence two signals that  are present at
              the same time do not catastrophically interfere  (collide) with each other,
              unless their baud clocks are aligned to  within the reciprocal of the common
              wideband carrier's bandwidth.   If matched filter (correlation) reception is
              used in this  environment ,then the system suffers degradation caused by both 
              multiple access noise and collisions.  In contrast to matched  filter
              reception, inverse filter reception nearly eliminates  multiple access noise in
              the receiver at the cost of a small  delay (a few baud times) in the receiver. 
              Inverse filters have  been developed primarily for RADAR applications.  One
              recent paper  has proposed common code modulation with inverse filtering as a 
              receiver.  The objective of this project is to determine if CCMA  systems with
              inverse filtering as a receiver component are  competitive with or superior to
              traditional CDMA syst ems.  Particular attention will be given to: (a) the
              tradeoff between the  residual multiple access noise and processing delay in an
              inverse  filter receiver, (b) signal design optimization, (c) the effects of 
              multipath and impulsive noise on common code receiver design and  system
              capacity, and (d) approaches to hybridizing CDMA matched  filter systems with
              common code inverse filter systems to obtain a  system that has the stronger
              points of each modulation.  Potential  payoffs include increased system
              capacity because of multiple  access noise elimination, reduced power control
              requirements, and  simpler central receivers, all in a system architecture with
               complexity comparable to current designs.  If the payoffs turn to  be real, a
              new paradigm for multiple access design will result.  ***
