Title       : New Computation Techniques for Shape Modeling and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9400823

Award Number: 9400823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fuhua Cheng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9400823  Cheng       The techniques of shape modeling and design will be
              broadened   and improved.  Computation techniques that combine interpolation  
              and approximation into a single process (called interproximation)   will be
              developed.  The curve and surface  representations that   will be considered
              here include B-splines, NURBS, Beta-splines and   rational Beta-splines. 
              Different ways of building polynomial   (integral) and rational B-spline curves
              and surfaces as well as   their properties when viewed as digital filters will
              be studied.    A general model for the automatic smoothing of sharp corners and
                edges formed by intersecting parametric surfaces in the design and   modeling
              process will be built.  This work will also include   filling an n-sided hole
              with an n-sided patch with n > 3.  A   general model will be developed for the
              automatic smooth connection   of disjoint parametric surfaces.      
              Computational techniques for shape modeling and design are   rapidly becoming
              important tools for modern industrial design and   manufacture.  Computer
              models are replacing physical models.  They   are cheaper to construct, easier
              to change, and simpler to analyze.   Computer-generated images increase
              productivity by allowing rapid   and accurate visualization during design.
              Applications include the  design and manufacture of car bodies, ship hulls,
              airplane wings,  and mechanical parts as well as a large variety of ducts,
              blends,  and fillets.  Many important open theoretical and practical issues 
              need to be explored to provide effective tools for industrial  design.
