Title       : Sea Ice Measurements on the U.S./Canada Arctic Ocean Section
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9400241

Award Number: 9400241
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95855              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter B. Tucker wtucker@crrel.usace.army.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony J. Gow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Debra A. Meese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 5219,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9400241  Tucker  Research supported by this grant is under the auspices of the
              Arctic Systems Science (ARCSS) Global Change Research Program and is jointly
              sponsored by the Division of Ocean Sciences and the Office of Polar Programs. 
              The research will be centered around a unique and intensive, multidisciplinary
              research expedition to parts of the Arctic Ocean that have never been
              extensively studied.  The 1994 U.S./Canada Arctic Ocean Section is a
              collaborative effort with Canada that will involve approximately 60 scientists
              on a Canadian and a U.S. icebreaker during summer 1994.  NSF-funded projects
              will focus on hydrography, biology, paleo-, and sea-ice studies.  Data
              collected will be amongst the first ever from several regions of the Arctic
              Ocean and will be highly relevant to improving our understanding of how the
              Arctic is an indicator of changing global climate conditions and how it affects
              the physical, chemical, and biological features of the more temperate oceans
              and regions.    This project is part of the program that focuses on the
              inter-relationship of sea ice physical and electromagnetic properties.  A two
              stage approach will be undertaken: small-scale detailed studies of the
              different ice types and large-scale surveys to determine their relative areal
              coverage.  Measurements of spectral albedo, bidirectional reflectance and
              wavelength integrated albedo at visible and near-infrared wavelengths will be
              made.  Ice cores will be taken and studied for physical state and structure
              including vertical profiles of temperature, salinity, brine and air volume,
              crystallography, and inclusion size distribution.  These small-scale
              measurements will be done in conjunction with helicopter surveys of active and
              passive microwave observations of the same ice to determine the range of
              physical properties, and to determine the impact of changes in the physical
              properties on electromagnetic signatures.  Helicopter transects, using an
              airborne spectroradiometer, as well as conventional photographic an d video
              cameras will be used to determine a quantitative estimate of large-scale
              albedo, ice concentration, melt pond fraction, and floe size distribution. 
              These large-scale measurements will be linked with small-scale data to provide
              an understanding of the spatial and temporal variability of ice albedo and the
              coupling of shortwave irradiance to ice ablation.  Such measurements are
              critical to our understanding of how the Arctic Ocean stores and reflects heat
              and its influence of climate variability.  ***
