Title       : GEM: Support for the Operation and Analysis of Data from the Induction
               Magnetometer at Iqaluit, NW, Canada: A Conjugate Site to South Pole, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9400664

Award Number: 9400664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Robert Clauer                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22674              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger L. Arnoldy ARNOLDY@UNHESP.UNH.EDU                  603/862-4685  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is a request for funds for the next three years  (remainder of the
              GEM Boundary Layer Campaign) to analyze the data  that is being received from
              an induction magnetometer operating at  Iqaluit, Northwest Territories, Canada
              which is nominally  magnetically conjugate to South Pole, Antarctica.  The
              magnetometer  was built and installed at Iqaluit in June, 1993 with funds  
              provided under the GEM program and Grant # ATM-9111929.  The major  objective
              of the GEM Boundary Layer Campaign is to understand the  interaction of the
              solar wind with the Earth's magnetic field and  the transport of energy across
              dayside boundaries.  Waves are an  important mediator of this transport of
              energy due to the  collisionless nature of the medium in which the boundaries
              are  imbedded.    Induction magnetometers measure the high frequency component 
              (greater than 0.1 Hz) of naturally occurring ULF waves in the  Earth's
              magnetosphere and in the solar wind which cannot be done  with conventional
              magnetometers.  Ground measurement and the study  of these waves in the
              magnetosphere is important because they are  of sufficiently short wavelengths
              to propagate as wave packers in  the Earth's magnetic field.  In such a mode of
              propagation the Pc  1 and Pc 2 waves can be used as probes of the topology of
              the  geomagnetic field and its boundaries.  Their resonant generation by  ions
              and the modification of their propagation by cold plasma  populations,
              indirectly provides a study of these particles.    The location at Iqaluit, MW
              Territories is vital because this site  permits a global study of the ULF waves
              by using several sites in  the Antaractic a which these waves are also measured
              as well as at  the Sondre Stromfjord site in Greenland.  Repetitive structure
              in  the wave form at two opposite hemisphere sites 180 degrees out of  phase
              can be an indication of closed magnetic field lines.  A time  delay between
              sites at different longitudes in either hemisphere  can give scale size and/or
              motion of the source  creating the waves.   Spacecraft making single point
              measurements are hard-pressed to  define boundaries, but done in correlation
              with multiple ground  measurements, as proposed here, one can begin to build a
              global  picture of the important dayside magnetospheric boundaries.  As a 
              result of this correlative work in providing "space-truth", ground 
              measurements in the future can monitor these boundaries and their  dependence
              upon solar wind and, ultimately, solar conditions.
