Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Problems Arising from Theoretical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1994      
File        : a9400243

Award Number: 9400243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daljit S. Ahluwalia                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yisong Yang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400243  YANG      Three main projects are proposed. The first project is a
              study  of the cosmic string solutions of the coupled Einstein and 
              Yang--Mills--Higgs equations. Problems such as the structure of  coupling in
              view of physical constants and gauge groups,  existence and nonexistence of
              regular stationary solutions will  be investigated. Solutions of this type have
              applications in  early universe physics and the theory of galaxy formation. The
               second project is a study of a variational problem arising from a 
              field-theoretical framework of nuclear interactions. The main  problem is to
              minimize an energy functional among all  configuration maps in various homotopy
              classes. The homotopy  class plays the role of a topological constraint which
              takes an  integral form. Existence, regularity, and behavior of the  minimizers
              will be investigated. The third project is a study of  the energy gap equation
              in the Bardeen--Cooper--Schrieffer  microscopic theory of superconductivity.
              Problems such as the  determination of the critical transition temperature, the
               uniqueness of a full space solution, and numerical approximations  of
              superconducting states will be investigated.  The proposed  research considers
              nonlinear problems arising from several  important areas of theoretical
              physics, including  superconductivity, cosmology, and nuclear systems. The 
              mathematical analysis and solutions will help better understand  these
              problems, open new areas of mathematical research, and  enhance the
              interactions of modern mathematics with physics. The  methods developed will
              also be useful and stimulating to other  related fields of applied, numerical,
              and pure mathematics.
