Title       : Development of a Small Helium Liquefier
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1998       
File        : a9400122

Award Number: 9400122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115863             (Estimated)
Investigator: Isaac F. Silvera silvera@physics.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9400122  Silvera    In order to provide liquid helium for a cryogenic laboratory
              with  experiments focused on spin-polarized atomic hydrogen, superfluid 
              helium, and high pressure studies of molecular hydrogen, a small  system
              capable of liquefying at least 24 liters/day with peaks of  40/day is being
              developed.  Experiments are carried out in three  dilution refrigerators, 3He
              refrigerators, and pumped 4He  cryostats.  The sub-kelvin studies are mainly on
              the properties  of spin-polarized atomic hydrogen, the only atomic system that 
              remains gaseous to T=0K.  Experiments include the development of  a microwave
              atom trap working at low temperature, compression of  a gas of hydrogen in
              intense magnetic fields, the formation of a  two-dimensional gas on a surface
              of superfluid helium, and the  study of cryogenic hydrogen maser.  This
              research is aimed at  observing quantum degenerate properties of hydrogen and
              to study  H-H and H-He interactions.  The ultimate goal is to attain Bose- 
              Einstein condensation and superfluidity in a gas; the cryogenic  maser is
              expected to surpass current standards in the measurement  of time and
              frequency.  Experiments at high pressure on molecular  hydrogen and its
              isotopes, D2 and HD are designed to achieve  pressures in the 2-4 megabar.  New
              Phases have been observed at  megabar pressures.  The ultimate goal is to make
              and study  metallic hydrogen, which has been predicted to be a room 
              temperature superconductor.  a rigorous test of metallization is  to show that
              the electrical conductivity remains finite in the  limit that temperature
              approaches zero, requiring liquid helium  temperatures and the combination of
              low temperature techniques  with ultra high pressure diamond anvil cells.   
              The principal liquefier consists of a Gifford-McMahon cryocooler  using a newly
              developed rare earth metal generator to precool  compressed helium gas which is
              liquefied by expansion through a  Joule-Thompson valve.  The estimated
              production is a conservative  1 liter/hour.  The  liquefier is designed to
              operate as a turn-key  system under computer control, requiring little daily 
              maintenance.  Two special cold traps for purifying the helium of  air
              impurities will be computer monitored for alternate switching  into the gas
              stream as they saturate and for automatic  reactivation.  A second system for
              use in high helium consumption  cryogenic experiments will reliquefy or absorb
              the heat load on  the helium reservoir by submerging a refrigerated probe in
              the  helium bath.  This system will be capable of reducing helium  consumption
              by 16 liters/day and can greatly reduce the demand on  the principal liquefier
              in peak periods of helium use.  This  system has potential to impact the
              commercial use of liquid  helium as in magnetic resonance imaging, industrial
              research  laboratories using cryogenic systems, as well as university  teaching
              laboratories.  ***
