Title       : Protein Histidine Phosphorylation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1996       
File        : a9400696

Award Number: 9400696
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry R. Matthews   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9198,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9400696  Matthews  Protein phosphorylation is a pervasive protein modification
              in both  prokaryotic and eucaryotic cells.  A common function of protein 
              phosphorylation is in signal transduction.  In prokaryotes,  phosphohistidine
              formation is a key step in a two-component  regulatory system.  Although signal
              transduction roles for  phosphoserine, phosphothreonine and phosphotyrosine are
              known in  eucaryotes, the phosphohistidine system is poorly characterized.  
              Recently with improved methods for studying phosphohistidine in  proteins, it
              is now clear that histidine kinase and histidine  phosphatases both exist in
              eucaryotic cells.  To begin to  understand the role of histidine
              phosphorylation in these cells, we  will identify protein substrates for the
              enzymes.  Studies will  first determine how much histidine phosphate/protein
              occurs in  cells and how many proteins are involved in this change.  Studies 
              will be performed with Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells.  Proteins  shown to
              contain phosphohistidine will be purified to homogeneity  and their amino acid
              sequence will be determined.  This information  will be used to clone the
              gene(s) for each phosphorylated protein  involved.  Cloned genes will then be
              used to determine the copy  number and the presence of near homologues in
              parent yeast cells.   Cloned genes may also be used as tools in gene disruption
              and over-  expression experiments to get a better understanding of the 
              substrate requirements and metabolic role of protein/histidine  phosphorylation
              eucaryotic cells.  %%%  Most cells respond to external signals.  For example,
              bacteria can  sense the concentration of nutrients and swim in their direction.
                Animal cell growth and development is regulated by hormonal signals  also
              from outside the cell.  The hormonal signal is passed from the  sensor (the
              molecule in the animal cell that detects the signal) to  the receptor (a
              molecule that responds.)  In bacteria, many  different signal systems have been
              described, and one common  feature  of them all is a reversible change in
              chemical structure of  a regulatory protein that links the sensor to the
              effector.  For  example, the change may be the presence, or absence, of a
              phosphate  on a specific histidine in a protein.  Similar protein changes also 
              occur in animal/yeast cells but their role is not as well  understood.  The
              idea in this study is that a specific change, such  as a protein histidine
              phosphorylation, is involved in animal cell  signal  transduction, as in
              bacteria.  To test this, the first aim  of our research is to determine how
              much histidine  phosphate/protein there is in animal/yeast cells, and how many 
              different proteins are histidine phosphorylated.  The histidine  phosphorylated
              proteins will be isolated and cloned.  Finally, the  cloned genes will provide
              the basis for molecular genetic studies  to determine the function(s) of
              protein histidine phosphorylation  in animal cells.  ***
