Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Task Feed- back on Expectations
               for Competence and Status
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1994     
File        : a9400887

Award Number: 9400887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3975               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Berger jberger@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400887  Berger              This is an award under the Grants for Improving
              Doctoral  Dissertation Research Program.  It is an experimental study of  the
              impact of task feedback on expectations for competence and  status.  It is well
              known that small task oriented groups tend to  stratify into consistent
              patterns of participation, task  activity, reward behavior and influence. 
              Recently, theorists  have begun to examine the conditions under which these 
              interaction hierarchies become legitimated or normative for the  members of the
              group.  This study seeks to test the argument,  developed from expectation
              states theory, that feedback on the  outcome of a task will have important
              consequences for the  likelihood of legitimation in subsequent tasks.  The
              likelihood  of legitimation based on initial status is experimentally crossed 
              with the presence or absence of positive external feedback which  increases the
              likelihood of such legitimation occurring.    %%%       This experiment tests
              an important extension of expectation  states theory, which has become highly
              influential in research on  group processes in both sociology and social
              psychology.  This  tradition has contributed in the past to administrative and 
              management science, and we would expect this study to do so as  well.  In
              addition to the scientific gains to be achieved by the  research, this award
              will materially assist a highly promising  student in completing research for
              the Ph.D. dissertation.  Thus  it contributes to the future scientific manpower
              of the nation  and the thorough training of the next generation of social 
              scientists.    ***
