Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Theoretical and Computational Problems in Turbulence and
               Climatology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1996  
File        : a9400615

Award Number: 9400615
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger M. Temam temam@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ciprian I. Foias  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1303,9263,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9400615  Temam    This project will focus on the study of the equations of fluid
               mechanics and turbulence as well as on the development of  efficient numerical
              codes for the solution of these equations.   Part of the project will involve
              the study of turbulence, based  on a dynamical systems approach; according to
              dynamical systems  theory the permanent regime for a turbulent flow is 
              mathematically represented by an attractor that is a compact set  in the phase
              space.  It is hoped that the study of this attractor  can improve understanding
              of the physics of turbulent flows.    The approximation of attractors by smooth
              finite dimensional  manifolds called Approximate Inertial Manifolds (AIMs) is
              part of  this study.  On the one hand these manifolds are related to the 
              concept of slow manifold used in meteorology for data  assimilation.  Used from
              a different point of view in  computational fluid dynamics they lead, on the
              other hand, to new  multi-resolution algorithms and to methods of data
              compression in  scientific computing.  Thus, it is believed that approximations
               of this attractor can lead to efficient new algorithms for the  numerical
              simulation of turbulence.  Finally, a significant part  of the effort will be
              devoted to problems related to climate and  global changes.  Various models for
              climate will be investigated  from the mathematical and computational points of
              view in order  to see how they are connected and what are their domains of 
              validity.  Such models include the primitive equations of the  atmosphere, the
              primitive equations with vertical viscosity, and  the geostrophic and quasi
              geostrophic equations.  Models of this  type will be studied for the atmosphere
              and for the ocean  separately and also for the Coupled system of Atmosphere and
               Ocean (CAO).     The understanding of the equations of fluid mechanics and 
              turbulence as well as the development of efficient numerical  codes for the
              solution of these equations are challenging  problems of considerable
              importance in p articular in industry or  for studies in meteorology or global
              climate change.  The aims  for this project are three fold: (i) to explore what
              can be  learned about these problems from the theoretical and  computational
              viewpoints, using the dynamical systems approach to  turbulence; (ii) to
              develop new efficient computational  algorithms taking into account the physics
              of turbulence and well  adapted to the current evolution of large scale
              computing towards  parallel computing; and (iii) to devote special attention to
              the  problems related to the study of climate and global changes.
