Title       : Investigation of Novel Ground States in Heavy Fermion Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9400755

Award Number: 9400755
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bohdan Andraka andraka@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9400755  Andraka    Technical abstract:  This Condensed Matter Physics Project 
              investigates the physical properties of metallic materials known  loosely as
              heavy-Fermion systems.  The major thrust deals with  cerium and uranium
              compounds and alloys which exhibit non-Fermi-  liquid-like behavior at low
              temperatures.  These materials exhibit  transport or thermodynamic properties
              that differ from ordinary  Fermi-liquid like metals such as copper.  Other
              areas of research  include the cross-over from magnetic to nonmagnetic ground
              states,  materials with low carrier concentrations, effects of the crystal 
              structure and crystal disorder on the formation of heavy-Fermion  states.  A
              special emphasis is placed on those physical systems  which are derivatives of
              heavy-Fermion superconductors.  The  experimental probes include heat capacity
              measurements at zero and  large magnetic fields, magnetic susceptibility and
              magnetization,  electrical resistivity and magnetoresistance as well as 
              collaborative experiments like neutron diffraction, NMR, Hall  effect and
              thermopower.    Non-technical abstract:  This Condensed Matter Physics Project 
              investigates the physical properties of metallic materials known  loosely as
              heavy-Fermion systems.  In these materials the electrons  act differently from
              those in ordinary, or "Fermi-liquid-like"  metals such as copper.  Materials
              being studied include cerium and  uranium.  Some of these materials and their
              alloys have  compositions which exhibit superconductivity which in some ways is
               reminiscent of the high-temperature superconductors.  The heat  capacities,
              electrical transport, response to magnetic fields of  the materials will be
              determined.  The study is of fundamental  interest, as well as technological
              interest in the context of high-  temperature superconductors.  ***
