Title       : U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research: Biophysical and Genetic Studies of
               Flavoprotein Peroxide and Disulfide Reductases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1994     
File        : a9400123

Award Number: 9400123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32875              (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Alexander Claiborne ALC@INVADER.BGSM.WFU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest U Sch of Med
	      Medical Center Blvd
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27157    336/716-4549

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5948,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9400123  Claiborne  This award supports Professor Alexander Claiborne, a 
              postdoctoral associate, and a graduate student, all from Wake  Forest
              University, to collaborate with three complementary  research groups in the
              Department of Biochemistry at Wageningen  Agricultural University in the
              Netherlands.   They will carry  out biophysical and structural studies on
              several flavoproteins  from Streptococcus bacteria, using state of the art
              nuclear  magnetic resonance (NMR) and time resolved fluorescence  techniques. 
              They will also carry out experiments to gain  understanding of the structure
              and genetics of two related  lipoamide dehydrogenases.  The U.S. group has
              developed  extensive experience working with the enzymes in this medically 
              relevant system.  The Dutch investigators have great expertise  and superb
              facilities for biophysical and genetic approaches to  studying flavoprotein
              structure and function.  The Wake Forest  group has excellent complementary
              facilities, but they will  obtain particular benefit from free access to the
              high field  NMR equipment at Wageningen.  Additional interaction with the 
              Netherlands Institute for Dairy Research will strengthen the  understanding of
              the genetics and physiology of streptococcal  oxidative metabolism.   
              Streptococcus has a unique defence against the leukocyte-  mediated
              phagocytosis of bacteria, which is dependent upon  destruction of hydrogen
              peroxide.  The hydrogenase and  peroxidase enzymes being studied by Dr.
              Claiborne and his group  control that defence.  Preliminary studies and
              substantial  advance planning with these Dutch experts have laid a promising 
              foundation for collaborative research on this important system.  The Dutch
              participants are heavily involved in two European  scientific networks
              supported by the European Union.  Their  U.S. collaborators will also benefit
              from links with these  other European experts.  ***
