Title       : U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research on Technology Strategies for Project
               Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1994     
File        : a9400332

Award Number: 9400332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24914              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clyde B. Tatum tatum@cive.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0317000   Urban Technology                        
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,5950,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9400332  Tatum  This award supports Professor C. B. Tatum of the Center for 
              Integrated Facility Engineering (CIFE) of Stanford University  to collaborate
              with Professor H. R. Schalcher and others of  the Center for Integrated
              Planning in Construction (CIPCON)  of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
              in Zurich.   Professor Tatum is a recognized leader in the evaluation, 
              understanding and modeling of innovation and the  introduction of new
              technology in construction engineering.   The Swiss group recently began a
              major research project to  improve construction project performance through 
              integrated planning and communication in the building  process.  They are
              testing this on a major commercial  complex planned for construction in
              Switzerland. The  collaboration provides Dr. Tatum a unique opportunity to 
              extend and refine technologies and organization structures  for implementing
              new technology developed at CIFE by  applying them to the CIPCON project.     A
              major barrier to improved performance in construction  projects is
              fragmentation of activities by functional  specialists over the various stages
              of the project.  Advanced  information technology can assist in meeting this
              major  challenge, but the process of implementing such technology  is poorly
              understood and the effort is frequently  unsuccessful.  This project will
              increase understanding of  approaches for effective use of new technology to
              improve  project performance in the vital construction industry.  The  U.S. has
              given substantial attention to Japanese research  and relatively little to
              European work.  In this area where  European groups are world leaders, Dr.
              Tatum's participation  will provide valuable insight into the European methods
              for  innovation and the introduction of new technologies in their  construction
              industry.  ***
