Title       : Low Energy Spectroscopy of Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0071949

Award Number: 0071949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zack Schlesinger zack@physics.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This condensed matter physics project focuses on the use of infrared and optical
              spectroscopy to study the dynamics of strongly correlated electron systems.
              From infrared reflectivity measurements one can obtain conductivity as a
              function of frequency and temperature, which relates to the two-particle
              electronic correlation function and provides fundamental input to the
              characterization of novel electronic systems. As industry moves toward higher
              speeds, smaller sizes and solutions incorporating novel materials, the
              relevance of strongly correlated systems to technology increases. Compound
              classes to be studied include ruthenium oxides in the Ruddlesden-Popper series,
              ytterbium compounds that exhibit or are close to an electronic phase
              transition, and doped Kondo semiconductors. By studying ruthenates, which are
              related to both cuprate and manganate transition-metal oxides, one can
              investigate the relationship between magnetism and unconventional charge
              transport (e.g. "bad metal behavior"). The Yb compounds in our research exhibit
              a phase diagram that includes heavy-fermion and mixed-valence phenomena, as
              well as an isostructural electronic phase transition. Research on these
              materials can help forge a link between the moment compensation physics of the
              periodic Anderson model and the phase transition dynamics of Mott-Hubbard
              systems. Undergraduate and graduate students involved in this work learn to
              carry out careful measurements utilizing modern equipment and receive valuable
              preparation for graduate school and employment in academic, industrial or
              government research.
%%%
This condensed matter physics project involves the
              characterization of strongly correlated electron systems. In such materials,
              interactions between electrons are very powerful and can induce electronic
              phenomena which are not yet understood. Strong electronic interactions can also
              induce new phases of matter and can lead scientists to new concepts of electron
              transport.  These materials will play an increasingly significant role in
              emerging technologies: as industry moves toward higher speeds and smaller sizes
              and seeks solutions incorporating novel materials, the knowledge base from
              studies of strongly correlated systems becomes increasingly relevant. In this
              research, spectroscopic measurements of infrared, optical and ultra-violet
              reflectivity will be used to obtain conductivity as a function of frequency.
              Such measurements can reveal the fundamental electronic excitations in systems,
              including ruthenium oxides, which exhibit novel transport and magnetic phases;
              Ytterbium compounds, which manifest a phase transition at which the electronic
              valence changes from integer to non-integer values; and iron silicide, a small
              energy gap "Kondo" semiconductor with a very high dielectric coefficient at low
              frequency. Students involved in this research learn to think critically and to
              carry out careful measurements on modern equipment. For undergraduates this
              experience provides valuable preparation for graduate school; for graduate
              students, this training enhances their preparation for a career in teaching,
              industry or government research.  In outreach efforts at K-12 schools with
              substantial underrepresented populations, the PI uses demonstrations of the
              phenomena of strongly correlated systems (e.g. magnetism and superconductivity)
              to embellish presentations on research and education and careers in science.

