Title       : Supramolecular Redox-active and Inactive Systems Derived From Hemilabile Ligands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0071885

Award Number: 0071885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chad A. Mirkin CAMirkin@chem.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research  by Professor Chad Mirkin of the Department of Chemistry at
              Northwestern University on the use of redox-active hemilabile ligands (RHLs) to
              control the coordination sites at transition metal centers.  A series of
              compounds, including polyterthienyl RHL complexes of Ru, will be synthesized
              and their properties studied.  A complimentary approach involving metal rather
              than ligand-centered redox reactions will  be investigated. In addition, a new
              high yield strategy for preparing macrocyclic multimetallic compounds with
              synthetically programmable structures and properties will be implemented. Once
              optimized, this strategy should be useful for virtually any transition
              metal.

The goal of this research is to prepare metal complexes which can be
              electrochemically changed from one state to another with the concurrent release
              or uptake of small molecules.  The utility of these compounds for separations,
              particularly of chiral molecules important to the pharmaceutical industry, will
              be determined, and their application as molecular switches explored.  Although
              not a direct objective of this research, the results could also lead to a
              rational design of materials for catalysts and sensors.  The students involved
              in this project will receive training in both inorganic and analytical
              methodology, and undergraduate participation will be achieved by leveraging an
              existing REU program at Northwestern.


