Title       : Diffusion Processes and Stochastic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0071486

Award Number: 0071486
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Krzysztof Burdzy burdzy@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zhen-Qing Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The PIs study several problems in stochastic analysis. The first problem
              involves reflected Brownian motion in time-dependent domains and the
              corresponding heat equation with the Neumann boundary conditions. The main
              emphasis is on the existence and uniqueness of the solutions to the heat
              equation and the reflected Brownian motion, and on the singularities of the
              heat equation solutions close to the moving boundary. The second part of the
              project is concerned with stochastic flows related to singular stochastic
              differential equations. Flows of this type have interesting combinatorial
              properties not present in flows corresponding to equations with smooth
              coefficients. The "hot spot" conjecture states that hottest point in an
              insulated body lies on its boundary. While this is not true in general, it is a
              widespread belief that the conjecture holds in convex domains. The PIs are
              currently studying symmetric convex domains. Finally, stable processes and
              related processes are studied from the point of view of potential
              theory.
	Stochastic analysis was one of the most important developments on the
              borderline of probability and analysis in the twentieth century. It now
              provides the basis of studying fundamental properties of real life phenomena
              which are random by nature. One of the most spectacular recent successes of the
              theory is the so-called financial mathematics. This theory provides a solid
              theoretical basis for trading securities - its founding fathers were recently
              recognized by a Nobel Prize in Economics. Stable processes, one of the topics
              of the project, are more and more often applied in financial mathematics and
              other applied sciences because the traditional continuous models are not always
              adequate. The study of a singular flow was directly inspired by a collaboration
              of one of the PIs (Burdzy) with economists, published in a leading journal
              "Econometrics." The study of reflected Brownian motion in time dependent
              domains is reminiscent of the "Stefan problem" concerned with melting ice.
              Similar physical models are of great interest to scientists who model real life
              environmental changes.

