Title       : GOALI: Optimization Based Design and Plantwide Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0071320

Award Number: 0071320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203005             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. McAvoy mcavoy@isr.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip D. Schnelle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - McAvoy - 0071320

Plantwide control involves the issue of which
              variables should be measured, controlled, and manipulated, and how these
              variables should be linked together.  For some plants a decentralized
              proportional-integral-derivative (PID) approach produces acceptable results,
              while in others it does not.  At present there is no systematic methodology
              that allows a designer to determine how well a particular plantwide control
              architecture can be expected to perform.  The basic question addressed in this
              research is: given a dynamic process model and expected set point
              changes/disturbances, is a decentralized architecture sufficient for acceptable
              performance, or should an interacting model predictive control (MPC)
              architecture be used for all or part of the plant?

The PI has developed two
              optimization-based approaches to answering this question.  One involves optimal
              control (OC) and it is the focus of the research planned here, while the other
              makes use of a mixed integer linear programming (MILP) formulation.  The
              approach to be studied assumes that a dynamic process model is available, since
              such models are becoming more and more common in practice.  The objective of
              the approach is to extract information from the process model about what type
              of architecture is required to control the plant that the model represents. 
              The PI's OC research used initial state forcing, full state feedback, and it
              required tuning PID feedback and P feedforward controllers for each candidate
              decentralized architecture.  This OC approach was applied successfully to two
              DuPont examples.  The research to be done under this grant uses output
              feedback, step forcing for either set points or loads, and no PID tuning is
              required during the architecture screening process.  The PI plans to apply the
              new methodology to the two DuPont examples, as well as to several other, larger
              plantwide examples.  These other examples include the Tennessee Eastman
              process, a vinyl acetate process, and possibly an HAD process.  Dynamic
              simulation software has been provided by DuPont and by Aspen Technology and
              will be used in this research.  The DuPont collaborators will provide
              assistance in developing model predictive controllers for the processes
              studied.

