Title       : Application of Accretion Disk Wind Models to QSOs /AGN
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0071193

Award Number: 0071193
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209717             (Estimated)
Investigator: Desmond J. Hillier jdh@galah.phyast.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Turnshek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0071235
Olinto, Angela V.
The Origin of the Highest Energy
              Particles

The goal of this project is to conduct theoretical investigations
              into the origin of the highest energy cosmic rays (UHE cosmic rays, with E > 5x
              1019 eV). Using plausible scenarios for the production and propagation of these
              energetic particles (ranging from young neutron star winds to AGNs), Olinto and
              co workers will study several types of acceleration models and also model the
              propagation of different  types of particles which may make up the UHE cosmic
              rays. Using these different models, they will generate predictions (of for
              example energy spectrum and relative isotropy) for comparison with the data
              obtained by such experiments as the Pierre Auger Project, the High Resolution
              Fly's Eye, the Japanese Telescope Array, and the OWL-Airwatch
              experiment.

Occasionally a subatomic particle enters the atmosphere with so
              much energy that it produces a giant cascade of many tens of billions of
              secondary particles which can be observed by very large detectors on Earth. 
              The particles that produce these giant air showers have been accelerated to far
              greater energies than can be achieved with terrestrial machines indicating
              incredibly powerful astronomical accelerators previously unforeseen. The
              explanation for the origin of these highest
energy particles remains unclear
              with a number of possibilities being proposed and constrained as the
              observations accumulate. The possibility that these particles come from the
              edge of the observable Universe is limited by the presence of the microwave
              background that fills all of space
and degrades the energy of such high energy
              particles. The microwave background limits the location of these fantastic
              cosmic accelerators to relatively nearby in cosmological terms. The most
              plausible proposals range from supermassive black holes in centers of nearby
              galaxies to decaying particles left over from the Big Bang. The goal of this
              project is to try and find the answer by studying most plausible proposals in
              detail and model aspects of the propagation from source to Earth. Propagation 
              studies will be intimately related to the knowledge of magnetic fields in the
              largest scales presently observed and particle physics models of interactions
              at the highest energies. Among plausible sources, we will investigate many
              models ranging from the most nearby possibility that these particles are iron
              accelerated in young neutron stars in the disk of our own Galaxy to the
              possible effects of large extra-dimensions on the physics of ultra-high
energy
              cosmic rays.  
Funding for this project  is provided by the NSF program for
              Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).

***




