Title       : Inference in Heteroscedastic Nonlinear Time Series Under Long Memory With
               Applications to Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0071619

Award Number: 0071619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hira L. Koul koul@stt.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard T. Baillie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT ABSTRACT:

In physical sciences, economics, and finance many
              realizations of discrete time series exhibit long memory, i.e., their
              autocovariances as a function of lag decrease to zero at a hyperbolic rate as
              the lag approaches to infinity.  Such processes have unbounded spectral
              densities at the origin.  A part of this proposal is concerned with developing
              asymptotically optimal and robust estimators for heteroscedastic, non-smooth,
              non-linear time series models in the presence of regression or explanatory
              covariates that may have long memory, in a semi-parametric setting.  In
              particular, it is planned to obtain the limits of the experiments generated by
              the non-smooth autoregressive models when there are long memory explanatory
              variables present in these models and when the error distributions are unknown.
               In the second part, the PI/Co-PI propose to develop asymptotically
              distribution free tests for fitting a parametric autoregressive mean and/or
              quantile function to a heteroscedastic stationary ergodic time series.  These
              tests are expected to be functions of certain martingale transforms of a
              partial sum processes that do notinvolve nonparametric curve estimation. 
              PI/Co-PI also plan to carry out a comparative study with some of the existing
              tests.  The results obtained will be used to estimate parameters of interest
              and test theories relevant to problems in financial economics.

A data set is
              said to have long memory if an association between distant observations is
              slowly decaying but persistent, as the distance between observations increases.
               A data set observed over a period of time is called a time series.  A
              heteroscedastic time series is one where the conditional variability of an
              observation at the current time, given the past, depends on the past.  Such
              data often arises in economics, finance, and physical sciences.  In particular,
              an important example of long memory heteroscedastic time series is  the
              volatility process in spot returns. It is also known that this volatility
              increases with bank interventions in currency markets.  This intervention
              process is highly non-smooth time series since it is zero most of the times
              with certain bursts over some times.  Part of the emphasis of the proposal is
              on developing optimal inferential procedures in a class of non-smooth
              non-linear heteroscedastic time series models.  Another part emphasizes
              application of the results obtained to develop new tests of market efficiency
              and estimates of time dependent risk premium in financial economics and high
              frequency data mentioned in the proposal pertaining to German Mark and Swiss
              Frank vs. US Dollar exchange rates and commodity prices.  



