Title       : Experimental Studies of the Edge-State Sheath on Quantum Hall Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0071956

Award Number: 0071956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elisabeth G. Gwinn bgwinn@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates a new type of two-dimensional (2D) system, the sheath
              of edge-states that emerges in the quantum Hall regime of semiconductor
              multilayers. The edge-state sheath forms from coupling of the edge states at
              the perimeters of modulation-doped GaAs quantum wells in GaAs/AlGaAs
              multilayers. Theory predicts that the highly anisotropic transport on the
              edge-state sheath (chiral flow around the layer planes, coupled with diffusion
              perpendicular to the layers) should make the interplay of disorder and
              interactions qualitatively different than in conventional, all-diffusive 2D
              systems. Low-temperature, high-magnetic-field measurements of electrical
              transport in multilayer samples of different sizes, shapes, and interlayer
              coupling strengths will test these predictions, which include distinctive
              changes in edge-state sheath properties with sample geometry. These studies of
              a new class of two-dimensional system can advance understanding of a central
              problem in condensed matter physics: electrical transport in disordered,
              low-dimensional and anisotropic materials, such as Bechgaard salts and chiral
              phases of carbon nanotubes. The graduate and undergraduate students who work on
              these experiments will be trained in state-of-the-art experimental techniques
              in cryogenics, low-noise electronic measurements, and modern semiconductor
              processing. This knowledge base will prepare them for science and engineering
              careers in academia, industry, and government. 
%%%
In conventional
              two-dimensional (2D) conducting sheets, electrons move randomly in both
              directions. This project investigates a new type of 2D system, in which
              electrons move randomly in one direction, but travel only one way, with uniform
              velocity, in the other direction. This "edge-state sheath" is a 2D skin that
              runs around the sides of multi-layered GaAs/AlGaAs semiconductor structures, in
              the regime of the quantum Hall effect. Theory predicts that the anisotropic
              flow of electrons on the edge-state sheath should make effects of
              imperfections, and of interactions between electrons, qualitatively different
              than in conventional 2D materials. Low-temperature, high-magnetic-field
              measurements of how electricity flows through edge-state sheaths on GaAs/AlGaAs
              samples of different sizes and shapes will test predictions for distinctive,
              geometry-dependent effects. It is important to study such anisotropy-induced
              phenomena, because imperfections and interactions have large, complex effects
              in anisotropic, low-dimensional materials of emerging technological importance,
              such as high temperature superconductors and carbon nanotubes. The graduate and
              undergraduate students who work on these experiments will be trained in
              state-of-the-art experimental techniques in cryogenics, low-noise electronic
              measurements, and modern semiconductor processing. This knowledge base will
              prepare them for science and engineering careers in academia, industry, and
              government. 




