Title       : Experimental Partnership-Experimental Research in Speculative Multithreading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0071924

Award Number: 0071924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory R. Andrews                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1859948            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gurindar S. Sohi sohi@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1659,1661,4725,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0071924
Gurindar S. Sohi
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Experimental
              Partnership-Experimental Research in Speculative Multithreading

Speculative
              threads do not depend on conservative guarantees of safe data communications
              among threads.  Rather, threads are dispatched speculatively, and data can be
              communicated speculatively. i.e. by assuming that it is correct.  Incorrect
              speculations are detected later, and whenever they occur, recovery is under
              taken to assure correctness.   This less conservative approach to defining and
              dispatching threads find parallelism in ways that conservative methods
              cannot.

In this research, the principal investigators will build a
              comprehensive, integrated experimental infrastructure and use it to carry out
              an investigation of issues related to the design of speculative multithreaded
              processors. Along with their graduate students the principal investigators will
              conduct experimental research in speculative multithreaded processors.  Modern
              parallel processing systems decompose a program into multiple threads that
              execute in parallel to provide high performance.  The convention method is to
              specify parallel threads where all communication of data is carefully
              synchronized to guarantee correctness a priori.  This approach often means that
              a conservative approach must be used to provide the necessary guarantees, there
              by constraining parallelism.  

Using this infrastructure, the investigators
              will conduct experimental research in three primary areas.

(1) Speculative
              Thread Identification and Usage.   This will include conventional
              "control-driven" threads where the focus will be on new opportunities provided
              by object-oriented programs and commercial workloads.  It will also include
              "data-driven" threads, a new form of speculative thread, which promises to open
              new opportunities for extracting parallelism from conventional programs.

(2)
              Software/Hardware Interaction.  Dynamic program characteristics of threads are
              likely to be critical
for managing their identification, scheduling, and data
              communication.  Dynamic linking will be done as well, in many large
              network-based applications and will very much limit the static compiler's view.
                 The investigators will research new methods by which hardware and software
              can interact to compile and execute speculative multithreaded programs.  This
              will include architecture features to permit efficient communication and the
              use of dynamic profiling and re-compilation techniques.

(3) Hybrid "Mixed
              Thread" Processing.   In future processors and systems, it is likely that
              several thread types will co-exist.  This includes the speculative threads that
              are the central focus of the proposed research.  It also includes the
              traditional non-speculative threads, which may be either explicitly programmed
              or implicitly extracted b software compilation tools and/or hardware. 
              Consequently, processors and systems that integrate the complementary thread
              types into a cohesive "mixed thread" processing model will be developed and
              studied.

