Title       : RUI: Galaxy Construction and Destruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a0071149

Award Number: 0071149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58578              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. West   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1217,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              AST-0071149
WEST

The genesis of galaxies is one of the great outstanding
              problems in modern astrophysics. How and when did galaxies form?  How have the
              galaxies evolved over time? How does environment influence galaxy properties? 
              One way to unravel the secrets of galaxy formation is by studying their
              globular cluster systems.  Globular clusters are dense aggregates of up to a
              million stars that are found in the halos of most galaxies. They are believed
              to be among the oldest stellar ensembles in the universe, most likely predating
              the formation of their parent galaxies. As such, these fossil remains from the
              early universe may provide important clues about the birth of galaxies.  Once
              galaxies have formed, they are subject to collisions, mergers, and partial or
              even total destruction from interactions with other galaxies. For example,
              large galaxies may grow by devouring smaller galaxy companions in an act of
              galactic cannibalism. Furthermore, material torn from galaxies during
              collisions may eventually be incorporated into other new or existing galaxies,
              a sort of recycling on cosmic scales. The birth and death of galaxies thus
              appear to be interwoven.	Over the past few years, astronomers have been
              pursuing a number of original lines of research, both observational and
              theoretical, to understand the construction and destruction of galaxies. The
              goals of this research project are to continue and expand upon previous
              successes.  Specific goals of this research project are:

To analyze the
              globular cluster metallicity distributions in a large sample of galaxies in
              order to place quantitative constraints on the previous merger histories of
              these galaxies. Using a recently adapted modeling technique, it is now possible
              to determine what fraction of the present-day luminosity of a galaxy has been
              inherited from other galaxies via mergers and/or accretion of tidally stripped
              material. It is now possible to determine more precisely how of this sort of
              merging has occurred, using globular clusters as a diagnostic.

To search for
              an expected population of intergalactic globular clusters which do not belong
              to any particular galaxy, but rather roam freely throughout the cores of rich
              galaxy clusters such as Virgo and Coma. Such a population of intergalactic
              globular clusters must surely exist, a consequence of galaxy tidal
              interactions, which remove stars and globular clusters and spread them
              throughout intergalactic space. This goal of the project is to search for this
              expected population of intergalactic globular clusters using data from major
              ground-based observatories and upcoming Hubble Space Telescope
              observations.

An ongoing wide-field, multi-color imaging survey of the Coma
              cluster of galaxies, the most ambitious cluster survey ever undertaken, will be
              continued.   Among the goals are to provide a definitive measurement of the
              luminosity function of the Coma cluster galaxies, and to search for the faint
              remains of galaxies, which have been tidally disrupted by their passage through
              Coma's core. This survey will provide an extremely rich database that can be
              used for many years.

The research program will involve a number of
              collaborators at different universities and will include undergraduate
              astronomy students at the University of Hawaii at Hilo.

This project is
              funded by the Division of Astronomical Sciences.

***

