Title       : Novel Colloidal Routes to Photonic Band Gap Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0071645

Award Number: 0071645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395908             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer A. Lewis jalewis@staff.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Braun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen G. Bishop  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research project will develop patternable, 3-D photonic band gap (PBG)
              materials.  Such systems will be templated from hard-sphere colloidal crystals
              assembled epitaxially from depletion-stabilized silica suspensions of varying
              chemistry, functionality, and size.  Through photopolymerization of functional
              groups grafted onto the silica particle surfaces or of the surrounding aqueous
              matrix, the assemblies will be patterned to embed critical features (e.g.,
              waveguides) needed for device applications.  Formation of PBG structures with
              the desired optical contrast will be created by infilling as-grown colloidal
              crystals with a high refractive index material followed by removal of the
              colloidal template.  Finally, the photonic properties of these novel PBG
              materials will be measured experimentally and compared to theoretically
              predicted behavior.   Engineering patternable 3-D PBG structures requires an
              interdisciplinary effort that brings together researchers in the fields of
              colloid science, materials synthesis, PBG fabrication, and photonic properties.
               Hard-sphere colloidal crystals that serve as templates for PBG structures will
              be assembled from depletion-stabilized suspensions of bare, uncharged silica
              spheres of varying functionality.  Colloidal epitaxy will be implemented to
              achieve the desired fcc crystal structure. The assemblies will then be gelled
              in situ by a photopolymerization process induced via confocal lithography.  The
              patterned assemblies will be infitrated with rare earth doped chalcogenide
              glasses.  The photonic properties of the resulting inverse fcc structures will
              be characterized with respect to their PBG structure, wave guiding nature, and
              luminescence. 

Successful implementation of this multidisciplinary research
              project will lead to new scientific understanding in several key areas. 
              Fundamental knowledge of depletion-enhanced colloidal crystallization, the
              mechanical and rheological properties of colloidal assemblies, and important
              discoveries in the patterning, drying, and infiltration behavior of colloidal
              crystals, and their photonic properties are expected.  These results should
              have broad impact on colloidal processing of ceramics, fabrication of porous
              materials for related applications including catalysts, membranes and
              biostructures, and on the technologically significant area of photonic band gap
              materials needed for the next generation of information technology. 

