Title       : Measuring Cosmological Parameters in an Imperfect Universe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0071213

Award Number: 0071213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244108             (Estimated)
Investigator: Max E. Tegmark max@physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1206,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Tegmark
AST-0071213

Progress in detector, space and computer technology has
              triggered an avalanche of high-quality
cosmological data from ongoing and
              upcoming experiments. However, the accuracy of present and upcoming
              measurements of cosmological parameters is limited by real-world headaches such
              as parameter degeneracies, microwave foregrounds, galaxy bias, and a long list
              of possible systematic errors. To take full advantage of the avalanche of great
              new data, the new higher level of ambition for precision cosmology must
              therefore be matched by a corresponding improvement in our understanding of
              these murky and often unpleasant issues. This is the purpose of the present
              proposal: to apply a number of recently developed techniques to currently
              available data sets to address a range of such real-world issues.

The
              proposed work has the following main objectives: using the results of
              measurements of the Cosmic Microwave Background radiation field, Large Scale
              Structure surveys, and the recent SNIa surveys,:
1. To compute joint
              constraints of all relevant cosmological constraints on the following ten
              cosmological parameters : Baryon density, Cold dark matter density , Massive
              neutrino density , Contribution from vacuum energy , Reionization optical
              depth, Spatial curvature k , Spectral index of scalar fluctuations, Spectral
              index of gravity waves, Primordial fluctuation amplitude, and the Relative
              amplitude of gravity waves, and to study the robustness of these results with
              respect to problems with the various input data sets.
2. To compare
              overlapping CMB experiments to assess the levels of systematic problems,
              relative calibration errors and frequency-dependent foreground contamination,
              to combine consistent data sets into a single larger foreground-cleaned map and
              to compute its power spectrum with uncorrelated error bars.
3. To reanalyze a
              number of key galaxy redshift surveys in a uniform way using the new
              Schlegel,
Davis & Finkbeiner extinction maps and a matrix-based analysis
              technique that allows an
exact calculation of window functions, including the
              so-called integral constraint, as well as
the production of a power spectrum
              with uncorrelated error bars. This analysis will also
include the
              complications of scale-dependent stochastic bias, using redshift-space
              distortions.
Funding for this project was provided by the NSF program for
              Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***


