Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impact of Restructuring on Nurses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a0071071

Award Number: 0071071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4738               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary-Jo DelVecchio Good maryjo_good@hms.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 

DelVecchio Good



In the hope of gaining a competitive edge,
              various hospitals have responded with mergers, organized delivery systems, and
              other reorganization strategies to challenges posed by managed care. While some
              of these strategies prove financially prudent, we know very little about the
              consequences of reorganization strategies for hospital workers and for patient
              care.  This dissertation research addresses this knowledge gap through an
              examination of the impact of hospital reorganization on staff registered
              nurses.

This research explores the impact of these changes on hospital
              nurses and nursing care.  It uses a combination of official hospital
              documentation, interviews, focus groups, surveys, and observation to explore
              nurses' perceptions and daily experience of these changes. The questions it
              seeks to answer are:  What changes have been introduced that affect nurses'
              everyday work?  How have these new arrangements affected the official role that
              nurses play in the hospital as a whole as well as within their individual
              departments?  How have nurses and other hospital employees reacted to these
              changes, and how have these responses affected the working relationships
              between different professional groups in the hospital? Most importantly, how
              have the altered organizational arrangements influenced nurses' ability to care
              for patients in a professional and responsible manner?




