Title       : Fluctuations Near Bifurcations in Spatially Extended Systems Far from
               Equilibrium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0071328

Award Number: 0071328
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guenter Ahlers guenter@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This experimental condensed matter physics project deals with nonlinear pattern
              formation in fluids and liquid crystals. Convection occurs in normal fluids
              when temperature gradients exceed a critical value. Electroconvection occurs in
              liquid crystals when the electric field gradient exceeds a critical value.
              Thermodynamic properties such as density become spatially and temporarily
              varying, a variation known as a "pattern". The appearance of a nonequilibrium
              driven pattern is known as a bifurcation, which can be characterized by its
              amplitude, wavenumber, correlation length, and correlation time. The latter
              parameters amount to a generalized order parameter e. This project will study
              bifurcations very close to the critical gradients in the fluids. In analogy to
              equilibrium critical phenomena, nonlinear interactions between the fluctuations
              should "renormalize" the order parameter exponents sufficiently close to the
              bifurcation where the fluctuation amplitudes become large. Experimentally, this
              bifurcation critical behavior has not yet been observed in nonequilibrium
              systems. Theoretical predictions based on renormalization-group methods exist
              and will be tested by these experiments. In addition to fluctuation
              renormalization, a subset of the project will measure heat transport
              Rayleigh-Bernard convection. These experiments will be of interest in the
              context of recent turbulence measurements in a range of fluids, including
              cryogenic helium near its critical point. The experiments provide excellent
              training for undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral associates in
              sophisticated measurement techniques that will prepare them for a range of
              careers in academe, industry or government. 
%%%
This experimental condensed
              matter physics project will investigate patterns that develop in fluids and
              liquid crystals, as the former are exposed to thermal gradients and the latter
              are exposed to an electric field gradient. The time and space varying patterns
              are analogous to those that can be seen in a pan that is heated from below. At
              a certain temperature, density fluctuations in the water cause swirling
              patterns to develop. This project will characterize these patterns, or
              bifurcations as they are known, in a carefully chosen liquid crystal that is
              exposed to an electric field gradient. Because of the great experimental
              difficulty in controlling temperature and monitoring the bifurcation pattern,
              these will be the first experiments of their kind. The results will test
              predictions of an important theoretical technique known as the
              renormalization-group method (the invention of which merited a Nobel Prize).
              The experiments provide excellent training for undergraduates, graduate
              students and postdoctoral associates in sophisticated measurement techniques
              that will prepare them for a range of careers in academe, industry or
              government.


