Title       : Stability Theory of Nonlinear Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0071838

Award Number: 0071838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156201             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter A. Strauss wstrauss@math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0071838
Mathematical Sciences: Stability Theory of
              Nonlinear Waves

Abstract

0071838  Strauss


This project studies
              mathematical models of various kinds of waves that occur in the theories of
              plasmas, of semiconductors, of fluids, of mechanical vibrations and of other
              branches of physical science.  The rigorous mathematics makes it possible both
              to make stable numerical computations in, and to understand the qualitative
              features of, such physical phenomena.  Stability and instability phenomena are
              investigated, particularly in the kinetic theory of charged 
particles. 
              Numerical simulation of semiconducting materials provides the rationale for a
              study of hybrid quantum-kinetic modeling.  Stability problems for a variety of
              other kinds of waves, such as 
solitary waves in fluids and equilibria in
              solids, are also explored.  Energy conserving waves of marginal stability,
              which occur in many of these scientific theories, are emphasized.  Methods of
              mathematical analysis are the primary tool employed in the
              investigations.

One purpose of this project is to analyze the structure of
              semiconducting materials that are used to manufacture computer chips.  As chips
              become smaller, quantum effects become increasingly important.  Since
              simulation of the quantum mechanics of an entire device is computationally
              infeasible, this project investigates hybrid models combining macroscopic
              kinetic theory for the bulk of a device with quantum descriptions in localized
              regions.  Another goal of the project is to study the stability of physical
              plasmas, important in the shielding effect of the earth's ionosphere as well as
              in fusion reactors.  The development of personnel, including graduate and
              undergraduate students, who are trained in the precise mathematical analysis of
              applied scientific problems, is an important outgrowth of the project.  


