Title       : FRG: Quantum Engineering of Metallic Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0071893

Award Number: 0071893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $649950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chih-Kang Shih Shih@physics.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Qian Niu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian A. Korgel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zhenyu Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1682,9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses effects of quantum confinement on epitaxial growth of
              metal/semiconductor thin films and nanostructures. The approach is a combined
              theory/experiment collaborative activity among researchers at U. Tx/Austin and
              ORNL, and is aimed at greater understanding and utilization of an "electronic
              growth" concept. To date, the main findings of the "electronic growth" model
              are that a competition between quantum confinement, charge spilling, and
              interface-induced electron density os-cillations can make a flat ultrathin
              metal film critically, magically, marginally stable, or totally unstable
              against morphological roughening. For Ag on GaAs and other III-V semiconductor
              substrates, the electronic growth mechanism leads to the existence of a
              critical thickness for the formation of an atomically flat film. Theoretical
              studies also showed the existence of magic thicknesses for other
              metal/semiconductor systems, and the possibility of oscillatory metal-nonmetal
              transitions.  The theo-retical and experimental scope of this project will
              include quantum effects in both the vertical and lat-eral directions and the
              interplay between thermodynamic and kinetic factors. The goal is to gain a
              deeper understanding of the pathways of the electronic mechanism for film
              growth, and to achieve controlled formation of lower-dimensional structures.
              The possibility of using electronic energetics as-sociated with quantum states
              and charge quantization to influence geometric ordering and size selec-tion of
              quantum dot arrays will also be explored. Theoretical predictions of
              critical/magic thicknesses and oscillatory metal-nonmetal transitions in a
              variety of systems will be studied experimentally.
%%% 
The project addresses
              basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with high
              technologi-cal relevance. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the
              research is expected to contrib-ute to next generation electronic/photonic
              materials.  An important feature of the program is the inte-gration of research
              and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologi-cally significant area. The project is co-supported by the DMR/EM
              and DMR/MET programs.

