Title       : RUI: Computational Studies of Spin-Polarized Quantum Fluids and Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2001     
File        : a0071706

Award Number: 0071706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Ragan ragan.robe@uwlax.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin La Crosse
	      1725 State Street
	      La Crosse, WI  546013742    608/785-8000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0071706
Ragan
This is an RUI award to support numerical and analytical
              approaches to study the spin dynamics of paramagnetic quantum fluids and
              solids.  The research consists of two parts: analysis of spin-wave
              instabilities in spin-echo experiments, and computer simulation of spin
              diffusion in solid helium-3.  The first part involves the detailed computer
              simulation and analysis of NMR experiments currently being planned at the
              National High Magnetic Field Laboratory to detect the long predicted, and
              recently disputed, zero temperature attenuation of transverse spin currents in
              spin-polarized Fermi liquids.  This effort builds on previous progress and the
              results should be key in assessing the validity of data obtained in future
              experiments at ultra-low temperatures and high magnetic fields.  The second
              project will lend computational support to recent attempts by Cowan and Mullin
              to use linear response theory to calculate spin diffusion coefficients in
              spin-polarized solid helium-3.  In the calculation, a method originated by Kubo
              is used to relate the long-time diffusive behavior of the spin-correlation
              function to the local interactions at microscopic time scales.  The goal of
              this project is to assess the validity of this method by calculating the spin
              correlation function using molecular dynamics simulations from initial
              conditions  generated with Monte Carlo techniques.  The bulk of the
              computations will be performed on the IBM SP at the San Diego Supercomputer
              Center.  Undergraduates will participate in these calculations as part of the
              university commitment to undergraduate research participation and as part of
              the Computational Physics Emphasis.
%%%
This is an RUI award to support
              numerical and analytical approaches to study the spin dynamics of paramagnetic
              quantum fluids and solids.  The research consists of two parts: analysis of
              spin-wave instabilities in spin-echo experiments, and computer simulation of
              spin diffusion in solid helium-3. Undergraduates will participate in these
              calculations as part of the university commitment to undergraduate research
              participation and as part of the Computational Physics Emphasis.
***



