Title       : Cobalt-Mediated Syntheses of Molecules of Theoretical and Synthetic Importance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0071887

Award Number: 0071887
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $824000             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Peter C. Vollhardt kpcv@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the use of transition metals to assemble highly
              energetic alkyne precursors which are then subjected to oligocyclizations and
              subsequent transformations which result in the preparation of phenylenes.  The
              phenylenes have linear, angular, C3-symmetric, circular, bent and "zigzag"
              topologies and, thus, remarkable physical and chemical properties.  The goals
              of the current project include the investigation of the chemistry of the
              phenylenes, in particular: to dissect pi and sigma electronic contributions to
              strain; to establish redox, charge transfer and self assembly behavior to
              discover the potential of phenylenes for use as building blocks for magnetic
              and electronic devices; to investigate fundamental organometallic reactions and
              unimolecular thermal isomerizations; to prepare novel members in the series and
              to progress towards larger unique carbon networks; to construct theoretically
              important hydrocarbons; and to expand the series to include heterocyclic
              analogs.

With this renewal award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
              Program is supporting the research of Dr. K. Peter C. Vollhardt of the
              Department of Chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley.  Professor
              Vollhardt  will focus his work on the use of transition metal mediated
              transformations for the synthesis of a number of highly energetic and
              topologically interesting benzenoid hydrocarbons.  The research has the
              potential to exert an impact on the area of magnetic and conducting materials
              and it also serves as an excellent training ground for the education of
              graduate students and postdoctoral participants.
