Title       : Toda lattices and Toric varieties for real semisimple Lie algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0071523

Award Number: 0071523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153598             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luis Casian   (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuji Kodama  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0071523
Luis Casian

     This project concerns the topology (integral
              homology, cohomology and cell decompositions) of certain real toric varieties
              that arise when isospectral manifolds of a (signed) Toda lattice are
              compactified.  The Toda lattice can be solved explicitly as an integrable
              hamiltonian system, but the geometrical feature of the solutions has not been
              clarified.  In Lie-theoretic terms, these toric varieties consist of closures
              of generic orbits of a split Cartan Subgroup acting on a real flag manifold of
              a semisimple Lie algebra.  An interesting problem is then to describe, in
              detail, their structure, which has some similarities with the structure of real
              flag manifolds.  The topology of these varieties is well-known in the complex
              case; however the real case poses new difficulties which have not been tackled
              before.  Extensions of this main problem are also considered which include some
              Kac-Moody versions of the original problem, the full Kostant-Toda lattice and,
              in general, the structure of real flag manifolds.

     The study of these
              toric varieties is physically motivated by the appearance of the indefinite
              (signed) Toda lattices in the context of symmetry reduction of the
              Wess-Zumino-Novikow-Witten (WZNW) model which is one of the most important
              model equation for conformal field theory.  The toric varieties under Study can
              then be seen to give a concrete description of (an expected) regularization of
              the integral manifolds of these indefinite Toda lattices, where infinities
              (i.e. blow up points) of the solutions of these Toda systems glue everything
              into a smooth compact manifold.  Also the study of isospectral manifolds of the
              Toda lattices is useful to understand the geometry of matrix eigenvalue
              algorithm based on QR or LU factorization.  The present project will clarify a
              global aspect of the integrable systems

