Title       : Long Range Dependence, Heavy Tails and Communication Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2002     
File        : a0071073

Award Number: 0071073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sidney I. Resnick resnick@orie.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gennady Samorodnitsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project is centered on connections between long range dependence and heavy
              tails. The primary application areas are data networks, finance, actuarial
              research and industrial engineering. The project includes a consideration of
              statistical issues related to detection of long range dependence,
              self-similarity and multifractality as well as fundamental issues of basic
              concepts being inadequately defined. For instance, long range dependence is
              often defined in terms of correlations but these may be either undefined due to
              the presence of heavy tails or for non-Gaussian processes rather uninformative.
              
	Our society is a fast moving and changing one, with ever increasing amounts
              of information being moved from one end of the country to the other. Dramatic
              technological and scientific advances are, often, day-to-day phenomena. The
              stock market is very volatile. The Internet and other communication networks
              are susceptible to overloads and delays and because of their crucial role in
              our economic and public life, one needs to be concerned with their performance.
              Appropriate models are required to make sense of these wildly oscillating
              processes. This project is centered on models appropriate to understanding and
              controlling these phenomena-- models with heavy tails and/or long range
              dependence.   
