Title       : Developing National Indicators of Equitable Access to Information Technology in
               the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a0071917

Award Number: 0071917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Derek L. Hill                           
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria C. Papadakis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 1502
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 8804      SCIENCE & ENGINEERNG INDICATRS
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop prototype quantitative indicators that measure access
              to information technologies (IT) in the United States.  These indicators will
              measure access to IT in terms of point of access (i.e., work, home, and
              libraries), demographics (i.e., income, education, race and ethnicity), and
              technological capability (i.e., computer and modem speed, internet access,
              software and media).  The PI will utilize data from government, commercial, and
              non-profit sources.  These indicators will help in the evaluation of the
              so-called "digital divide"--the social and economic disadvantages of lacking
              access to information in a knowledge-based economy.  These indicators are of
              particular significance to the National Science Board, the Divsion of Science
              Resources Studies, the broader U. S. policy community, and scholars.  The
              project will aim to synthesize the theory and empirical evidence regarding the
              impacts of information inequalities on information and society, develop
              prototype indicators of IT equity in the United States, and evaluate the
              potential for an IT equity indicators program.  The key expected outcomes are a
              set of prototype IT equity indicators and detailed instructions about the
              construction of the measures, the data available to calculate the measures, and
              the institutional and data collection requirements for an on-going effort in
              this area.
