Title       : Gravitational Lens Studies of Mass Distributions, Cosmology, and Supermassive
               Black Holes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0071181

Award Number: 0071181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257430             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline N. Hewitt jhewitt@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1206,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hewitt
AST-0071181

The goal of this proposal is to use gravitational lensing
              of high redshift radio sources to study cosmology and the mass distribution
              within galaxies which act as lenses.  The program has several aspects: (1) Use
              of the VLA to identify ~ 10 additional strong lenses in the south. 2) use of
              the VLA and VLBA to monitor several lenses to measure time delays, and thus
              constrain Ho (and with statistics on 10 or more sources) also constrain lambda
              (3) modeling of galaxy mass distributions, using new modeling techniques based
              on Taylor expansions of the gravitational potential and (4) searching for
              supermassive black holes in the centers of lensing galaxies intermediate z
              galaxies by imaging the expected faint second images of extended background
              radio galaxies with the VLBA. The lensing technique provides a  method for
              determining Ho and lambda which is independent of the more classical magnitude
              distance methods.


Gravitational lensing occurs when radiation from a
              background astrophysical source passes by a foreground massive object. A
              special case is "strong lensing" where more than one image of the background
              source is produced. Strong lensing provides a unique laboratory for probing
              mass distributions, the geometry of the space between the source and the
              observer (cosmology) This work will carry out studies of gravitational lensing
              with the goal of measuring the distance scale and probing the geometry of the
              universe, investigating the mass distribution in galaxies, and determining
              whether intermediate-redshift galaxies harbor supermassive black holes at their
              centers. To do this we need a large, well understood, sample of lenses. A large
              radio survey of the southern sky, aimed at identifying new gravitational lens
              systems, we expect to identify between 5 and 10 new lens systems. Applying lens
              systems to the astrophysics problems listed above requires several related
              observational and theoretical programs. With the goal of measuring time delays,
              monitoring observations of newly identified lens systems, and of some known
              systems for which time delays have not yet been measured, will be carried out.
              These time delay measurements provide distance estimates, which in turn provide
              information on the distance scale in the universe and constrain cosmological
              models. In particular, gravitational lens distance measurements may be used to
              test the recent claim, based on Type Ia Supernova measurements, that the
              expansion of the universe is accelerating. Mass distributions in lensing
              galaxies will be studied by applying a recently developed multipole-Taylor
              expansion of the gravitational potential to all lens systems, and by searching
              for faint second images of background sources that should be present if there
              are supermassive black holes at the galaxies' centers. Funding for this project
              was provided by the NSF program for Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology
              (AST/EXC).
***



