Title       : Exploration of the High Redshift Universe with Lyman-Alpha Emitting Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0071208

Award Number: 0071208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130047             (Estimated)
Investigator: Esther M. Hu hu@ifa.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0071208
Hu, Esther M.

Exploration of the High Redshift Universe with
              Lyman-Alpha Emitting Galaxies

The goals of this project are to study the
              history of star formation,  structure formation, and possible evolution of the
              universe at the highest accessible redshifts using the emission-line properties
              of high-redshift objects. The approach is to use the Suprime-Cam on the Subaru
              telescope with narrow-band interference filters centered on redshifted
              Lyman-alpha emission in the range 4<z<7 and multi-color deep imaging to search
              for high redshift galaxies in that range. Candidates identified in this way
              will then be followed up with slit spectroscopy using the Keck, and Gemini
              telescopes with the DEIMOS spectrograph on the Keck telescope, and the
              near-infrared spectrographs NIRSPEC and IRCS.

The nature of the earliest
              galaxies -- their properties and evolution -- is a topic of intense interest
              which has been placed within our reach by the new generation of large
              telescopes.  The present program is intended to explore the very earliest
              (z=4-7) galaxy formation and the properties of these very high redshift
              galaxies using the capabilities of  the new 8- and 10-m class telescopes.   An
              extensive faint emission-line, faint galaxy survey conducted with deep
              narrowband imaging searches will be combined with extremely deep imaging in
              multiple colors to identify distant galaxies in early stages of active star
              formation.  This technique has already been successfully pioneered on the Keck
              telescope to identify some of the most distant galaxies currently known. This
              project applies these techniques on the Keck, Gemini, and Subaru telescopes,
              where very wide field cameras, such as the  0.5 degree X 0.5 degree wide
              SuprimeCam on the Subaru 8.3-m telescope, and new wide-area spectrographs will
              be coming on line over the next two years.  International cooperation in using
              these complementary facilities will provide large samples of these most distant
              galaxies, to explore the global star formation history of the Universe,
              and
the evolution in the numbers and properties of galaxies at very early
              times.  Such galaxies will also be targets for internationally planned future
              space missions to investigate the early Universe.
Funding for this project  is
              provided by the NSF program for Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology
              (AST/EXC).
***




