Title       : GOALI: Quantum Amplified Isomerization: A New Strategy for Polymeric Optical
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2001  
File        : a0071302

Award Number: 0071302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph P. Dinnocenzo jpd@jpdmac.chem.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samir Farid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Robello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Turan Erdogan  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1024,1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI award, co-funded  by the Division of Materials Research and the
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate for Mathematical &
              Physical Sciences, involves a collaboration between the University of Rochester
              and the Eastman Kodak Company.  A new concept for photoresponsive polymers is
              described based on a process called Quantum Amplified Isomerization (QAI).  QAI
              materials are defined as polymers that undergo electron transfer-initiated ion
              radical chain isomerization reactions upon absorption of light.  QAI materials
              have the potential to overcome many of the known problems associated with
              existing photoresponsive polymers, while still retaining their primary
              advantages.  Specifically, QAI materials are designed to produce many chemical
              tranformations per photon absorbed, with little or no accompanying dimensional
              changes.  The primary research goals of this proposal are: (1) to obtain a
              predictive understanding of the fundamental ion radical chain reaction
              chemistry that forms the basis of QAI processes, (2) to test sensitization
              strategies for the efficient inititaion of QAI processes, (3) to use the
              insights from (1) and (2) to design and synthesize functionalized QAI polymers,
              and (3) to characterize key optical properties of new QAI materials.

This
              collaboration is in the fields of photochemistry and optical materials for
              communications, and involves a number of educational experiences, including
              on-site industrial research for the students and weekly group meetings among
              the academic and industrial co-PI's.

