Title       : Model Theory of Fields and Diophantine Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0071890

Award Number: 0071890
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Scanlon scanlon@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Scanlon investigates the structure of definable sets in theories of enriched
              fields with an eye towards applications in diophantine and algebraic geometry.
              In many theories of enriched fields, for example differential, difference and
              valued D-fields, the definable sets are known to enjoy strong regularity
              properties, but in most cases the determination of the full induced structure
              on even one-dimensional sets has proved elusive. Scanlon seeks to determine
              this structure on minimal sets in differentially closed and difference closed
              fields and to resolve foundational issues for the theory of valued D-fields in
              preparation to study the fine structure of their definable sets. The main
              trichotomy theorem on Zariski geometries, or more exactly the locally modular
              versus non-orthogonal to an infinite field dichotomy for Zariski groups,
              implies finiteness and uniformity theorems for certain subgroups and
              subvarieties of algebraic groups. Scanlon exploits this connection, especially
              by studying extensions of the Drinfeld module analogue of the Manin-Mumford
              conjecture to higher dimensional T-modules and of the Tate-Voloch conjecture in
              the case of p-adically transcendental moduli. Scanlon searches for
              mathematically meaningful interpretations of the triviality of  certain
              definable sets in differential or difference fields by  concentrating on
              certain subsets of moduli spaces of Shimura  varieties definable in some
              difference closed fields. Scanlon  studies inverse problems in model theoretic
              algebra. Specifically, Scanlon addresses the questions of which fields are
              stable and  which fields are supersimple.  

Scanlon undertakes this project
              to exhibit how the  deep, though apparently abstract, theorems of stability
              theory  manifest themselves in concrete mathematical practice.  Some such
              phenomena have already been discovered.  Given the strength of these abstract
              theorems, a systematic search  to interpret them can only lead to strong
              uniformity results on the number and properties of solutions to algebraic, 
              differential, and difference equations not readily perceived from an elementary
              perspective.

