Title       : Strict Quantization, Elliptic Operators, and E-Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0071120

Award Number: 0071120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85413              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Trout John.D.Trout@Dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Trout

This project is designed to investigate and deepen the
              relationship between the operator algebraic E-theory of Alain Connes and Nigel
              Higson, the index theory of elliptic differential operators on manifolds, and
              quantum physics. First, we will investigate the correspondence between
              (positive) asymptotic morphisms (which form the basic cycles in E-theory) and
              "asymptotic" projection-valued measures. This will help to understand the
              fundamental use of E-theory groups as receptacles for invariants of strict
              (physical) quantization schemes. This should also give novel formulas for
              writing asymptotic morphisms as operator-valued integrals, and for computing
              the pairing between K-homology and K-theory, e.g., in computing the index of a
              Dirac type operator coupled to a gauge connection. The second part deals with
              extending the work of Erik Guentner in using E-theory groups to understand the
              relationship between elliptic differential operators and strict quantization
              schemes, e.g., the relationship between the (E-theory elements of) the
              Dolbeault operator on a Kahler manifold and the Berezin-Toeplitz quantization
              on the associated Bergmann-Fock space.  The third part is a long-term project
              to develop an E-theoretic classification method for strict quantization schemes
              that parallels the cohomological classification in the formally algebraic
              (nonphysical) deformation quantization of star products.

The purpose of this
              project is to more thoroughly investigate the relationship between quantum
              physics and the operator algebraic E-theory of the Fields medalist Alain Connes
              and Nigel Higson. This mathematical theory associates classifying groups to
              pairs of operator algebras. Group elements are determined by objects called
              asymptotic morphisms between the two operator algebras. The relationship to
              quantum theory is as follows. Different types of structures are used in quantum
              theory to model subatomic and atomic systems, for example, Dirac operators
              coupled to a gauge field in quantum field theory, and operator-valued measures
              in operational quantum physics and quantum computing, etc. Under appropriate
              conditions, these structures have asymptotic morphisms associated to them
              (between the algebras of the classical observables and quantum observables,
              respectively). Hence, they define elements in an E-theory group. By fully
              understanding this correspondence, we want to show that computing these
              E-theory invariants provides a natural procedure for classifying, and defining
              obstructions for, diverse types of quantum-mechanical systems.


