Title       : Innovative training for biotechnologists through coordinated curricula and
               partnerships with industry and academia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a0071062

Award Number: 0071062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183206             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann Gnagey agnagey@vtc.vsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vermont Technical College
	      
	      Randolph Center, VT  05061    802/728-3391

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The object of this project is to educate biotechnologists who not only
              understand how to perform sophisticated techniques, but who also can more
              quickly provide their employers with improved productivity because they
              understand the molecular theory behind these 
laboratory procedures. Two major
              concerns being addressed by the project are insufficient scientific
              preparedness of high school graduates entering two-year technical programs and
              the need for structured involvement of industrial and academic laboratories in
              the education of these technicians.

To address these concerns, the project
              is: 
a. aligning the secondary school requirements with post-secondary
              education biotechnology curriculum; 
b. familiarizing secondary teachers with
              current techniques in the field as they pertain to the high school curriculum;
              
c. providing opportunities for high school classes to conduct laboratory
              exercises using materials and/or equipment unavailable in high school
              laboratories;
d. developing summer courses for potential biotechnology
              students; 
e. involving academic and industrial partners in student training
              and curricula development; and
f. ensuring access for groups underrepresented
              in this field.

The methods are improving science education at the secondary
              level, helping to satisfy the needs of industry and academic laboratories for
              qualified technicians, and broadening the participation of underrepresented
              groups in this field including women, persons with disabilities, and students
              from lower socioeconomic backgrounds in rural New England.


