Title       : Sheaves on Affine Flags, Springer Fibers, and Representation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a0071967

Award Number: 0071967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roman Bezrukavnikov roman@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Previous results of the investigator and collaborators establish
a relation
              between coherent sheaves on a Steinberg variety of a complex
simple algebraic
              group, and perverse sheaves on the affine flag variety of
the Langlands dual
              group. Since the latter are known, by the work of Kazhdan
and Lusztig, to be
              related to representations of quantum groups at a root
of unity, and hence
              also to representations of algebraic groups in prime
characteristic, our
              results have implications for that theories. 
They also indicate that there
              should be a relation between the geometry
of perverse sheaves on affine flag
              varieties, and non-restricted 
representations of quantum groups or Lie
              algebras in prime characteristics.
The principal goal of the present project
              is to develop this kind of 
relationship, thus providing a new tool for the
              theory of non-restricted 
representations. It is expected, in particular, to
              yield a proof and a
conceptual explanation for recent numerical conjectures by
              Lusztig. 
The methods and ideology of the present work are partly based on the
              geometric
approach to the Langlands program, due to Drinfeld. Another goal of
              the project
is to investigate consequences of the above mentioned results to
              that theory.

 A key to new developments, and a source of inspiration in
              mathematics often 
lie in discovery of parallelism (equivalence)
              between
seemingly unrelated objects or theories. Representation theory is a
              rich
source of examples of that kind: though formally being a branch of
              algebra,
the modern theory relies heavily on geometric disciplines, such as

              topology and algebraic geometry. The principle goal of the present project
is
              to develop geometric language for a branch of representation theory
where it
              has been lacking so far, namely the so called theory of non-restricted
modular
              representations. In the corresponding algebraic constructions
              
divisibility
properties of integral numbers by a particular prime number are
              relevant.
The geometry apparently related to this deals with particular
              infinite
dimensional objects, encountered also in mathematical
              physics
(conformal field theory), and in number theory (Langlands duality
              theory).
This construction is expected to provide new tools for the above
              mentioned
branch of representation theory; in particular, it is expected to
              yield a
proof of certain conjectures  by  leading experts in the field.
