Title       : The Universe at z=5: High-redshift quasars from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0071091

Award Number: 0071091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Strauss strauss@astro.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Gunn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST- 0071091
Strauss

The goals of this proposal are to use the Sloan Digital
              Sky Survey (SDSS)  photometric data to identify high redshift quasars (Z ~5)
              and conduct a follow up analysis of these objects. The initial SDSS
              commissioning data have already been used to develop and prove the discovery
              technique and the final sample size is expected to be ~ 100 objects. These data
              open up a new regime and will allow the PI-CO-I's to  study quasar demographics
              with redshift; the relationship between galaxy formation and quasar activity at
              high redshifts; and studies of intervening gas at high redshifts. 
			  
The
              Sloan Digital Sky Survey is an ambitious project involving a consortium of
              universities and institutions around the country and around the world, to
              develop an accurate and complete census of the heavens in three dimensions. 
              Using a dedicated 2.5m telescope at Apache Point Observatory, New Mexico, it
              will survey the sky over the next five years, compiling detailed data on 100
              million galaxies, stars, and quasars.  Early results from the survey have shown
              its potential on many fronts, including the search for the most distant objects
              in the universe.  Quasars, which appear as unresolved, exceedingly luminous
              points of light in the sky, are believed to be the result of the radiation
              given off as material falls into a black hole one billion times more massive
              than the sun.  Their extreme luminosity allow them to be detected at very great
              distances. The Sloan Survey has allowed us to discover a great number of the
              most distant quasars yet known.  We plan to do a number of investigations of
              these enigmatic objects over the next few years:   a).  Compile complete
              samples of distant quasars, to study their
tendency to cluster together and to
              understand their evolution with time.  b).  Study the physical properties of
              these systems with telescopes sensitive to a large range of wavelengths, to
              understand the processes by which they formed and how they generate their
              tremendous luminosities. c).  Study the immediate environment of these quasars
              to learn about their effect on neighboring galaxies, and the diffuse gas which
              permeates the space between quasars.  d).  Discover new classes of quasars and
              other phenomena which our complete survey should bring to light. Funding for
              this project was provided by the NSF program for Extragalactic
Astronomy &
              Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***

