Title       : Virtual Laboratory for Training Machine-tool Building and Maintenance
               Technicians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2000     
File        : a0071014

Award Number: 0071014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xueshu Song song@ceet.niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip Pilcher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Billman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Radha Balamuralikrishna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project is developing and testing a virtual laboratory via the Internet
              to enhance the comprehension of the interdisciplinary nature of machine tool
              building and maintenance technology, to reduce costs by maximizing the
              adaptiveness of the curriculum, to enhance learning efficiency in a multimedia
              and multi-intelligence approach (Gardner,1993), and to improve laboratory
              safety with minimized environmental hazards. A coalition of a two-year college,
              a four-year university, a community-based technology center, professional
              associations, and partners from the multimedia software and machine tool
              industry are working together on the project. The expected outcomes are three
              simulation modules, each targeting a particular aspect of machine tool building
              and maintenance technologies that will supplement and complement the existing
              machine technology curriculum in the nation's two-year associate degree
              programs. 

A comprehensive and independent evaluation is being conducted
              prior to national dissemination via both the Internet and CD-ROM to two-year
              colleges, high schools and other community based training centers throughout
              the nation. Pre- and post-tests are being used to evaluate the effect of the
              proposed multimedia modules on students' attitudes and learning. A diverse
              cohort of two-year college students, including women and minorities, are
              participating in the field tests as control and test groups. 

A national
              workshop is being developed to help faculty members learn how to use the
              modules and to develop "customized" modules for themselves. 

