Title       : Ultrahigh Pressure Studies of Hydrogen and its Isotopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0071828

Award Number: 0071828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Isaac F. Silvera silvera@physics.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              One of the great outstanding problems and challenges to condensed matter physics
              is a determination and understanding of the phases and properties of solid
              hydrogen at high density. A number of phases have been predicted, in particular
              the Wigner-Huntington transition to the atomic metallic state, which may be a
              High-Tc superconductor. In addition, detailed electronic band structure
              calculations predict that the high-density molecular phase should be metallic
              and exhibit high temperature superconductivity. Currently there are three
              phases known to exist experimentally, the low-pressure phase, the broken
              symmetry phase at a pressure of 110 GPa, and the A-phase at 150 GPa. This
              research program will pursue the study of solid hydrogen and its isotopes,
              deuterium and HD, to multi-megabar pressures. An effort will be dedicated to
              extend the pressure to the 400 GPa range in the search for the metallic phases
              of hydrogen. The DC electrical conductivity of the A-phase will be measured as
              function of temperature and pressure in order to determine whether hydrogen is
              metallic at these pressures or, if not, will determine the band gap as a
              function of pressure.  Newly developed diamond anvil cells (DACs) with high
              quality, flaw-free and very low impurity synthetic diamonds will be use in
              these studies. These improved DACs are expected to overcome the limitations
              inherent in conventional designs. Spectroscopic techniques will be used to
              search for and explore new phase lines. The conductive properties will be
              investigated either by DC conductivity measurements or optical spectroscopy,
              characterized by a Drude free-electron spectrum. A determination of the
              high-pressure phases and their properties will be a major accomplishment for
              theory and experiment. Graduate students and post doctoral research associates
              will participate in this research and will thereby acquire knowledge and skills
              that prepare them for employment in industry, academia, or
              government.
%%%
One of the great outstanding problems and challenges to
              condensed matter physics is the determination and understanding of the atom
              structure and properties of solid hydrogen at high density. Hydrogen freezes at
              -260 degrees centigrade. The solid has low density and is transparent to the
              eye. At high density the molecules are closer and the solid is predicted to
              become a metal and possibly become a high-temperature superconductor. At still
              higher densities the molecules are predicted to dissociate so that the solid is
              made up of atoms, rather than molecules, at the lattice sites. This transition
              to atomic-metallic hydrogen with its accompanying superconductivity was
              predicted over 65 years ago but has so far eluded detection. It is now believed
              that pressures in the range of 3 to 4 million atmospheres are required to
              achieve the densities needed to produce atomic-metallic hydrogen. It is the
              goal of this research to generate such pressures with so-called Diamond Anvil
              Cells (DACs) that are specially designed to overcome the limitations of
              conventional DACs. Electrical and optical spectroscopic methods will be used to
              search for evidence of the atomic-metallic state of hydrogen. The production of
              atomic-metallic hydrogen would be a major accomplishment, not only
              scientifically, but very likely also for technological reasons, for the same
              theory that predicts its existence also predicts that it will be a
              superconductor at room temperature, even after the pressure is released. These
              predictions are at the center of current debate about the properties of
              hydrogen under extreme conditions.  A successful outcome of this project will
              not only settle one of the outstanding problems of contemporary condensed
              matter physics but will also open up new avenues for scientific discoveries and
              applications.  This research is conducted with the assistance of graduate
              students and postdoctoral research associates. They will thereby acquire
              knowledge and skills in a contemporary area of condensed matter physics that
              will prepare them for productive employment in industry, academia, or
              government.
***



