Title       : Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Ice Formation in Upper Tropospheric Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2001  
File        : a0071321

Award Number: 0071321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $645000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. DeMott pdemott@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sonia M. Kreidenweis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cirrus clouds are a widespread atmospheric constituent with major importance for
              radiative transfer, yet the mechanism of their formation is not well
              understood.  The ice crystals of which they are composed form by nucleation of
              the solid phase from liquid water droplets or water vapor.  Homogeneous
              nucleation of droplets containing sulfate solutes is thought to be the dominant
              process, but there is not yet a consistent explanation for the range and
              variability of thermodynamic conditions at which ice forms in this way.  For
              example, nucleation of ice in droplets containing a mixture of solutes
              evidently occurs at warmer temperatures than required to freeze single-solute
              droplets.  Therefore the temperature, and hence the altitude, at which cirrus
              clouds form may be determined by the chemical composition of aerosols dissolved
              within the droplets.  This project is a laboratory study of the freezing of
              droplets composed of various aqueous solutions thought to be typical of those
              found in the upper troposphere.  To be investigated are (1) the homogeneous
              freezing of solution droplets having different chemical compositions at
              temperatures between -35 and -65 degrees C and relative humidities between 70
              and 100%, and (2) the heterogeneous freezing of solution droplets containing
              insoluble particles of the kind that might be present in the upper troposphere.
               The approach involves generation of well-characterized aerosol particles of
              various types, determining their ice-nucleating properties, and performing
              numerical modeling calculations to relate the laboratory measurements to
              existing theories of homogeneous and heterogeneous ice nucleation.  The study
              will provide the data needed for predicting cirrus cloud formation in
              large-scale atmospheric models.   
