Title       : Epitaxial Electrodeposition of Metal Oxide Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2000      
File        : a0071365

Award Number: 0071365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay A. Switzer jswitzer@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0071365
Switzer

In this project, epitaxial films of semiconducting metal
              oxides will be electrodeposited from solution precursors onto single-crystal
              substrates. The emphasis will be on epitaxial systems with high lattice
              mismatch, and on the synthesis of technologically-important semiconducting
              metal oxides that cannot by processed by traditional thermal methods. 
              Epitaxial films are usually deposited by vapor deposition methods, such as
              chemical vapor deposition, at elevated temperatures onto a single crystal
              substrate chosen to have a lattice parameter as close as possible to that of
              the film. The project breaks with these traditions by using a simple
              low-temperature process, electrodeposition, to produce epitaxial systems with
              large lattice mismatch. The research project will consist of three phases: (i)
              Epitaxial electrodeposition and characterization of metal oxide semiconductors,
              (ii) Mechanistic studies of epitaxial electrodeposition, and (iii) Study of the
              transition from thermodynamic to kinetic control in epitaxial
              electrodeposition. The goals of the first phase of the research will be to
              establish the generality of epitaxial electrodeposition of semiconducting metal
              oxides and to determine both the out-of-plane and in-plane orientation of the
              epitaxial films relative to the single-crystal substrates. The second phase of
              the work will focus on the mechanism of epitaxial electrodeposition. The final
              phase of the work will explore the transition from thermodynamic to kinetic
              control of orientation. 

In this project, epitaxial films of oxide materials
              will be deposited onto single-crystal substrates using a low temperature
              process, electrodeposition.  This low temperature technique allows the growth
              of films that cannot be obtained by the standard high-temperature techniques.
              Thin film materials are important in high tech applications such as information
              technology and telecommunications.

