Title       : SGER: Contingency Logistics Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2000     
File        : a0071935

Award Number: 0071935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marlin U. Thomas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) provides funding for the
              development of a taxonomy of contingency logistics systems, formulate a general
              model of such systems, develop  approaches for characterizing  contingency
              logistics system decision support systems and exploration of empirical data to
              suggest how such decisions are structured in practice.  The contingencies faced
              by such systems may be due to (1) a change in the system performance objective,
              (2) changes in available system resources or (3) changes in system demands.  
              System objectives may change from efficiency as a goal, to timely delivery.  
              System resources may change due to catastrophic events; technology changes
              etc.,  and system demands may change due to the product life cycle evolving
              from ramp up stage to operational stage to the ramp down stage.  

The
              requirements for a contingency logistics system to have an effective list of
              alternate control parameters are as follows. (1) selection apriori of a finite
              number of possible styles of operation, (2) repeated investments to preserve
              the viability of these possible styles of operation, and (3) adjustment of the
              mode of operation in response to changes in the environment.   The investment
              in maintenance of possible alternatives thus takes away from the available
              resources when contingent actions are not required, but provides effectiveness
              when contingencies do in fact surface.  Results of this research will offer an
              environment to examine  alternate ways to organize prototype systems;  use of
              control rules and switching schemes between rules in the presence of
              contingencies; and their impact on system response as well as other performance
              objectives.  These results will prove useful in the organization and planning
              for contingency rich logistics environments.

