Title       : Equivariant Gauge Theory on 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0071480

Award Number: 0071480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44914              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolai N. Saveliev   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS-0071480
PI: Nikolai Saveliev

A major obstruction to using the
              Floer homology to study 3-dimensional 
manifolds is the lack of clear
              understanding of its behavior with respect to 
the standard constructions of
              3-dimensional topology, such as Dehn surgery, 
connected sums etc. The known
              results in this direction have not made much 
of headway in Floer homology
              computations or applications. The main thesis of 
the investigator is that the
              operation with respect to which the Floer homology
behaves most naturally is
              the branched covering. Therefore, the investigator 
studies gauge theory on
              3-manifolds with group actions and relates 
gauge-theoretical invariants to
              the classical invariants of the branch set. 
As an example, his previous study
              of equivariant gauge theory on the links of 
quasi-homogeneous surface
              singularities has led to a closed form formula 
expressing their Floer
              homology in terms of classical invariants. The 
investigator introduces and
              studies an equivariant Casson invariant for an 
integral homology sphere with
              a cyclic group action and relates it to the 
classical Casson invariant and
              the knot signatures. The definition makes use 
of the equivariant gauge theory
              and, in particular, of the equivariant Floer 
index. The latter is closely
              related, in the case of anti-holomorphic 
involutions, to the topology of
              Stein surfaces and the non-compact Kaehler 
geometry. The investigator also
              continues his study of the links of complete
intersection singularities, and
              the relevance of the equivariant Casson 
invariant to homology cobordisms and
              the triangulation conjecture for 
topological manifolds in dimensions five and
              higher. 

The research is a study of 3- and 4-dimensional manifolds by the
              methods of 
gauge theory, coming from theoretical physics. In the last two
              decades, these 
methods brought new life into the classical low dimensional
              topology, leading 
to many spectacular developments and to the solutions of
              many difficult 
problems. The area was revolutionized to the point that the
              state of knowledge
of two decades ago looks now, in many aspects, like a
              desert of nearly 
complete ignorance. Manifolds of dimension four were the
              ones that benefited 
the most: gauge theory methods worked very efficiently in
              this setting. At 
the same time, their analogue in dimension three, which is
              known as the Floer 
homology, is yet to reveal its full potential. The Floer
              homology is in the 
focus of investigator's research efforts.

