Title       : Self-Assembly of Condensed Biomolecular Phases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0071761

Award Number: 0071761
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard Wong gclwong@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This work is centered on the phase behavior, structure and governing
              interactions in a general class of biomolecular self-assembled systems, where
              condensed arrangements of charged biopolymers are formed through their
              interactions with oppositely charged micro-ions or macro-ions of varying
              complexity.  Intuitively, two like-charged objects in aqueous solution are
              expected to repel one another. .In the presence of multivalent macro-ions or
              micro-ions, however, many biopolymers can attract one another and condense into
              compact ordered states. Examples include DNA condensation by charged histone
              proteins in chromosome: and the hierarchical organization of the actin
              cytoskeleton.  The origin of this attraction is at present poorly understood.
              This project aims to delineate the physical mechanisms responsible for these
              complex molecular organizations.  Various forms of counterion correlations have
              been proposed as possible mechanisms for the observed anomalous attraction. 
              These ideas will be tested for tile first time, along with an investigation of
              the global biopolymer phase behavior, using a combination of synchrotron x-ray
              scattering, epifluorescence microscopy, and electron microscopy.  These
              entropically modulated electrostatic interactions will be exploited to develop
              new self-assembled Systems with a wide range of applications, including drug or
              gene delivery vehicles, templates for protein crystallization, and biosensors. 
              The multi-disciplinary nature of this work will provide unique educational
              opportunities for the new kind of hybrid scientists necessary in this emerging
              field.  The students will be prepared for a range of careers in academia,
              industry, or government 
%%%
This work is directed at the structure and
              governing interactions of a general class of biomolecular self-assembled
              materials, where condensed arrangements of charged biological polymers are
              formed through their interactions with oppositely charged micro-ions or
              macro-ions of varying complexity.  Intuitively, two like-charged objects in
              aqueous solution are expected to repel one another.  In the presence of
              multivalent macro-ions or micro-ions, however, many biological polymers can
              attract one another and condense into compact ordered states. Examples include
              DNA condensation by charged proteins in chromosomes and the hierarchical
              organization of the actin cytoskeleton.  The origin of this attraction has been
              the recent subject of intense theoretical debate, but no consensus has emerged.
               Further, there exists no quantitative empirical evidence to discriminate among
              the many suggested explanations.  Using a range of advanced experimental
              techniques, including synchrotron x-ray scattering, fluorescence microscopy,
              and electron microscopy, this program aims to delineate the physical mechanisms
              responsible for the formation of these complex self-assembled biomolecular
              systems, and to develop new materials based on their novel governing
              interactions. These material systems have a wide range of applications,
              including drug or gene delivery systems, templates for protein crystallization,
              mid biosensors.  The multidisciplinary nature of this work will provide unique
              educational opportunities for the new kind of hybrid scientists required for
              this emerging field.  The students will be prepared for a range of careers in
              academia, industry, or government.

