Title       : Space Decomposition Methods in Nonsmooth Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a0071459

Award Number: 0071459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Mifflin mifflin@math.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
 Abstract for Space Decomposition Methods in Nonsmooth Optimization
 DMS
              0071459 

The proposed research concerns developing theory and methods for
              combining 
polyhedral and quadratic approximation to produce a rapidly
              convergent 
algorithm for minimizing a nonsmooth function of many variables.
              The idea 
is to use a bundle method to determine a so-called VU-space
              decomposition 
such that on V-space the cutting-plane aspect of bundling works
              fast and on 
U-space a quasi-Newton approximation of a Hessian of a
              U-Lagrangian can be 
employed. Such methods can be used to solve large or
              complicated 
optimization models via separation of variables or constraints.
              For 
example, a water pressure control problem of finding values for flow
              rates 
and pump pressure gaps to minimize pumping cost subject to maintaining
              
water pressures in allowable ranges at all points in a pipe network can be
              
solved via separation of the variables. If the flow rates are fixed then
              
the subproblem of finding optimal values for the pressure gaps is an
              
easy-to-solve linear minimization problem. With this approach the outer
              
problem of finding optimal values for the flow variables is a nonsmooth
              
problem whose solution can be found efficiently via the techniques to be
              
developed. The theoretical research is concerned with properly defining a
              
class of functions which is special enough for the members to have
              
U-Hessians and general enough to include functions from many
              
applications.

The computational methods proposed for development are
              significant because 
they can be applied in many practical decision-making
              situations. These 
include the determination of values of parameters for
              fitting models to 
data such as in topographic or geophysical modeling. They
              also include 
application of decomposition techniques to large or complicated
              models such 
as those occurring in allocation of scarce resources, traffic
              assignment, 
manufacturing, structural engineering, logistics and strategic
              planning. 
The pipe network problem in the first paragraph is an important
              example 
occurring in civil infrastructure design. It illustrates the need to
              make 
trade-off decisions when considering conflicting design criteria such as
              
simultaneously having high reliability and low cost. Another area of
              
application is in power system planning subject to environmental protection
              
constraints. These decision  models will increase in importance as
              
deregulation of the energy supply sector takes effect. These problems
              
naturally decompose into higher level problems of deciding which types and
              
sizes of power generation plants to build and lower level problems of
              
deciding how best to operate the various units to meet daily energy demand.
              
Additionally, this research fits in well with on-going efforts in
              
high-performance computing, because its methods will utilize parallel
              
processing for solving very large and/or very complex
              decision-making
problems.



