Title       : AGNs to the IGM: Tracing the Energy Flow Through Radio Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0071167

Award Number: 0071167
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Jones twj@astro.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence Rudnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1206,1207,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Jones
AST-0071167

This proposal is to use both theoretical 3-D MHD modeling
              constrained by X-ray observations and low-frequency radio imaging to study the
              deposition and diffusion of energy in the jets and lobes of radio galaxies. The
              goal is to relate the magnetic field and cosmic rays to the jet dynamics and
              radio-galaxy evolution.

The proposed work aims to add fundamental insights
              to the understanding of interactions between the enormously energetic phenomena
              originating in the central cores of some galaxies and the vast, gaseous
              environments around those galaxies. Energetic streams of hot plasma appear to
              be expelled from the galactic cores at speeds approaching the speed of light.
              When those streams plow into the diffuse plasma surrounding the galaxy the
              interacting regions produce relativistic electrons and become illuminated.
              Those structures are known as Radio Galaxies and they not only emit radiation
              at radio wavelengths but also in the optical and x-ray regions.  For the first
              time, new observational capabilities will enable us  to directly compare radio
              and X-ray emissions produced by the same electron populations. The radio
              emissions are a consequence of weak magnetic fields pervading the interaction
              regions, while the signature X-rays result from collisions between those
              electrons and photons in the Cosmic Microwave Background. Simultaneous
              measurements of both is necessary to find measures of the strengths of the
              magnetic fields and the properties of the electron populations. That
              information, in turn is crucial input into efforts to infer the dynamical
              events leading to the radio structures. 
The investigators are in position to
              carry out highly sophisticated numerical simulations of these objects, studying
              both the relationships between the energetics of the plasma flows and the
              emissions that can be observed from earth. Those studies will be followed by
              more general exploration of the evolution of these vast dynamical structures,
              so as to understand better the ways in which radio galaxies contribute to the
              properties of the gaseous media that fill clusters of galaxies. That topic is
              currently of broad interest in the study of cosmic structure
              formation.
Funding for this project was provided by the NSF program for
              Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).
****

