Title       : Physics of Magnetoelectronic Microstructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0071770

Award Number: 0071770
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gang Xiao xiao@physics.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to a professor at Brown University for a
              project that will explore the physics of magnetoelectronic microstructures. For
              four decades, the operation of semiconductors has been based on the charge
              properties of electrons. Now, a new type of electronics- magnetoelectronics -
              has emerged, which utilizes both the electron spin and charge to enable devices
              performing novel functions. The objective of this project is to understand and
              solve some outstanding problems in magnetoelectronic microstructures. The
              research will focus on systems that are composed of a few magnetic domains. In
              particular the project will include investigations of magnetization reversal
              processes, and studies of the origins of magnetically induced electric noise
              and along with the development of methods to suppress this noise. This research
              will lead to a more comprehensive understanding of magnetism in
              microstructures. The results should contribute to the technological development
              of magnetoelectronics, and to the development of the human resources needed in
              this critical technology.
%%%
This individual investigator award is to a
              professor at Brown University for a project that will explore the physics of
              magnetoelectronic microstructures. This is an important field for the high-tech
              industries in the new millenium. For four decades, the operation of
              semiconductors has been based on the charge properties of electrons. Now, a new
              type of electronics- magnetoelectronics - has emerged, which utilizes both the
              electron spin and charge to enable devices performing novel functions.
              Magnetoelectronic devices are increasingly used in areas such as computer
              information storage, magnetic sensing, communication, and automobiles. The
              objective of this project is to understand and solve some outstanding problems
              in magnetoelectronic microstructures. The research will focus on systems that
              are composed of a few magnetic domains. In particular the project will include
              investigations of magnetization reversal processes, and studies of the origins
              of magnetically induced electric noise and along with the development of
              methods to suppress this noise. This project will lead to a more comprehensive
              understanding of magnetism in microstructures. The results should contribute to
              the technological development of magnetoelectronics, which is a critical
              technology for our Nation's economy. The project will support graduate
              students, human resources needed for the high-tech industries.
***

