Title       : Optical Excitations in Conjugated Oligomer and Polymer Aggregates: A
               Computational Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0071802

Award Number: 0071802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis C. Spano spano@astro.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0071802
Spano

This grant supports the theoretical work of this mid-career PI
              on light absorption and emission from conjugated polymer films.  The work here
              is focussed on the absorption and emission of light by aggregates of the model
              compounds, oligo- (p-phenylenevinylene) and oligo-thiophene and their
              derivatives.  The analysis is broadly divided between two aggregate packing
              motifs: (i) edge-to-face packing, which leads to cyclic tetramers (pinwheels)
              as well as the large herringbone lattices, and (ii) cofacial packing, which
              leads to p stacks.  The aggregate eigenstates are vibrationally dressed
              excitons, determined primarily by the competition between the delocalizing
              influence of intermolecular energy (and/or charge) transfer and the localizing
              influence of intramolecular excited state nuclear relaxation.  The primary
              objective is to understand how exciton-vibrational coupling and the degree of
              charge separation influence photophysical properties.
%%%  
This grant
              supports the work of this midcareer theoretical chemist in a comprehensive
              study of the phenomena of light emission and absorption in conjugated polymer
              films.
It is expected that soon the light-emitting diodes and other
              optoelectronic devices will be made out of conjugated polymer films.  This will
              show up, most likely, in flat panel displays.  Polymer films can be made to
              lase via optical pumping although there is hope that they may lase electrically
              as well.  Despite the many experiments designed to uncover the mechanism, by
              which they produce light, a fundamental understanding of light emission in
              polymer films is far from complete largely because of the complicating presence
              of strong intermolecular interactions.  The research here will attempt to
              address these and other related issues
***


