Title       : The Topology of Generalized Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0071693

Award Number: 0071693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Washington Mio mio@math.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Bryant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0071693
Washington Mio and John Bryant

Topological n-manifolds are
              spaces locally homeomorphic to 
Euclidean n-space. The simple local structure
              of manifolds 
lends them a very special role in mathematics since phenomena
              
modeled on these spaces are amenable to a vast array of 
methods and tools.
              The study of the structure of manifolds 
has been an important theme in
              geometric topology for many 
decades.  More recently, spaces called
              generalized manifolds, 
with the large-scale properties of topological
              manifolds but 
very intricate local structure, were discovered by the
              proposers 
in joint work with S. Ferry and S. Weinberger. Previously
              
conjectured not to exist, the first theoretical evidence that 
they might
              exist appeared in the work of F. Quinn.  This 
project proposes to continue
              the investigation of the topology 
of generalized manifolds. This study is
              intimately related to 
important structural properties of manifolds, such as
              the 
conjectural rigidity of aspherical manifolds and the 
Siebenmann
              periodicity phenomenon. Other indications of 
the relevance of these spaces
              are present in areas as 
diverse as Dynamical Systems, Geometric Group Theory
              and C-star-algebras.

The long-term goal of this project is to probe the
              local 
structure of generalized manifolds and establish a deeper 
parallel
              between generalized manifolds and topological 
manifolds by showing that these
              exotic spaces satisfy most 
of the fundamental properties of manifolds, such
              as topological homogeneity, the s-cobordism theorem, and the
              alpha-approximation theorem. More immediate goals of the proposed investigation
              
include the study of control improvement problems, submanifold 
and map
              transversality questions, normal bundle and embedding 
problems for
              generalized manifolds. These are elements that 
arise naturally in the study
              of the core problems, and they 
also represent important ramifications of
              independent interest. 
The main technique to be employed is controlled
              topology, 
including controlled homotopy theory, controlled K-theory, 
and
              controlled surgery applied to patch representations of 
generalized manifolds
              and, ultimately, to generalized manifolds themselves.


