Title       : Search for Gravitational Strength Forces Below 1 cm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0071029

Award Number: 0071029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $540000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Price john.price@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1243      GRAVITATIONAL EXPERIMENTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Experiments will be conducted to test Newtons law of gravitation at
inter-mass
              separations of less than one centimeter.  For separations
between one
              centimeter and one tenth of a millimeter, the experiments
will be sensitive
              enough to detect gravity and to test for deviations
from Newtons
              inverse-square law.  For smaller separations the
experiments could detect
              proposed new short-range forces stronger than
gravity but still many orders of
              magnitude weaker than other known
forces. The investigators will first
              complete on-going experiments with
an existing room temperature apparatus, and
              then construct a new
cryogenic instrument with greater sensitivity.  A planar
              tungsten
torsional oscillator is used as the sensitive force detector.  There
              is
currently intense interest among theoretical physicists in the
possibility
              that there may exist new feeble forces at length scales
below one centimeter. 
              String theory, which seeks to encompass all
known physics including
              gravitation, generally predicts light fields
called moduli.  When these
              acquire mass through certain mechanisms,
they may mediate forces with a range
              of about one millimeter.
Detecting such forces would provide dramatic evidence
              for string
theory.

Theorists have also proposed that there may exist
              several new compact
spatial dimensions beyond the usual three, and that
              gravity is weak
because it is able to spread out in the extra dimensions. 
              When the
number of extra dimensions is two, this view leads to large
              deviations
from Newtons law of gravitation at about one millimeter. 
              Experimental
evidence of the predicted deviations would be a dramatic step
              forward
for our understanding of fundamental physics.

