Title       : Research in Stochastic Processes and Nonlinear Filtering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0071970

Award Number: 0071970
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159473             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven P. Lalley lalley@galton.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lalley
	Research will be conducted in two distinct areas: (1) stochastic
              processes, especially stochastic growth models, on graphs with 'hyperbolic'
              geometries; and (2) filtering and inference for time series produced by chaotic
              dynamical systems. In the first area, the primary objective is an understanding
              of how 'hyperbolicity' influences the behavior of certain fundamental
              stochastic processes, including random walks, branching random walks, contact
              processes, and percolation, and to elucidate the nature of the different phase
              transitions that occur in such processes. In the second area, the goal is to
              develop statistical procedures for analyzing time series data produced by
              systems governed by 'chaotic' dynamics. In particular, situations where data
              from deterministic, but chaotic, systems is corrupted by external 'noise' will
              be studied. The goals of the research will be (a) to determine when, and how,
              chaotic 'signals' can be extracted from noisy time series; and (b) to develop
              procedures for inference about the governing dynamical laws based on raw time
              series data.
	Stochastic growth processes are crude mathematical models for
              the growth and spread of populations in time and space. Understanding of the
              mathematical laws governing the evolution of such processes may also contribute
              to our understanding of how epidemics develop, how favorable genes are
              disseminated in large populations, and how information makes its way through
              large communications networks. The notion of a 'phase transition', a drastic
              change in the qualitative behavior of a system precipitated by a small change
              in the parameters governing it, is especially important, because understanding
              the nature of such transitions may have ramifications for the development of
              intervention strategies. 
