Title       : Low-Dimensional Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0071622

Award Number: 0071622
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291572             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold J. Dahm ajd3@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to an established scientist for a project
              focused on the investigation of electrons supported by a liquid helium surface
              and confined to one or two dimensions.  It is directed towards understanding
              the fundamental properties of low-dimensional systems.  The research consists
              of two parts; 1) a systematic study of electron localization induced by
              quantized surface waves called ripplons and 2) the transport and plasma
              excitations in surface electrons confined in helium-filled channels.  In the
              first part, it is predicted that a change in the conduction from metallic to
              weak localization to strong localization will occur as the electric field
              pressing the electrons toward the surface is varied.  Dephasing times in the
              weakly-localized regime will be measured.  An understanding of the
              electron-ripplon interaction is important because of its potential relevance to
              the field of quantum computing.  The study of one-dimensional surface electron
              systems is in its infancy, and studies have been confined to dc transport. 
              Studies will probe the normal-mode frequencies of longitudinal (plasmons) and
              transverse sound modes as well as dc transport properties including
              localization.  The undergraduate and graduate students involved in this
              research will learn experimental and problem solving skills that will be of use
              to them in their future careers.
%%%
This individual investigator award is to
              an established scientist for a fundamental study of properties of electrons
              confined to one and two dimensions.  At low temperatures, electrons are
              confined to two dimensions on the surface of liquid helium.  They can be
              further confined to one dimension by locating the helium in narrow grooves of
              micron-sized width.  These systems are of interest because they are the
              simplest and cleanest examples of a one or two dimensional system.  Various
              properties of these low dimensional electron systems have analogues in three
              dimensional solids, where they are more difficult to study.  It is possible to
              vary parameters of the low dimension systems through a wider range and with
              more control than in the three dimensional solids.  The project comprises the
              first attempt to probe the collective properties of one-dimensional electron
              systems.  This study will examine localization of electrons by back scattering
              from quantized capillary waves (ripplons) on the helium surface.  When the
              scattering from ripplons is made sufficiently strong by forcing an electron
              against the helium surface with an electric field, the electron should become
              localized.  That is, it should become confined to a small region of
              micron-sized lateral dimensions.  The surface will then deform to create a
              ripplonic polaron, an electron trapped in a small dimple in the helium surface.
               This interesting entity has been extensively studied by theorists.  The
              understanding of the scattering of electrons by ripplons is particularly
              important, since it introduces decoherence into a new design of a quantum
              computer under study.  The undergraduate and graduate students involved in this
              research will learn experimental and problem solving skills that will be of use
              to them in their future careers.
***


