Title       : Shimura Varieties, the Trace Formula, Congruences and Galois Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a0071404

Award Number: 0071404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : August 15,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Freydoon Shahidi shahidi@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen S. Kudla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Shimura varieties, the trace formula, congruences and Galois
              representations

Stephen S. Kudla (University of Maryland)
Freydoon Shahidi
              (Purdue University)

This project will provide support allowing young
              researchers from  the US mathematical community to benefit from participation
              in   the special program at the Institute Henri Poincare (IHP) in Paris  in the
              spring semester 2000. This program focuses on two topics:  (i) Shimura
              varieties and the trace formula and  (ii) congruences and Galois
              representations.  These topics, and particularly their interaction, will
              certainly  be at the center of much of the research activity in automorphic 
              forms and number theory in the opening decades of the 21st century.  The
              activity at IHP will bring together the world leaders in these  areas. The
              program will center around a series of lecture `courses' covering the latest
              developments concering the trace formula, endoscopy,  the fundamental lemma, L
              functions for Shimura varieties, global and  local Langlands functoriality, 
              Galois representations,  p-adic Hecke algebras, p-adic modular forms, rigid
              analysis, the local Langlands  correspondence and the geometric Langlands
              correspondence.  The scope of the program encourages new directions for
              research  at the interface of the two major fields and participation will 
              provide young researchers a  unique opportunity to develop expertise  in this
              important area at an early stage in their careers.  


Two major
              developments in mathematics in the later part of  the 20th century are the
              Langlands program in automorphic  forms/representation theory and the Wiles and
              Taylor-Wiles  proof of Fermat's Last Theorem and the Taniyama-Shimura 
              conjecture. These advances, relating number theory and geometry,  are in fact
              very closely linked, and a vigorous development of  the union of the techniques
              from the two areas is currently taking  place. The resulting field will be one
              of the main arenas of  research activity in mathematics  in the first decades
              of the  21st century. The research program taking place at the  Institute Henri
              Poincare in Paris in the spring  semester 2000 and centered around lecture
              courses by the world leaders   provides an unparalleled level of vision and
              insight. This NSF Grant  award will provide funding for young researchers from
              the US  mathematical commmunity to participate in the IHP program,  and hence
              will help to ensure a strong level of US expertise  in these new developments
              in number theory.  
 
This award is being supported by the Division of
              Mathematical Sciences (Algebra and Number Theort program), the Divison of
              International  Programs (Western Europe Program), and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate .

