Title       : Radio and Infrared Studies of Star Formation in Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a0071276

Award Number: 0071276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean L. Turner turner@astro.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
AST- 0071276
Turner

The goal of this project is to obtain IR
              Brackett-line spectroscopy, 10-micron and 20-micron observations using the Keck
              telescope, and  VLA synthesis images at 1 and 2cm for between 6 and 12 nearby
              galaxies which have bright radio continuum emission at 1 cm. These will be used
              to study the emission from star-forming regions in these objects. The data will
              provide a substantive base for the interpretation of future ground-based (the
              Atacama Large Millimeter Array and inferred observations from the South Pole)
              and deep, space-based  (SOFIA/SIRTF ) surveys where the 10 micron region will
              be redshifted to100 microns.

A dramatic mode of star formation is the
              starburst, in which star formation appears to proceed via large clusters rather
              than the sparse open clusters that currently  form in the Milky Way. These
              "super star clusters" are likely precursors to globular  clusters. Globular
              clusters in the Milky are all old, and there are indications that  the early
              universe may have preferred to form these large clusters. The formation of
              super star clusters can be studied by observing the very youngest large
              star-forming regions, which are closest to their birth conditions. These
              regions are usually visually obscured by dust and gas clouds. The goal of this
              project is the detection of star formation in nearby galaxies in the infrared
              and radio wavelengths where star clusters and nebulae are not as affected  by
              extinction as they are in the visible. Free-free radio continuum observations
              with  the Very Large Array radio telescope will be used to map out radio
              nebulae surrounding young stars. Hidden nebulae can also be revealed by the
              mid-infrared emission from dust warmed by intense starlight from these
              clusters. With the Keck Telescope, nearby starbursts  will be imaged in the
              mid-infrared at resolutions sufficient to distinguish gaseous nebulae from
              young star clusters. The first step is to locate the youngest super star
              clusters in nearby galaxies, where they are relatively easy to study. This is 
              the major goal of this research. Eventually, once the locations of these
              clusters and their nebulae have been established, the imaging of gas clouds
              near the  nebulae will show the relation of the clusters to their natal gas,
              which may reveal  the trigger for the star formation. This is a topic that can
              be fruitfully explored with the future Atacama Large Millimeter Array
              telescope. Funding for this project was provided by the NSF program for
              Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***

