Title       : Coding Theory with Methods from Algebraic Geometry and Number Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a0071011

Award Number: 0071011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77736              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy L. Walker jwalker@math.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In previous work, the PI introduced the study of algebraic geometric
codes over
              local Artinian rings, and the first main goal of this
project is to further
              the understanding of these objects.  In
particular, the investigator studies
              the minimum squared Euclidean
weight of these codes.  This quantity is closely
              related to an
exponential sum, where the sum is over points on the curve
              (defined
over the ring) used in the construction of the code.  Thus,
              the
question of the error-correcting capability of these codes is reduced
to
              a question in number theory.  Results have already been obtained by
the
              investigator and a colleague in the two special cases where the
curve involved
              is either the Serre-Tate canonical lift of an ordinary
elliptic curve or a
              plane curve with a single point at infinity.  The
PI is continuing this work
              with the goal of studying the squared
Euclidean weight and associated
              exponential sum for more general
curves.  Additionally, the PI is working
              towards the development of a
decoding algorithm for these codes, with respect
              to the squared
Euclidean weight.  The second main goal of the project involves
              the
search for a structure theory of codes, a topic which has been
              around
almost from the beginning of the study of codes.  This search
              was
largely unsuccessful until the introduction of so-called
              critical
indecomposable codes in a recent paper of Assmus. The PI is
              developing
this theory further and demonstrating its power by revisiting
              the
classification of self-dual codes.

Whenever data is transmitted across
              a channel, errors are bound to
occur.  The goal of coding theory is to find
              efficient ways of adding
redundancy so that errors can be detected, or even
              corrected.  Two
basic questions must be asked about every code: "What is
              the
error-correcting capability of this code?" and "If an error occurs
              in
transmission while using this code, is there an efficient way
              of
recovering the original codeword?"  In the case that code is defined
over
              the ring of integers modulo a power of a prime, the
error-correcting
              capability of the code is measured in terms of the
code's minimum squared
              Euclidean weight and the investigator studies
this property in the case of
              algebraic geometric codes.  The problem
of recovering the original codeword is
              equivalent to finding a
decoding algorithm for the code, which has important
              connections to
cryptography also.  Finally, a structure theory for codes
              allows the
study of codes from a systematic point of view.  In
              particular,
self-dual codes often achieve a good balance between
              error-correcting
capability and efficiency, and a structure theory allows a
              new attack
for the study of these objects.

