Title       : In-situ Microstructural Characterization of the Biodegradation of
               Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0071717

Award Number: 0071717
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian H. Augustine augustbh@jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas E. Dennis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 5728, Med Arts West 22-B
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9181,9197,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this study is to investigate the in-situ and real-time
              enzymatic biodegradation of the surface microstructure in thin films of
              polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs), and correlate these changes with the degradation
              mechanism.  In-situ surface microstructural changes will be monitored using the
              liquid cell capability of the atomic force microscope (AFM) and will be
              performed at elevated temperatures to maximize the enzymatic activity of the
              depolymerase.  Literature has suggested that biodegradation preferentially
              occurs in amorphous regions of bulk copolymers opposed to crystalline regions. 
              However, this postulate has never been analytically confirmed.  This theory
              will be evaluated using the phase imaging capability of the AFM and confirmed
              with surface analytical spectroscopy.  A secondary objective of this project is
              to better understand the role of surface chemistry in the microfabrication of
              biomaterials surfaces/  Through control of surface chemistry via hydrophobic
              and hydrophilic modifications to the substrate, novel patterning techniques for
              PHAs using microcontact printing (m-CP) of alkanethiol self-assembled
              monolayers (SAMs) to gold surfaces will be studied.  This will be used to
              produce a self-aligned thin film internal height standard for the in-situ
              surface microstructural changes and bulk mechanical properties will initiated. 
              A final objective of this project is the scientific training of undergraduate
              research students and high school science teachers in an interdisciplinary
              research project.

This project will provide a new insight into the breakdown
              mechanism in an important class biodegradable plastics.  It is an
              interdisciplinary project for undergraduate research students and high school
              teachers at the interface between the biological and materials sciences. 
              Future scientists and present secondary school teachers in chemistry, biology
              and materials science need to be trained in the complex interactions of these
              disciplines as this project highlights.

