Title       : RUI: Magnetic and Superconducting Properties of Nickel Borocarbides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0071947

Award Number: 0071947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Schmiedeshoff gms@oxy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Occidental College
	      1600 Campus Road
	      Los Angeles, CA  900413384    213/259-2500

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a renewal proposal from a PI at an undergraduate institution for
              research exploring the relationship between superconductivity and magnetism in
              the nickel borocarbide family of materials.  The overall goal is to identify
              and characterize the ground states of these materials. Specifically, a
              dilatometer will be used to measure the thermal expansion and magnetostriction
              of the magnetic material YbNi2B2C and the magnetic superconductor TmNi2B2C.  In
              addition magnetization and critical field measurements of the Tm compound will
              be carried out.  The intent is to characterize the heavy fermion state in the
              former material and the magnetic states in the latter.  Furthermore,
              undergraduate students will participate in this research.  Most of the work
              will be done on the campus of Occidental College, with the remainder at the
              National High Magnetic Field Laboratory.  The undergraduate students will fully
              engage in this project and gain first hand experience to do research and
              interact with scientists in a major research environment.
%%%
This research
              project will be conducted with undergraduate students at Occidental College and
              at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory.  The research focuses on the
              experimental determination of certain magnetic and superconducting properties
              of two members of a family of nickel-boron-carbon compounds.  The results will
              contribute to the understanding of superconductivity.  Moreover, this project
              has a very strong educational component.  The undergraduate participants will
              gain experience in one of the current forefront areas of condensed matter
              physics.  In addition to their work done at Occidental College their presence
              at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory will give them experience in
              research conducted in a major research environment, where they will interact
              with experienced scientists as research colleagues.
***

