Title       : Collaborative Research: Collective and Coherent Spin Organization in Magnetic
               Semiconductor Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0071977

Award Number: 0071977
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nitin Samarth nsamarth@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               This experimental project explores collective and coherent spin behavior of
              electrons, local moments and nuclear spins in low dimensional systems ranging
              from 2D electron gases to 0D quantum dots. The experiments focus on model
              nanostructures fabricated from II-VI magnetic semiconductors which can be
              systematically tailored to modulate spin interactions between confined
              electronic states, magnetic ions and nuclei. The project combines development
              of sophisticated nanostructures and state-of-the-art spin probes having high
              temporal (~100 fs) and spatial (~100 nm) resolution, and high magnetic moment
              sensitivity (~105 Bohr magnetons). Microfabricated cantilevers will be used to
              search for collective spin effects in magnetic semiconductor nanostructures.
              Dynamical spin organization in these nanostructures will be studied using an
              "all-optical" magnetic resonance technique, encompassing spin precession of
              electrons, local moments and nuclear spins. Coherent optical spectroscopy
              coupled with time-resolved transport will probe dynamical spin transport in
              mesoscopic systems (wires) wherein the nuclear polarization is systematically
              varied using optical pumping. Finally, near field scanning optical resonance
              techniques will be developed to achieve spatially resolved magnetic resonance
              imaging of 2D electron spin systems. Knowledge of the collective spin response
              in nanostructures gained from this project may be important for coherent
              control of spin processes in future generations of magneto-electronic devices.
              Advanced technical training in solid state physics, materials science, and
              advanced instrumentation will prepare students for careers in academic and
              industrial environments.
%%%
 This experimental condensed matter physics
              project explores the complex quantum mechanical behavior of electrons, magnetic
              atoms and nuclei in low dimensional systems ranging from "electron sheets" (2D
              electron gases) to "electron boxes" (0D quantum dots). The experiments use
              model nanostructures fabricated from a family of materials (II-VI magnetic
              semiconductors) in which the quantum mechanical property known as "spin" can be
              systematically varied. A fundamental understanding of spin transport in
              nanostructures may enable new technologies based on quantum mechanical
              interactions in the solid state. The project is comprised of a collaborative
              effort that combines development of sophisticated nanostructures with
              state-of-the-art spin probes having high temporal (~100 femtoseconds) and
              spatial (~100 nanometer) resolution, and high spin sensitivity (~ 105 magnetic
              atoms). Experiments range from ultrasensitive magnetometry, to "all-optical"
              spin resonance microscopy, to dynamical studies of electron spin transport.
              While the principal focus is on fundamental physics, knowledge gained will be
              important for developing concepts in the coherent control of spin processes in
              future generations of high speed magneto-electronic devices, with potential
              applications ranging from ultrafast switching to quantum computation. This
              research involves advanced technical training in materials physics and advanced
              instrumentation, and prepares students to make immediate contributions both in
              academic and industrial environments.


