Title       : High-Resolution Photoemission Study of Strongly Correlated Electrons Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0071897

Award Number: 0071897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhi-Xun Shen zxshen@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to a professor at Stanford University for
              a project using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) to study
              complex materials with strongly interacting electrons.  These materials have
              many remarkable properties, such as high temperature superconductivity.  In
              addition, they provide the opportunity to discover and study novel fundamental
              phenomena and phases. ARPES has emerged as a major tool in advancing the
              understanding of these strongly interacting electron systems at the microscopic
              level.  With the recent significant improvement in resolution and detection
              efficiency, ARPES has the promise to make greater contributions to the
              understanding of strongly interacting electron systems, in particular the
              oxides with novel properties from coupled charge, spin, orbital and lattice
              degrees of freedom.  The objective of this project is to bring the experimental
              sophistication to a qualitatively higher level in order to address the most
              critical issues in the field, especially the issues related to high-temperature
              superconductivity.  At the same time, the project will also function as an
              effective tool to educate and train graduate students and thus enlarge the
              scientific talent pool.
%%%
This individual investigator award is to a
              professor at Stanford University for a project concerned with the understanding
              of complex oxides that contain many novel phases and properties, including
              unconventional dielectric insulators and high-temperature superconductors that
              may lead to important applications.  By directly measuring the motion of
              individual electrons using a sophisticated spectroscopy, this project tries to
              reveal the underlying microscopic principles that govern the fascinating
              properties manifested in these materials.  This process will also train and
              educate graduate students and thus enlarge the scientific talent pool. 


