Title       : Theoretical Studies of Energy Transfer, Relaxation and Spectroscopy in Condensed
               Phase Molecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0071394

Award Number: 0071394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Silbey silbey@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Robert Silbey has submitted a renewal proposal to continue his theoretical
              studies of the time dependent spectroscopy of chromophores in glasses and
              liquids.  This research will explore the connection between single molecule
              spectroscopy and the spectrum of distributions of molecules in experiments such
              as photon echo, hole burning, and ultrafast pump-probe studies.  Various
              molecular processes that are caused by the interaction of the chromophores with
              modes of the condensed phase and evidenced in the spectrum will be examined. 
              Specific topics that will be explored are exciton and excitation energy
              transfer, spectral diffusion, and energy transfer induced spectral diffusion. 
              All of this work will be carried out in collaboration with interested
              experimental groups. 

Laser spectroscopic studies of molecules embedded in
              glasses and liquids have enabled improved understanding of interactions and
              relaxation processes in condensed phase systems including biologically relevant
              photosynthetic reaction centers and proteins.  In most studies, many molecules
              are monitored at once, so their averaged behavior is measured.  Now methods are
              evolving that permit measurements on a single molecule where one can measure
              line shapes and watch the molecule diffuse in real time.  Silbey is developing
              new theoretical interpretations that connect experimental results on single
              molecules with the studies on distributions of molecules.  The insights
              resulting from this effort will lead to a better appreciation of chemical
              dynamics in condensed phase systems, both experimentally and theoretically.  

