Title       : Analytic Theory of L-functions and Modular Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a0071509

Award Number: 0071509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynne Walling                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94690              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Farmer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9229,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The main part in this proposal concerns the relationship between mean-values of
              L-functions, the distribution of zeros of L-functions, and the distribution of
              the prime numbers.  The investigator and his colleagues study mean-values of
              L-functions times a "mollifier," in order to prove an equivalence between the
              mean-value and the distribution of zeros of the L-function predicted by random
              matrix theory.  The investigator and his colleagues also study the connection
              between the distribution of zeros and variations in the distribution of primes
              in short intervals.  In a separate project the investigator develops computer
              programs to construct Maass forms on Hecke congruence subgroups.  The resulting
              data confirms the predictions of random matrix theory.

The work in this
              proposal is motivated by recently discovered connections between number theory
              and physics.  These connections reveal a relationship between classical number
              theory (mathematics) and quantum chaos (physics).  The main tool used to
              exhibit the connection is Random Matrix Theory,  a subject which arose as an
              explanation for certain experimental results in nuclear physics.  Random Matrix
              Theory has since been found to be related to other physical phenomena, as well
              as several areas of purely theoretical mathematics.  By exploiting this
              connection with Random Matrix Theory it is possible to use mathematics to
              explain phenomena observed in physical experiments, and to use the underlying
              physics as motivation for discovering new mathematics.  In this way, more
              progress is possible by combining the two approaches than could be achieved
              separately.  The majority of projects in this grant will be carried out with
              the assistance of undergraduate research students.

