Title       : Studies of Elementary Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0071001

Award Number: 0071001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marvin Goldberg                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2010794            (Estimated)
Investigator: Morris Swartz morris@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aihud Pevsner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Barnett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chih-Yung Chien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barry J. Blumenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1221      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests support for a research program
in experimental
              elementary particle physics at the highest laboratory energies.  The two hadron
              collider experiments are CDF at the Fermilab Tevatron and CMS at the Large
              Hadron Collider (LHC) currently being built at the CERN laboratory in Geneva
              Switzerland.
	The CDF collaboration is now finishing a major upgrade of the
              detector for high-luminosity data taking (Run II) with the Main Injector,
              currently scheduled to begin on 1 March 2001.  The Tevatron energy will
              increase from 1.8 GeV to 2.0 GeV, and the luminosity is expected to increase by
              an order of magnitude.  Johns Hopkins University physicists are analyzing the
              present data set (from which the discovery of the top quark was made) while
              also playing crucial roles in upgrading the silicon vertex detector (SVX II)
              section of the CDF particle tracking system.  This vertex detector is important
              for all charged particle tracking but is essential to find and measure
              secondary vertices close to the primary vertex that are characteristic of
              b-quark decays.  Physics research in CDF by this group is concentrated on heavy
              quark physics and searches for new particles, especially mixing and
              CP-violation in b-quark decays and Higgs and supersymmetry searches.
	The CMS
              experiment will be one of two comprehensive experiments at the LHC.  It will
              open a new energy frontier in the search for physics beyond the Standard Model,
              in particular the Higgs boson and supersymmetric partners of the known
              particles.  Many of the new processes involve states with b-quarks.  This group
              is working to develop the b-quark vertex detector capabilities of CMS.  The
              vertex detector will use small silicon pixels to provide exceptional position
              resolution near the pp interaction region.  This group has over a decade of
              experience on silicon detectors from many experiments (Mark II, SDC, CDF, and
              L3).  The group intends its physics analysis efforts to be concentrated on
              using b-quark decays to study bottom and top physics and to search for
              phenomena on electroweak symmetry breaking, Higgs bosons, and
              supersymmetry.
The L3 experiment is now taking LEP II data above the
W+W-
              threshold, allowing precise measurement of W boson properties, most notably in
              mass and couplings, and allowing searches for new particles, especially the
              Higgs boson in both the Standard Model and supersymmetry.  The group intends to
              continue to participate in L3 data taking through the end of LEP running
              (expected to be fall 2000) and intends to complete L3 analysis work in mid to
              late 2001. This group will concentrate on the search for the Higgs boson,
              exploring both Standard Model and supersymmetric signatures.

