Title       : Thermodynamic Measurements of Interacting Disordered Quantum Hall Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a0071969

Award Number: 0071969
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong-Wen Jiang jiangh@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Jiang
0071969
This research is focused on the thermodynamic measurements of
              interacting disordered semiconductor heterostructures.  The problem of strong
              correlations, in low-dimensional quantum systems, is made more difficult by the
              presence of disorder.  Particularly, the thermodynamic properties of
              interacting disordered quantum Hall devices is still poorly understood.  A high
              density GaAs/AlGaAs quantum well structure with two populated subbands as well
              as a p-type single-heterostructure with highly correlated holes will be used
              for the investigations.  Compressibility will be measured by using a
              field-penetration technique to probe the internal interaction energy. 
              Magnetization will be measured by a torsional magnetometer to determine the
              spin polarization at different electronic phases.  Various physical regimes
              will be explored following the "road-maps" obtained from early transport
              studies.  Electrically controlled gates will be used to vary the density, to
              alter the screening properties, and to change the spatial correlation of the
              disorder.  Contemporary issues, such as the nature of the zero-field 2D 
              metal-insulator transition, its relation to quantum Hall effect, and
              consequences of Landau level interactions in two-component systems, will be
              addressed.  This project will also provide an excellent training for graduate
              and undergraduate students in this program for solid state electronics field. 
              In fact, the semiconductor device fabrication and characterization aspects of 
              the work overlaps closely with what is going on right now in semiconductor
              electronics industry.
%%%
This project is concentrated on the study of
              thermal properties of thin-layered semiconductor structures in the presence of
              both disorder and carrier interaction.  Similar structures are currently used
              for high-speed electronics and opto-electronics technologies.  Due to the
              intricate interplay of disorder and interaction, the properties of these
              advanced devices are less predictable, and sometimes even appear to be
              mysterious.  The proposed experiments study the thermal properties of several
              poorly understood quantum electronic phases by using several  high-sensitivity
              measurement techniques.  The main objective is to establish a better
              understanding on the underlying physical principle of these phases and the
              wealth of effects exhibited.  The better understandings can, in turn, provide a
              basis for designing the next generation of electronics.  The concepts obtained
              from the proposed experiments can be applied to some of the more complex
              condensed matter systems.  The work concerning electron spins could potentially
              have impact on the development of future quantum information processing systems
              for quantum computing and quantum communications. This project will also
              provide an excellent training for graduate and undergraduate students in this
              program for solid state electronics field.  In fact, the semiconductor device
              fabrication and characterization aspects of the work overlaps closely with what
              is going on right now in semiconductor electronics industry.


