Title       : Moduli Spaces of Abelian Varieties and Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0071795

Award Number: 0071795
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elham Izadi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Elham Izadi
0071795

The purpose of E. Izadi's research is to better
              understand principally polarized abelian varieties and their moduli spaces, the
              moduli spaces of curves and their relation with the moduli spaces of
              principally polarized abelian varieties to which they map.  Her project has two
              main parts. In the first part she relates the Hodge conjectures for an abelian
              variety to those for its theta divisor. In particular, one of the steps
              involved in proving the Hodge conjectures for an abelian variety is to prove
              them for the primitive cohomology of its theta divisor.  For this, she needs to
              find appropriate curves in the theta divisor.  These also have applications to
              the theory of Prym-Tjurin varieties. In the second part she reduces the Hodge
              conjecture for abelian fourfolds to proving a specific result about a
              particular family of curves in the abelian variety: she also works on
              this.

This research is in the field of algebraic geometry, whose main
              objects of study are algebraic varieties.  These are classically defined as the
              sets of simultaneous zeros of polynomials. Curves and abelian varieties are
              special algebraic varieties which classically appear in the work of Abel,
              Jacobi and Riemann among others, who developed the theory of modular forms. 
              They have applications in many areas of mathematics including number theory; in
              particular, they were used in Faltings' proof of the Mordell Conjecture and in
              Wiles' proof of the Semistable Shimura Taniyama Weil Conjecture.  Abelian
              varieties make ideal testing grounds for important conjectures in algebraic
              geometry such as the Hodge Conjectures.  These are deep conjectures which
              concern the analytic structure of algebraic varieties.  They were originally
              formulated in the form of questions by Hodge, then reformulated and corrected
              by others including some of the greatest mathematicians of this century such as
              Grothendieck.  They are central to the field of algebraic geometry, one of the
              oldest parts of modern mathematics, but one which has blossomed to the point
              where it has, in the past 20 years, solved problems that have stood for
              centuries.  Today, the field uses methods not only from algebra, but also from
              analysis and topology, and conversely it is extensively used in those fields.
              Moreover, it has proved itself useful in fields as diverse as physics, computer
              science, cryptography, coding theory and robotics.


