Title       : Collaborative Research on Graphical Markov Models and Related Topics in
               Multivariate Statistical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0071920

Award Number: 0071920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steen A. Andersson standers@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Perlman 0071818
Andersson 0071920

Abstract

Statistical models based on
              acyclic directed graphs (ADGs) (also called directed acyclic graphs (DAGs),
              Bayesian networks, or influence diagrams) are particularly well behaved, easily
              interpretable, and computationally convenient.  In the late 1980s, ADG models
              were generalized to adicyclic graphs or chain graphs, which include both
              directed and undirected edges, hence can simultaneously represent dependences
              some of which are directional and some associative.  The investigators will
              study the Markov and statistical properties of a new class of chain graph
              models that retains many of the desirable properties of ADG models.  Problems
              to be investigated include the completeness and faithfulness of these new
              models, determination of their local Markov property, and characterization of
              their Markov equivalence classes by means of an appropriate essential graph. 
              The investigators will also study a very general class of Wishart distributions
              on homogeneous cones, in which transitive acyclic directed graphs (TADGs) play
              a central role. E. B. Vinberg's classical characterization of homogeneous cones
              has been found to reveal a fundamental relationship between normal models
              satisfying TADG Markov conditions and this general class of Wishart
              distributions.  This class includes all Wishart distributions previously known
              in multivariate statistical analysis, including the hyper-Wishart distributions
              and Wishart distributions associated with normal lattice conditional
              independence (LCI) models, as well as a great many new ones.  Additional topics
              to be investigated include the limitations of the Neyman-Pearson, likelihood
              ratio, and maximum likelihood criteria for multiparameter hypothesis-testing
              and estimation problems, and the efficacy of the likelihood ratio test for
              testing order-restricted and multivariate one-sided alternatives.

One of the
              most central ideas of statistical science is the assessment of dependences
              among a set of stochastic variables.  The familiar concepts of correlation,
              regression, and prediction are manifestations of this idea, and many aspects of
              causal relationships ultimately rest on representations of multivariate
              dependence.  Graphical Markov models  (GMM) use graphs i.e. networks, either
              undirected, directed, or mixed, to represent multivariate dependencies in a
              visual and computationally efficient manner.  A GMM is usually constructed by
              specifying local dependences for each variable, i.e. node of the graph, in
              terms of its immediate neighbors, parents, or both, yet can represent a highly
              varied and complex system of multivariate dependences by means of the global
              structure of the graph.  The local specification permits efficiencies in
              modeling, inference, and probabilistic calculations.  Among their many
              applications, GMMs have become prevalent in statistical science for the
              analysis of categorical data in contingency tables, for the modeling of
              spatially-dependent processes such as the spread of epidemics in human and
              animal populations, and for the development of early warning systems for severe
              weather conditions; in computer science (as Bayesian networks) for information
              processing and retrieval, for robotics, computer vision, and pattern
              recognition, for the debugging of complex programs (such as Windows 98), and
              for the representation of expert systems for medical diagnosis; and in decision
              science (as influence diagrams) as models for information flow and control and
              for combining the opinions of many decision-makers.  A crucial feature of these
              models is that they are designed for fast computational implementation, thereby
              facilitating the development of software that can "reason" about real world
              problems.

