Title       : RUI: Lagrangian Chaos: Phase Separation, Coalescence and Aggregation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a0071771

Award Number: 0071771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121183             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Solomon tsolomon@bucknell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
This condensed matter physics project concentrates on the effects of
              Lagrangian chaos (chaotic particle motion and fluid mixing) on multiphase
              processes: phase separation and coalescence; droplet break-up, and aggregation
              of suspended particles.  There is significant interest in these processes, both
              from fundamental and practical perspectives.  Previous research has studied the
              effects of simple shearing flows on multiphase processes; however, those
              studies did not consider advection of  drops between regions with varying
              shear.  Advection is particularly important in light of recent discoveries that
              Lagrangian chaos occurs for flows that are not chaotic or turbulent themselves;
              rather, chaotic trajectories occur even in well-ordered, laminar flows.  This
              research will generalize previous measures used to characterize multiphase
              processes (e.g., the Capillary number) to account for advection in general and
              Lagrangian chaos in particular.  A series of experiments and numerical
              simulations are proposed in simple two- and three-dimensional fluid flows
              composed of chains of alternating vortices. The studies are done entirely with
              undergraduates; the research provides them with an opportunity to experience
              novel research at a time when they must make important career decisions.
              Furthermore, the techniques that they learn help prepare them for graduate
              school and/or careers in academics, industry or government.
%%%
Lagrangian
              chaos is the process by which impurities in a fluid flow can follow
              trajectories that are chaotic, even if the flow itself is very simple and
              well-ordered.  Experiments are proposed to study the effects of Lagrangian
              chaos on multiphase processes, which involve fluids containing either a second,
              immiscible fluid (such as oil in water) or suspended particles.  Studies will
              be done in both two- and three-dimensional flows, and the experiments will be
              complemented by numerical simulations. The research is applicable to a wide
              range of industrial processes, since many applications employ multiphase fluid
              systems.  Previous research focused on how simple shearing flows break up
              immiscible fluids into smaller droplets or prevent them from coalescing into
              larger drops. However, those studies did not consider chaotic motion of drops
              between regions of varying shear. The proposed research will fill the gap in
              this understanding. The studies are done entirely with undergraduates; the
              research provides them with opportunities to experience novel research at a
              time when they must make important career decisions. F Furthermore, the
              techniques that they learn help prepare them for graduate school and/or careers
              in academics, industry or government.
***

