Title       : RUI: The Evolution of Sun-like Stars Through Their Mass Accreting Phase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  2000      
File        : a0071063

Award Number: 0071063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77296              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin F. Ladd ladd@bucknell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1215,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              AST-0071063
LADD

It is abundantly clear that stars must form from the
              aggregation of diffuse interstellar material.  However, how this process
              occurs, and specifically which mechanisms play a dominant role in the
              evolution, are still poorly understood.  Stars in the process of formation do
              not accrete all of the material energetically available to them, but instead
              reject some fraction of their surrounding dense cores during the formation
              process. While the rejection process is not well understood, it is suspected
              that jets and bipolar outflows from the forming star play a major role.

The
              goal of this research program is to understand the time evolution of stars and
              their placental cores during the critical phase when the mass of a forming star
              is determined. This phase is dominated by the gravitational infall of material
              from the core onto the star, and the ballistic ejection of material from the
              immediate vicinity of the star in the form of bipolar jets and outflows. Both
              processes have substantial impacts on the core - the former removes mass, while
              the latter injects energy. The complicated interplay between these two
              processes strongly affects the evolution of the core, and, since the core is
              the mass reservoir out of which the star will form, may even set the star's
              final mass. While the mass of a forming star is impossible to measure directly,
              the mass of the circumstellar core can be inferred from observations of the
              rotational transitions of its molecular constituents. Furthermore, the
              energetics of the core material can be measured from the velocity structure of
              this spectral line emission. This research activity seeks to track the
              evolution of circumstellar core material through the main mass accreting phase
              of star formation, via studies of populations of forming stars.

An initial
              study of sources in the Taurus molecular cloud indicates that the
              circumstel-lar core is emptied on about a hundred million year time scale, with
              the most rapid decrease taking place at the earliest times. The rate of mass
              loss from the circumstellar core is consistent with that expected from standard
              models of accreting protostars; except during these earliest phases when the
              mass loss rate is larger than that expected from these models.

The analysis
              of the velocity structure of these cores suggests that bipolar outflows from
              the forming star couple to core material more efficiently during the earliest
              times, during which outflows may inject substantial energy into the core. In
              addition, maps of the spatial distribution of the "stirred-up" core material
              indicate that this interaction takes place in the inner core, near the forming
              star. 

This research program will apply the methodology proved for modeling
              core forming stars in the Taurus region to all very young stars in large
              complexes nearer than 350 parsec. The survey observations will be conducted
              such that the linear spatial resolution will be constant, producing a data set
              free of distance-dependent effects, and facilitating comparisons between star
              forming complexes. The new observations will build on the results from the
              Taurus survey by increasing the sample size by at least a factor of five, and
              will constrain models of the time-evolution of forming stars during the
              critical phase in which they accrete most of their mass.

This project is
              funded by the Division of Astronomical Sciences.

***


