Title       : Nucleation Processes in Liquid Helium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0071507

Award Number: 0071507
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Humphrey J. Maris Humphrey_Maris@BROWN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is an experimental condensed matter physics project whose goal is to
              understand how bubbles are formed in liquid helium when the liquid is in a
              state of tension. When an electron is introduced into liquid  helium, it forces
              open a small cavity in the liquid. This "electron bubble" has a radius of
              approximately 20 A. Application of a negative pressure to the liquid causes
              this bubble to grow, and at a critical pressure the bubble becomes unstable and
              explodes. It is planned to study how the pressure  required to cause the
              explosion of the bubble changes when the electron is optically excited to
              different quantum states. The results of these measurements will be compared
              with theoretical calculations already completed. As part of the experimental
              study it is planned to also measure the lifetime of the different excited
              states of the electron. In a second project the effect of quantized vortices on
              the nucleation of bubbles in superfluid helium will be investigated. The
              research provides excellent training for graduate students who utilize
              state-of-the-art instrumentation to study fundamental physics problems which
              have implications for a number practical circumstances where bubble formation
              is important.
%%%
Bubbles form in liquid as a result of a number of different
              processes. They can be produced when the pressure on a liquid that contains gas
              is reduced, when a can of Coca Cola is opened, for example. Bubbles also form
              in the turbulence around the propeller of a ship, and when a liquid is heated
              above its boiling point. In some situations bubble production has undesirable
              effects. For example, over the course of time the bubbles produced near to the
              propeller of a ship damage the propeller. On the other hand, bubble generation
              can also be very useful, as in an ultrasonic cleaner. The long range  goal of
              this research is the study of how bubbles are formed and how to control the
              formation for technological advantage. Experiments will be performed to
              investigate bubble production in liquid helium under a number of different
              conditions. Liquid helium is chosen for these experiments because it can be
              produced with exceptional purity, and so effects that might arise from
              impurities in the liquid can be controlled or eliminated. In the next stage of
              this research, the effect of electrons and vortices on bubble formation will be
              studied. The research provides excellent training for graduate students who
              utilize state-of-the-art instrumentation to study fundamental physics problems
              which have implications for a number practical circumstances where bubble
              formation is important.



