Title       : Statistical Analysis of Linkage/Association on Family-Based Studies in Human
               Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0071930

Award Number: 0071930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260468             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaw-Hwa Lo slo@stat.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9125,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The allelic association between disease genes and marker alleles allows
              predicting which marker allele is in coupling with the disease. There are novel
              statistical testing procedures proposed recently.  For example, the
              Transmission/ Disequilibrium Testing ( TDT ) has been both a popular and
              powerful method to evaluate the linkage/ association between the candidate
              genes with disease and the markers. This approach combines the information of
              association and linkage to yield greater power than conventional tests for
              detecting linkage when the association is present. It also has great potential
              to play a major role in future gene mapping of human disorder, by carrying out
              genomewide TDT screens. Recent literature has seen an increasing trend in the
              number of studies that have applied TDT or its generalizations to a variety of
              complex family-based data, but these methods are ad hoc. There is a great need
              for a systematic and sensible optimal analysis of these methods.  This work
              sets up a general statistical framework that can incorporate all procedures,
              different data sets and other related knowledge such as disease information,
              sampling designs and population information.  We develop a general statistical
              theory, useful as a guideline for future investigators, who can design and
              develop their own statistical procedures (following the framework) to meet
              their needs in incorporating different environments.  

The research provides
              a likelihood-based approach by introducing a useful 3x2 table which applies to
              each nuclear family. It is natural to adopt the conditionality principle to
              derive and to evaluate a variety of TDT type procedures and linkage tests,
              using "Locally Most Powerful Testing" (LMPT ) as a central optimality criteria.
               This research outlines the likelihood approach and demonstrates how the method
              works in some special cases. The research provides the derivations and findings
              from the examples,which should shed light on a better understanding of the more
              challenging and broader problems arising from these data sets.  In training
              doctoral students working on this increasingly important area, the research
              provides the basis to develop a new research level course.  The proposed
              research intends to lead ultimately to routine guidelines for future
              investigators and to offer a theoretical basis for family-based studies.
