Title       : Novel Vibrational Modes and Thermal Properties in Systems with Large, Open Unit
               Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0071863

Award Number: 0071863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank G. Bridges bridges@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to a senior professor at the University of
              California in Santa Cruz.  The project involves a series of local structure
              (XAFS) measurements on systems which
have large, open unit cells. Such
              materials have a rich array of vibrational motions, many of which are not
              observed in simple structures. In particular, there can be a large number of
              low energy optical phonon modes, some of which involve rotations of nearly
              rigid atomic. Such rigid unit vibrational modes have been proposed explain the
              novel negative thermal expansion coefficient of ZrW2O8 and other open
              structures. Another set of open structure materials are the partially filled
              skutterudite compounds. Here rare earth atoms can be incorporated into a void
              in the unit cell and strongly suppress the thermal conductivity. The XAFS
              measurements will clarify whether the proposed structural models are correct
              and provide a basis for developing better thermoelectric compounds and low
              thermal expansion materials. The work will provide educational opportunities
              for both graduate and undergraduate students to work as a team under the PI.
              Students will gain experience working at a national facility as well as learn
              experimental design and data analysis at the home institution, UCSC. 
%%%
A
              number of complex materials, containing open spaces within the crystal
              structure, exhibit unusual thermal properties. They are potentially important
              for a variety of practical applications, including better thermoelectric
              coolers and materials that do not shrink when cooled.
The voids in such
              materials allow the atoms to vibrate in new ways and many of the unusual and
              enhanced thermal properties are attributed to such motions. In one set of
              materials, clusters of atoms are thought to vibrate nearly as a single unit; in
              others it has been proposed that
each added impurity atom "rattles around"
              inside a void in the structure. This is an individual investigator award to a
              senior professor at the University of California at Santa Cruz to fund the
              detailed experimental measurements of these types of motion crucial for
              developing an understanding of these unusual thermal properties.  The work will
              provide educational opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students
              to work as a team under the PI. Students will gain experience working at a
              national facility as well as learn experimental design and data analysis at the
              home institution, UCSC. 
***

