Title       : Structure Theory for Graphs and Matroids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0071096

Award Number: 0071096
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil Robertson robertso@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              STRUCTURE THEORY OF GRAPHS AND MATROIDS

The investigator intends to pursue
              research with several colleagues in  the areas of graph coloring, matroid
              representation, surface embeddings and graph structure.  The main graph
              coloring project involves aspects  of the Hadwiger graph coloring conjecture,
              that any graph that needs k  colors to properly color its vertices can be
              contracted to the complete  graph on k vertices.  The main matroid theory
              project involves a plan to settle Rota's conjecture that matroids representable
              over a fixed finite  field have finite obstacle sets.  In contrast to these two
              well known open problems, there are many concrete questions on surface
              embeddings and other graph structures, and these are important to settle for
              the orderly development of the subject.  Two problems which provide a focus in
              these areas are the Seymour-Szekeres cycle-double-cover conjecture and Hajos'
              conjecture that graphs that need 5 colors must contain K_5 topologically.  The
              proposed research studies several problems, closely related to these, but
              perhaps more accessible.  The most promising part  f this project, and
              mathematically the most interesting, is the Rota  conjecture and the related
              conjecture that finite matroids representable  by matrices over a fixed finite
              field are well-quasi-ordered.  This is an  area with several very strong
              mathematicians currently active, as well as the investigators usual
              collaborators.  The investigator feels that  this topic should be strongly
              pursued on a wide front.

About 20 years ago the investigator and his
              colleague, Paul Seymour, began a project concerned with the structural
              properties of graphs which are preserved under the elementary operations of
              deleting or contracting the edges of the graph.  The outcome was to show that
              these properties are finitely based, in the sense that the list of graphs,
              which are minimal amongst those for which a given property fails, is always
              finite.  This shows there is always a finite list of graphs explaining why the
              property fails to hold.  Moreover, the dual problem was solved of
              characterizing the inherent structure of graphs which possess any such property
              (at least to a close and useful approximation).  Over the years since this was
              done the investigator, Seymour and an expanding group of colleagues and
              students, have been vigorously developing the consequences of this main theory,
              and striving to apply the techniques to their natural scope.  This has been
              important mathematically, and for the subject of graph  theory, but also has
              contributed extensively to computer science and combinatorial optimization
              through the algorithms arising naturally from  the finiteness conditions. There
              is real hope to extend the subject into its natural context in linear algebra
              known as matroid theory, where also there are finiteness conjectures when the
              matroids arise from matrices over a finite field.  There are also still many
              long standing problems, open to the graph theory techniques of this area, which
              provide a focus for the more general development of the theory, and which are
              an important part of this proposal.

