Title       : Heat Kernel Analysis and Zeta Functions on Quotients of Symmetric Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0071363

Award Number: 0071363
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay A. Jorgenson jjorgenson@mindspring.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for proposal of Jorgenson

Jay Jorgenson proposes to continue ongoing
              research with his co-authors into applications of heat kernel analysis to
              number theory.  Jorgenson and Serge Lang will study spectral theory on finite
              volume quotients of symmetric spaces using generalizations of Eisenstein series
              defined using heat kernels, as opposed to classical Eisenstein series which are
              defined using automorphic forms.  Jorgenson and Lang plan to investigate
              questions involving analytic continuation, functional equations, and special
              values of their heat Eisenstein series.  Upon completion of this component of
              their work, Jorgenson and Lang then will investigate applications of heat
              Eisenstein series to Weyl's law as well as to constructions of zeta functions
              which will yield higher rank generalizations of Selberg zeta functions.  In
              collaboration with Jurg Kramer, Jorgenson will study analytic aspects of
              Arakelov theory.  In recent work, Jorgenson and Kramer study bounds on special
              values of Selberg's zeta function and asymptotic bounds through covers. 
              Jorgenson and Kramer propose to extend these results to study asymptotic
              behavior of Faltings's delta function through covers, thus extending results
              first obtained by Jorgenson in his 1989 Stanford Ph.D. thesis.  In
              collaboration with Jozek Dodziuk, Jorgenson plans to use Lang's definition of
              degenerating number fields (from Lang's 1971 Inventiones paper) to study
              spectral theory on the corresponding sequence of degenerating Hilbert modular
              varieties.  The proposed methods to employ involve generalizations of research
              previously obtained by Jorgenson with Dodziuk and with Huntley and Lundelius. 
              As time permits, Jorgenson plans to study proposed additional research problems
              with Carol Fan, Edward Jenvey and Peter Grabner.

Classically, the heat
              kernel is a function defined for positive values of time t and points x and y
              in a domain D, and the heat kernel measures the amount of heat at point x in D
              at time t when a unit burst of heat is introduced at point y in D at time zero.
               Although the origin of the heat kernel lies in physics, the mathematics
              surrounding the function known as the heat kernel manifests itself in virtually
              every area of pure and applied mathematics. In addition, the heat kernel is
              present in the theoretical foundations of many fields of statistics as well as
              econometrics and, more specifically, financial mathematics.  Part of  the
              research undertaken by Jay Jorgenson and his collaborators involves
              understanding various ways in which the heat kernel appears in one area of
              mathematics and then translate the questions, theorems and techniques to other
              areas of mathematics, statistics, and economics.  Going beyond mathematical
              research, Jay Jorgenson proposes to extend his research endeavors to incluce
              applications of heat kernels to practical problems of financial mathematics and
              economics, which naturally includes developing ways in which one can program
              constructions of heat kernels in order to obtain precise, numerical
              evaluations.



