Title       : A Search for Gravitational Radiation at LIGO: Oregon Experimental Relativity
               Group
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0071058

Award Number: 0071058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Brau jimbrau@faraday.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1252      SUPPORT OF LIGO RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              During the next three years, the Oregon Experimental Relativity Group
will
              collaborate with the LIGO Scientific Collaboration, on the search
for
              gravitational radiation with LIGO.  Specifically, the Oregon group
will play a
              large role in the development of an understanding of the
environmental noise
              sources which would otherwise limit the sensitivity
of LIGO.  Environmental
              noise includes subtle effects such as stray
magnetic field and cosmic ray
              interactions with detector elements which
may limit LIGO's sensitivity after
              the initial phase of operation.  The
Oregon group will develop the
              environmental monitoring capabilities of
LIGO in the the areas of weather
              monitoring, magnetic fields, seismic
characterization, cosmic ray studies, and
              gravity-gradient noise.  They
will develop analysis techniques, analyze
              interferometer data sets, and
investigate the influence of these environmental
              factors on data.  They
will search for gravity wave signals, including signals
              correlated with
gamma ray bursts.

With the construction of LIGO, a new era
              of sensitivity to
gravitational radiation will begin.  After LIGO
              commissioning, the
first experiments attempting detection of the effects of
              gravity waves
on the strain measurements in the LIGO interferometers will
              need
careful analysis of noise-dominated data streams.  This will require
              a
careful characterization of the noise, including the many sources
              of
environmental noise, and the correlation of these noise sources
              among
interferometers.
