Title       : Viscous Fluid Dynamics and Characterization of Nano-Structured Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a0071743

Award Number: 0071743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harald W. Ade harald_ade@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical work over the last years has shown that the dynamics of
              two-dimensional viscous fluids is a richer phenomenon than hitherto believed
              and described theoretically.  Depending on the hydrodynamic and diffusive time
              scales, the scaling invariance of phase coarsening can break down and jagged
              domains can form.  In preliminary experiments, the various viscosity regimes
              considered in the theoretical simulations have been experimentally observed.  A
              detailed quantitative comparison to theory will be made and the phase
              separation of viscous fluids, such as polymer melts, will be experimentally
              determined for fluid pairs ranging from highly immiscible to weakly
              incompatible.  The primary model systems will be
              poly(methylmethacrylate)/polystyrene (PS), PS/brominated PS, and PS/poly(vinyl
              methyl ether) above their glass transition temperature.  It is expected that
              data is acquired outside the applicability of the present simulations, most
              notably fluids with asymmetric composition and volume fractions as well as
              asymmetric viscosities.  An interesting extension to binary viscous liquids
              will be the investigation of systems that contain small particles or beads in
              one of the phases.  Recent theory shows that the addition of hard particles
              significantly changes both the kinetics and the morphology of the phase
              separation.  In order to generate truly two-dimensional fluids, a special
              sample preparation method that will sandwich the polymer films between Si3N4
              membranes will be developed.  The surfaces will be treated to make them neutral
              or near neutral for the polymers utilized.  In the process, control over
              confinement effects such as changes of viscosity in thin polymer films will be
              achieved.  Near Edge X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (NEXAFS) microscopy will
              be an important characterization tool, complemented by other microscopies (AMF,
              VLM, SEM).  - Improvements in the theoretical understanding of NEXAFS spectra
              will be pursued.  The accuracy of compositional quantitation will be
              improved.

Students will be trained in executing interdisciplinary research
              projects situated at the interface of Physics, Chemistry, Materials and Polymer
              Science.  Fundamental understanding of polymer thin films will be advanced,
              which might improve applications such as coating, adhesives, lubricants, inks
              and a variety of thin films applications in the semiconductor industry.  Part
              of the effort continues a longstanding collaboration with Dow Chemical.

