Title       : RUI: Acquisition of Automated DNA Sequencing Equipment for East Carolina
               University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a0071384

Award Number: 0071384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund J. Stellwag stellwage@mail.ecu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred C. Lamb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald J. Newton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cindy Putnam-Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9141,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              RUI: Acquisition of Automated DNA Sequencing Equipment for East Carolina
              University. 

This award, combined with matching funds from East Carolina
              University, will be used to purchase an Applied Biosystems 377 automated DNA
              sequencer, a Silicon Graphics 2000 parallel processing computer system, a
              gradient programmable thermal cycler and an automated plasmid DNA purification
              system for revitalization and expansion of the  centralized DNA sequencing
              facility.  Seven principal and several minor investigators, as well as their
              students, will use the centralized facility for sequencing intensive research
              covering diverse aspects of the biological sciences. In specific, this DNA
              sequencing intensive research includes molecular phylogenetics and
              biogeography, character evolution, evolution and function of the teleost immune
              system, vertebrate evolutionary developmental biology, organellar-nuclear
              genome gene regulation, gene regulation of stress response in plants and
              structural organization of photosynthetic membrane protein complexes. 
The
              Department of Biology at East Carolina has a strong research program that
              places a heavy emphasis on training undergraduate and Master's level graduate
              students in research. The department offers Bachelor's degrees in Biology and
              Biochemistry and Master's degrees in Biology and Molecular Biology and
              Biotechnology.  The number of undergraduates electing the molecular biology and
              biotechnology areas of concentration and the number of Master's degrees in
              Molecular Genetic and Biotechnology has  increased significantly.  The
              University is adding courses in bioinformatics, molecular biology, molecular
              genetics, and protein purification and structure analysis.  This award will
              facilitate these course offerings by allowing the Center to provide access to
              state-of-the-art equipment in these courses.   

