Title       : Large Fluctuations in Systems Lacking Time-reversal Symmetry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0071059

Award Number: 0071059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark I. Dykman dykman@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0071059
Dykman
	Large fluctuations give rise to many important physical
              phenomena, from radioactive decay to nucleation in phase transitions and to
              protein folding. The goal of the proposed research is to develop appropriate
              mathematical tools and investigate large quantum and classical fluctuations in
              systems which lack time-reversal symmetry. The problems of specific interest
              are single- and many-electron tunneling in a magnetic field, including
              tunneling from correlated two-dimensional electron systems, and escape from a
              metastable state of nonequilibrium classical and quantum systems, including
              systems driven by periodic fields. Breaking of time-reversal symmetry results
              in the occurrence of singularities in the pattern of optimal fluctuational
              paths. The singularities are expected to have common features in classical and
              quantum systems. Revealing these features is necessary for evaluating
              fluctuation probabilities and finding efficient ways of controlling them by
              external fields. Theoretical results will be compared with experimental
              data.
	The goal of the research is to develop theoretical methods of the
              analysis of large fluctuations in quantum and classical systems lacking
              time-reversal symmetry, and to investigate related new
physical effects.
              Although the research is fundamental, its results bear on several applications.
              It is immediately related to using large fluctuations as a diagnostic tool and
              controlling fluctuation
probabilities. Concurrent interest and growing body of
              experimental work on large fluctuations in different areas of physics,
              chemistry, and biology make the project particularly timely.

