Title       : Probability Measures on Vector Spaces: Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a0071700

Award Number: 0071700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Kuelbs kuelbs@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Applications of probability in modern science frequently involve the study of
              random quantities with many components (dimensions), or perhaps even of a
              geometric nature. Thus they require probability estimates and limit theorems
              which are applicable to random sets, or which are dimension free (hence, in
              essence, infinite dimensional). A major theme in the investigator's previous
              work, and in much of the current research, addresses both of these issues in a
              variety of settings. As a first example consider the link between small ball
              probabilities and metric entropy problems, which showed certain probability
              estimates are equivalent to problems in approximation theory. This link led to
              the solution of a long standing problem in approximation theory, and portions
              of the proposed research involve important unsolved analogues of this problem.
              Another example is the study of the Gibbs conditioning principle of statistical
              mechanics for statistics with infinitely many components. To begin to handle
              this type of problem one needs non-logarithmic estimates of large deviation
              probabilities which are dimension free. These estimates depend critically on
              dominating points and a suitable representation formula for the probabilities.
              A variety of conditional limit theorems are to be considered. Additional
              problems exhibiting these general features are also proposed, and connect with
              classical geometry, analysis, and statistics.
	This work includes further
              non-logarithmic large deviation probabilities for partial sums of independent
              random vectors, an investigation of dominating points in a more general
              setting, and the application of these results to conditional limit theorems for
              infinite dimensional statistics. Limit sets for random samples of stochastic
              processes, as well as related coverage problems will be examined, and a primary
              focus will be to further examine the link between small ball probabilities and
              non-classical functional laws of the iterated logarithm applicable to
              occupation measures. Problems concerning vector valued partial sums, cluster
              sets, small ball probabilities, self-normalized partial sums, and limit
              theorems for convex hulls of Brownian motion paths are also to be considered.
              

