Title       : Mississippi Earth Science Applications Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0071101

Award Number: 0071101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400093             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Williams williams@gpsinc.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tony L. Honeycutt  (Principal Investigator former)
              Molly M. Walker  (Principal Investigator former)
              Allen W. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Delta Comunity College
	      Olive Street Box 668
	      Moorhead, MS  387610668    601/246-5631

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

Agriculture remains an economic juggernaut in the Lower
              Mississippi River Delta region. This region has traditionally been one of
              America's most prolific producers of cotton, rice, soybeans, and other major
              agricultural products. In the 90's, agricultural producers have faced one of
              the most severe depressions in American history. However, recent developments
              in plant pathology and availability of advanced technologies such as remote
              sensing, global positioning systems (GPS) and geographic information systems
              (GIS) have the potential to greatly improve agricultural productivity and
              enhance crop yields. The rapid application of science and information
              technology have dramatically changed the way producers, including farmers,
              bring their products to the marketplace. However, farmers remain reluctant to
              invest heavily in 'precision farming' without knowing that they will have a
              steady stream of highly qualified, technically proficient workers capable of
              utilizing the technology to make decisions.

Mississippi Delta Community
              College in collaboration with industry leaders, Mississippi State University,
              NASA, and the Delta Research Experiment Center are developing and implementing
              a curriculum in Spatial Information Systems (SIS) leading to the Associate
              
degree. Through input from the training partners, the curriculum is being
              developed around 
short-term and long-term industry needs for an Advanced
              Agricultural Specialist. The SIS program is developing students' basic
              competencies, workplace values, and technological awareness, and competency
              through faculty and instructor enhancement internships, classroom experiences,
              and student internships. Articulation of curricula from two-year to four-year
              levels is also a project component. The curriculum is transferable to other
              community colleges with similar needs.

