Title       : Microwave Processing of Ceramic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0071368

Award Number: 0071368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158226             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Kriegsmann grkrie@micro.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will model and analyze a class of physical
problems arising in
              microwave processing of ceramics.  These problems
give rise to challenging
              nonlinear initial boundary value problems
for partial differential equations.
              Their mathematical formulation involves 
one or more nonlinear parabolic
              equations, governing  the diffusion of heat and
the diffusion of a chemical
              concentration, and the time harmonic
version of Maxwells equations, governing
              the propagation of electromagnetic waves.  
These equations are coupled
              together in a nonlinear fashion and, in 
addition, nonlinear heat balances are
              required in certain applications 
where surface temperatures produce
              significant thermal radiation.  
Kriegsmann will develop and use asymptotic
              methods, dictated 
by certain physical limits, to simplify the mathematical
              systems and 
develop and use numerical methods to solve the reduced
              problems.

The goals of the work supported with this award are twofold.  The
              first is 
the mathematical understanding of the basic physical mechanisms
              which 
make microwave processing work.  Such an understanding will give
              scientists 
and engineers involved in microwave processing of ceramics more
              basic scientific
underpinnings to judge and interpret their experimental
              findings.
The second goal is the development and application of asymptotic,
              numerical,
and other approximate methods required to obtain an accurate
              description
of more realistic and complicated processes. The successful
              completion
of the planned research will allow engineers and scientists to
              design
more efficient sintering and joining processes for ceramics which will
              allow 
them to produce higher quality materials.   It will also help in the
              design
and implementation of microwave assisted vapor deposition
              processes
which are highly promising in the construction of composite
              ceramic
materials

