Title       : Optical and Infrared Observations of Gamma-Ray Burst Afterglows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a0071108

Award Number: 0071108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard E. Barvainis                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jules P. Halpern jules@astro.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
AST-0071108
Halpern

This project has as its objective the rapid
              follow-up of gamma-ray burst (GRB) afterglows using ground-based, optical/IR
              photometry and spectroscopy on the Michigan-Dartmouth-MIT (MDM) 2.4m telescope
              on Kitt Peak. The PI has been one of the important players in this type of
              research since 1998 and has the good, prompt access to the telescope which is
              necessary for this type of follow-up work.

Using the approximately 6 to 8
              bursts per year in the northern hemisphere that are located within hours by the
              BeppoSAX and/or RXTE satellites, this project will continue a successful
              program of discovering and characterizing the optical afterglows of gamma-ray
              bursts with the two telescopes of the MDM Observatory. Starting with the year
              2000 launch of the HETE-II satellite, it will become possible to make optical
              identifications within minutes of a GRB event, which affords the opportunity to
              obtain multicolor optical light curves on small telescopes such as the
              MDM
1.3m, and absorption-line redshifts on medium-sized telescopes such as the
              MDM 2.4m.
These data can be used to study the temporal decay and spectral
              evolution of the afterglow in order to diagnose the energetics of the fireball,
              and to model the circumstellar environments
in which these explosions occur,
              e.g., uniform interstellar medium vs. stellar wind. HETE-II will also be
              sensitive to the class of short-duration gamma-ray bursts, which have
              heretofore not been identified, and are distinct in their gamma-ray spectral
              properties and flux distribution from the long-duration bursts which have
              triggered all previous after- glow detections. This work has the goal of
              revealing a distinct population of GRB progenitor, for example, old ones that
              have traveled outside their galaxy's interstellar medium, versus those that end
              their short lives while still embedded in dense, star-forming regions. Infrared
              photometry is of utmost importance for this distinction. Prompt IR photometry,
              particularly in the K band, offers the opportunity to identify the
highest
              redshift and/or most obscured GRBs. The MDM 2.4m and ONIS IR camera, can easily
              detect a moderately obscured GRB to z = 10 within an hour of the event. On
              longer time scales, the light curves can be followed for several days in order
              to discover the predicted (and occasionally detected) temporal steepening which
              is the signature of jet-like afterglows. Measuring such breaks is crucial to
              quantifying the effects of beaming on the energetics of the fireball and on the
              global statistics of GRBs and their afterglows. Finally, the afterglows of the
              brighter and closer events can be monitored for several weeks in order to
              search for the signatures of underlying supernovae in their late-time optical
              light curves. The possible association of at least some GRBs with supernovae of
              massive stars promises to be the long-sought handle on the physics of the GRB
              itself. Funding for this project was provided by the NSF program for
              Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).

***

