Title       : Arithmetic Geometry of Diophantine Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0071921

Award Number: 0071921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucien Szpiro   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/417-8423

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for 0071921- Szpiro

Technical description:  This is a project in the
              arithmetic algebraic geometry of diophantine problems.  The PI is continuing
              his work which was successfully used by Faltings in the solution of the Mordell
              Conjecture and by E. Ullmo, S. Zhang and the PI in the solution of the
              Bogomolov Conjecture.  The use of the modern theory of heights has been very
              effective.  The PI views the Equidistribution Theorem as the solution to the
              problem of finding lower bounds for solutions of algebraic equations.  The
              question of finding effective upper bounds for solutions of algebraic equations
              leads to  many conjectures.  Some are very well known and may be unattainable
              (the abc conjecture, or the discriminant conjecture for elliptic curves) but
              the PI has always believed that attacking difficult problems is the secret of
              success in doing high-level  mathematics.  The project will concentrate
              on:

	a) The study of the degree of Belyi maps (these are coverings of the
              Riemann sphere ramified in only 3 points and they characterize curves defined
              over the field of algebraic numbers).  
	b) The study of the Zariski closure
              of the non-zero p-division points (for p big enough) in an abelian variety as a
              finite scheme.
	c) The consequences for the Tate-Shafarevich group of  recent
              results  of the PI  and J. Pesenti  on the discriminant inequality for
              potential good reduction.
	d)  Dynamical Systems (first on the Sphere  then on
              towers of Shimura varieties):  The canonical height associated to these objects
              should lead to equidistribution statements, for example for CM points (cf the
              work of Duke).

Non technical description:  The PI and his collaborators are
              studying a subject first investigated by Diophantus in ancient Greece:  find
              the solutions in integers of algebraic equations.  The modern attack uses
              algebraic geometry, analysis, and geometry.  Many problems in the natural world
              (asking: How many times? How  to decipher?)  require a solution in integers. 
              This no doubt explains why number theory, like physics,  has been a constant
              motivation for the development of mathematics.


