Title       : Studies in Interacting Particle Systems and Statistical Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0071766

Award Number: 0071766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto H. Schonmann rhs@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0071766
Schonmann
	Schonmann plans to work on various projects in the areas of
              interacting particle systems, statistical mechanics, percolation, and other
              related subjects in Probability Theory.  The main objects of interest in this
              research are the ergodic behavior and the relaxation patterns of several
              interacting particle systems, including Ising models, contact processes and
              other lattice spin systems.  Percolation theory is also a major object of
              concern in this proposal, because of its strong relations to these processes
              and its simplicity, which makes it a paradigm in the study of probabilistic
              models with many components.  A substantial part of the proposal refers to the
              study of the above mentioned processes on arbitrary graphs -- an important
              current trend in the area.  Several of the proposed problems have their
              motivation in phenomena observed in nature as, for example, phase transitions,
              critical behavior, metastable behavior of systems in the vicinity of phase
              transition regions and domain formation and growth.

	On a more informal and
              broad level one can see the objects of interest in this research in the
              following fashion.  A system contains a large number of similar components and
              each component interacts in a simple way with a few other ones, which are near
              to it in some sense.  For instance one can think of the atoms in a crystal
              interacting when they are close enough, or individuals in a large population
              which may suffer or not from some infection with contamination occurring
              between neighbors.  The local interaction may involve a substantial amount of
              randomness, but since the system as a whole is large, one expects and indeed
              observes a much more predictable behavior at the global level. A great deal of
              interest in such systems stems from the fact that the qualitative behavior of
              the whole system may depend in non-trivial ways on parameters which are built
              into the local interactions, but which only affect those in a smooth way (e.g.,
              the rate of infection between neighboring individuals in our second example
              above).  The general issues of interest are then the understanding of which
              sort of equilibria can be reached by such types of stochastic dynamics, how an
              equilibrium state is reached, and how the parameters which affect the local
              rules may affect the answers to these questions.

