Title       : The Physics of Charge Shuttling and Chemically-Engineered Nanoscale Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2002     
File        : a0071756

Award Number: 0071756
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark T. Tuominen tuominen@physics.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The is a renewal individual investigator award to two professors at the
              University of Massachusetts, Amherst.  The primary objective of this project is
              to carry out an experimental investigation of charge transport through
              precisely-engineered, self-assembled molecular-scale electronic devices.  The
              recently identified phenomenon of electromechanical charge shuttling is
              expected to play a significant role in these nanodevices -- in particular,
              because these devices have parts that can move and vibrate.  This project
              utilizes a device fabrication approach that integrates recently developed
              molecular recognition assembly techniques used
in chemical research with
              electron-beam lithographic methods used in microelectronics research. 
              Thymine/diaminotriazine molecular recognition pairs will be used to position a
              nanometer-scale particle midway between  closely-spaced lithographic
              electrodes. To explore the interplay of charge shuttling and single-electron
              charging effects, transport characteristics will be compared for devices using
              "hard-spring" and "soft-spring" organic bridging molecules. Single-electron
              transistor behavior will be investigated with the use of a capacitive gate
              electrode.  The project also includes investigations on shuttle dynamics at the
              macroscopic scale, since much fundamental understanding can be revealed through
              experiments on larger-sized shuttle devices.  This research is likely to impact
              the development and understanding of a variety of systems: nanodevices made of
              soft/hard composites, flexible nanosystems, microelectromechanical (MEMS)
              devices, specific biological systems, and even particular macroscopic devices. 
              This research project will provide training for graduate students and post docs
              in state-of-the-art techniques and concepts in this interdisciplinary field
              involving condensed matter physics and chemistry.  This training will prepare
              the students for careers in academe, industry, or government
              laboratories.
%%%
Miniaturization technology has resulted in smaller, more
              powerful computers, smarter handheld devices, and gadgets of increased
              functionality.  However, we are rapidly approaching the limit where the
              continued miniaturization of microelectronic devices by standard techniques
              will proceed no further. As a consequence it is crucial to develop reliable
              methods to create a class of devices at the molecular-size scale. This is a
              renewal award to two investigators at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst
              to follow the robust example set by nature itself - to construct
              nanometer-scale structures by exploiting self-assembly based on molecular
              recognition. In this project, novel single-electron transistor devices are
              self-fabricated in a fashion that mimics the way in which biological molecules
              are able to recognize other specific molecules.  These devices are expected to
              carry electricity by an unusual means that involves electrons which are
              "shuttled" from one place to another. This research is likely to impact the
              development and understanding of a variety of systems: hybrid nanodevices made
              of molecules and nanoparticles, flexible nanosystems, microelectromechanical
              (MEMS) devices, specific biological systems, and even particular macroscopic
              devices. This research project will provide training for graduate students and
              post docs in state-of-the-art techniques and concepts in this interdisciplinary
              field involving condensed matter physics and chemistry.  This training will
              prepare the students for careers in academe, industry, or
              government.
***




