Title       : Turbulent Structure of Canopy Flows using Large-Eddy Simulation: Homogeneous and
               Inhomogeneous Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2002    
File        : a0071377

Award Number: 0071377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309126             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger H. Shaw rhshaw@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kyaw Tha Paw U  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Turbulence accounts for the transport of heat, water vapor, CO2  and other
              quantities between the surface of the earth and the lower atmosphere.  Plant
              and forest canopies have a strong effect on the wind flowing through them and
              hence modify the exchange processes.  This project is a continuation of work on
              the distinctive flow patterns (coherent structures) that make a substantial
              contribution to the exchanges that take place between canopies and the surface
              layer.  The strong velocity gradient at the interface between the canopy and
              the overlying layer of air induces a relatively high degree of organization to
              the turbulence, evidenced by strong velocity correlations, high velocity
              skewness, intermittency, and consistent and repeated flow patterns.  Using the
              computational method of large-eddy simulation (LES), the main objectives of the
              work are:
- Develop methods to visualize and examine the coherent patterns
              found in computed canopy flow fields.
- Create descriptions of coherent
              structures by constructing a framework of the various elements of which the
              structures are composed.
-Examine the vortex-like nature of the flow
              structures.
- Perform simulations to examine the effects of inhomogeneous
              conditions, for example at forest edges.
- Examine the statistical properties
              of the flow fields in such transition zones, and also the forces exerted on
              individual trees, to asses the potential for wind damage.

By analyzing the
              physics of interactions between elements of the plant canopy (foliage,
              branches, and tree trunks) with the wind, the work provides a basis for
              explaining transport processes in the canopy.

