Title       : Infrared Band-Specific Near Field Optical Microscopy Probing of Chemically
               Amplified Polymer Photoresists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a0071725

Award Number: 0071725
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411442             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Leone   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will explore mechanisms, line dimensions, and acid diffusion rates
              in acid catalyzed, chemically amplified deep ultraviolet (UV) photoresists
              using infrared near field scanning optical microscopy(IR NSOM). The objectives
              are to (1)develop a higher resolution variant of tunable laser infrared near
              field scanning optical microscopy, (2)push the limits of spatial resolution to
              10 nm, (3)use the method to study state-of-the-art samples of
              photolithographically generated lines in deep-UV chemically amplified polymer
              photoresists, and (4) to probe the diffusion properties of the acid species. IR
              NSOM is a chemically band-specific optical characterization technique that
              offers an adaptable method to study features and line dimensions. It can be
              applied in many situations and as new chemical components are introduced into
              polymer chemistries for deep-UV lithographic applications for smaller line
              dimensions. The basis for the contrast mechanism is that the absorption
              features in the polymer films before and after UV exposure and post exposure
              bake show dramatic wavelength-specific changes in infrared vibrational bands.
              When the contrast is properly accounted for with regard to both absorption and
              index of refraction changes, the method provides a highly sensitive way of
              detecting chemical transformations on a nanoscopic scale. Wavelength-specific
              IR NSOM is expected to provide an important new route to characterize line
              dimensions and to study acid diffusion rates quantitatively. 
%%%
The project
              addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with
              high technological relevance. New experimental tools are now becoming available
              to allow high resolution of elementary chemical and diffusion processes which
              when better understood allow advances in fundamental materials science and
              technology. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research is
              expected to contribute to improving the ability to lithographically define
              smaller and higher resolution components for advanced devices and circuits.  An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area.
***

