Title       : Southeast Center for Networking and Information Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0071047

Award Number: 0071047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2999800            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bob L. Williams williab@dbcc.cc.fl.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alex J. Kajstura  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bettye J. Parham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig L. Tidwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Angela M. Kersenbrock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Daytona Beach Cmty Col
	      1200 W. International Speedway
	      Daytona Beach, FL  321202811    386/255-8131

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Southeast Center for Networking and Information Technology Education 
(the
              Center) is promoting the development of curricula, processes, and
              infrastructure to improve programs and 'create a statewide delivery system to
              educate and train technicians to meet workforce shortages in computer
              networking and information technology (IT). The Center involves a statewide
              partnership of educational institutions (two community colleges, three school
              systems and two state universities) and industry participants. The Center is
              jointly managed by Daytona Community College and Seminole Community College.
              

The Center is working to achieve the following objectives and
              outcomes:
(a) Incorporate best-of-breed IT workforce curricula with current
              industry certification requirements to develop integrated networking and IT
              curricula that provide seamless K-1 6 articulation with multiple occupational
              exit points and incumbent worker education opportunities. 
(b) Develop and
              conduct Teach the Teacher (T3) in-service and faculty development in a
              technologically-integrated format to disseminate IT instructional resources and
              facilitate curricula adaptation and course delivery. 
(c) Leverage industry
              partnerships to provide ongoing support to the Center, determine 	training
              requirements, create and validate curricula, and provide student and faculty
              internships. 
(d) Encourage diversity in the workforce by developing marketing
              collateral to be used by
educational institutions to generate IT career
              awareness and recruit students from under-represented populations, i.e. women,
              minorities, and non-traditional students.

