Title       : Percolative Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a0071635

Award Number: 0071635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43741              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yu Zhang yzhang@math.uccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Colo Springs
	      1420, Austin Bluffs Parkway
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80933    719/262-3153

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0071635
Zhang
This project concentrates on percolation theory, a mathematical
              theory used to describe transitions of physical systems.  Percolation theory
              has a variety of applications to solid physics, biology, computer science, and
              geology.  A percolation process typically depends on one or more parameters,
              and a dramatic change in physical  properties may occur as a critical parameter
              value is passed.  This research will focus on the behaviors of percolative
              models in the following three areas: percolation model, first passage
              percolation model, and the percolative process.  More precisely, the research
              makes use of probability theory  (the moment estimations, the ergodic theory,
              correlation and martingale inequalities and stochastic ordering), the CLT
              theorem, graph theory (duality, the fractal dimension), combinatorics
              (partition lattices, distributive lattices), and functional analysis (the real
              analyticity).  The project will use these mathematical tools to advance in a
              rigorous understanding of the critical phenomena.

This project concentrates
              on percolation, a mathematical model used to describe transitions of physical
              systems.  Percolation theory has a variety of applications to solid physics,
              biology, computer science, and geology.  A percolation process typically
              depends on one or more parameters, and a dramatic change in physical properties
              may occur as a critical parameter value is passed.  For example, suppose we
              immerse a large porous solid in a bucket water.  Clearly, how water penetrates
              the solid depends on the size of the pores of the solid.  A simple mathematical
              model of such a process is defined by taking the pores to be distributed in
              some regular manner, and to be open or closed with probabilities p or 1-p. 
              There is a critical threshold, for probability at which the behavior changes
              abruptly, below which the water penetration is only superficial and above which
              it is arbitrarily deep.  The behavior near the critical threshold is more
              complicated. One of the most challenging problems is to give a mathematical
              description of deep penetration near the critical threshold.  This research
              will focus on three areas: percolation model, first passage percolation model,
              and percolative process.  In particular, the project will investigate
              mathematically rigorous exact solutions for the percolation process.  The
              research makes use of probability theory, graph theory, combinatorics and
              functional analysis.  The project will use these mathematical tools to advance
              in a rigorous understanding of the critical phenomena.

