Title       : Microscopic MRI with Joule-Thomson Micro-Refrigerators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a0071837

Award Number: 0071837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135275             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander C. Wright wright@oasis.rad.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Felix W. Wehrli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0071837
Wright
Magnetic resonance micro-imaging (u-MRI) has become an
              invaluable tool for the microscopic characterization of materials due to its
              non-destructive, non-invasive nature and the rich variety of available contrast
              mechanisms, although many of the techniques for generating contrast suffer from
              low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).  A technological innovation of recent years,
              however, has been the use of high-Tc superconductor (HTS) materials to
              construct radio frequency (RF) detector coils of extremely high fidelity for
              greatly increased SNR in u-MRI of biological tissues.  While the rewards of
              cryogenically cooling the RF coil can be great, as recently demonstrated for
              conventional coils made of copper, the coils are typically cooled to about 40 K
              and must be maintained in close proximity to the (body-temperature) tissue
              being imaged.  Their implementation thus has posed significant challenges to
              existing cryogenic technology, with current solutions raising concern over the
              hazards of liquid cryogens.  Very recently, however, a new type of two-stage
              Joule-Thomson micro-refrigerator has been developed, capable of sustained
              operation at 35 K.  This work proposes a new approach to cryogenic probe
              design, applicable to coils made from both conventional and HTS materials, that
              involves precision cooling by means of such micro-miniature Joule-Thomson
              refrigerators.  This new approach to be explored and developed represents a
              substantial change in the existing technology important to u-MRI as well as an
              innovation in cryogenic engineering specific to this field and is likely to
              have broad implications for biomedical research.  It also contains an element
              of risk in that it seeks to apply novel Joule-Thomson micro-refrigeration
              technology to advance the emerging sub-field of u-MRI cryogenics, yet it has
              potential to admit imaging and spectroscopy techniques previously precluded by
              the limits of SNR.

The micro-cryo-probes to be developed in this work will
              have application as new tools for u-MRI and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
              spectroscopy of normal and pathological tissues and biological structures of
              medical significance.  Applications may include in vivo imaging of trabecular
              bone structure and spinal cord injuries, ex vivo imaging of the mouse brain,
              and in vitro high-field NMR spectroscopy of biologically relevant cells and
              fluids.  It is envisioned that such tools will permit more accurate
              quantitative analyses of tissue microstructure and composition, with impact on
              the understanding, diagnosis and treatment of metabolic bone diseases, spinal
              cord injury and repair, genetic expression in the developing brain, and
              cancer.

