Title       : Femtosecond Pulse and Multiwavelength Generation from Semiconductor Optical
               Amplifiers - Fundamental Physics and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a0071941

Award Number: 0071941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Delfyett delfyett@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               
This research program will develop and investigate the fundamental physics of
              the operation of two classes of novel modelocked semiconductor lasers: 1) a
              compact, high average power femtosecond modelocked diode laser, and 2) a
              multi-wavelength modelocked semiconductor diode laser.  The salient feature of
              these new modelocked diode lasers is that it has the potential to exploit
              intracavity filtering techniques, to control both the spectral amplitude and
              phase of the output, and as a result, precisely control the output temporal
              electric field characteristics of the laser.  The successful completion of this
              program may allow for controllable output optical pulse shapes directly from a
              modelocked diode laser, and may potentially realize an "arbitrary optical
              waveform generator".

Novel applications of the laser system will be
              developed with interactions from industrial participants, in order to
              facilitate technology transfer.  Applications will be focused on photonic
              network and instrumentation applications using a hybrid WDM-TDM technology
              architecture, such as terabit optical links, THz analog optical links, 100 Gsps
              optical analog to digital converters, and arbitrary optical waveform
              generation, real time nonlinear multi-wavelength signal processing, and
              real-time recording and retrieval of high density, massively parallel,
              multilayer-multiwavelength compact disc optical memories. 

The success of
              this type of opto-electronics and photonics program will enable the training of
              students in technically vital areas of optics, communications, and signal
              processing.  In addition to outstanding academic training, fundamental
              processing, packaging and manufacturing skills will be obtained by
              participating graduate students, thus enabling students to provide timely
              impact to prospective employers upon their graduation.



