Title       : Multivariate Analysis, Ranks, and Multivariate Ranks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0071757

Award Number: 0071757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74903              (Estimated)
Investigator: John I. Marden marden@stat.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project explores two areas that utilize ranked data. The first aims to
              
develop statistical procedures that are robust to violations of assumptions
              
while still working close to optimally when the assumption holds. There is
              
a long history of such robust procedures based on ranking the data, that
              
is, replacing the observed values in the data with the values' ranks. This
              
process helps to ameliorate the effects of unusually wild observations that
              
can ruin an analysis. A number of multivariate situations in which there
              
has previously been little work using rank procedures will be the main
              
focus of this project. These include certain structural models defining the
              
relationship of variables, testing for runs in multivariate data observed
              
over time, estimating variances and covariances, and testing whether
              
certain variables are conditionally independent given some other variables.
              
A proposed method for defining multivariate ranks ("iterated ranks") so
              
that their distribution is independent of the distribution of the
              
underlying observations will be explored.

The second area looks at
              modeling rank data directly, where the data arise 
from judges ranking
              particular objects based on their preferences. One 
popular model posits that
              judges and objects can be arrayed along a line, 
where a judge is located
              nearest the judge's most preferred object, next 
closest to the second most
              preferred object, etc. A new model that also 
allows judges to locate
              themselves nearest the objects they prefer least 
will be considered. An
              extension of these models in which there is 
provision for a small percentage
              of judges to act not at all according to 
the model will also be considered.
              



