Title       : Topics in Model Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0071746

Award Number: 0071746
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79800              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. C. Laskowski mcl@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT


Laskowski is continuing his research on three projects within the
              realm of model theory.  First, in collaboration with Hart and Hrushovski, the
              investigator is seeking to  determine the `fine structure' of models of
              classifiable theories. This amounts to determining the amount of flexibility
              one has in choosing a decomposition tree for a model of such a theory.
              Recently, Laskowski has discovered that any shallow, strictly stable theory
              that does not have the dimensional order property interprets an infinite group.
               In collaboration with Shelah, Laskowski is seeking to understand the extent to
              which this group determines the dependence relation of dividing. Finally, in
              collaboration with Dolich, Laskowski is seeking to identify a class of theories
              that contains the simple theories, yet also a satisfactory notion of
              independence.   


Model theory is concerned with the interplay between
              theories (i.e., sets of sentences in a very formal language) and the classes of
              algebraic structures (models) that satisfy these sentences.  Most of
              Laskowski's research to date concerns broad classes of theories, as opposed to
              concentrating on a specific theory or structure. Because of the breadth of the
              context, applications have been found in other areas of mathematics and in
              computer science, specifically in the analysis of structured data bases. These
              classes of theories are described in terms of the embeddability  or
              non-embeddability of certain configurations of elements  into models of the
              theory.  Laskowski is continuing to analyze three classes of theories.  In all
              three cases, the combinatorial assumptions on the class of theories imply that
              the models of such theories contain  some algebraic content.  The investigator
              is studying the extent to which this algebraic component determines the
              behavior of a model of the theory.    

