Title       : Vorticities, Coherent Structures, and Surface Roughness Effect in Turbulent
               Thermal Convection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0071323

Award Number: 0071323
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Penger Tong ptong@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research uses laser light scattering and other modern experimental methods
              to study the shape and dynamics of the large-scale velocity structures, spatial
              and temporal correlations between the velocity and temperature fields, and the
              surface roughness effect on the heat transport in turbulent convection driven
              by a large temperature gradient across a fluid layer. The proposed experiments
              involve investigation of universal features of turbulence, such as
              intermittency, coherent structure, and anomalous scaling, and also include
              exploration and characterization of special behaviors of turbulent convection
              in a closed cell under different boundary conditions.  Emphasis will be placed
              on the understanding of the dynamic process and the physical mechanism of the
              characteristic features of convective turbulence. The study of turbulent
              convection over a rough surface is directly related to the convection in the
              atmosphere and oceans, where the underlying surfaces are almost always rough.
              This research contains a combination of exploring new physics and
              instrumentation development.  Students involved in the project will receive a
              broad training in physics and optics, which will prepare them for a range of
              careers in academe, industry or government.  The development of a novel
              fiber-optic vorticity probe will provide a powerful tool, which can be used
              widely in the general area of fluid dynamics. 
%%%
This work uses laser light
              scattering and other modern experimental techniques to study turbulent fluid
              motion driven by a large temperature gradient across a fluid layer. The
              proposed experiments involve investigation of the shape and dynamics of the
              large-scale velocity structures, spatial and temporal correlations between the
              velocity and temperature fields, and the surface roughness effect on the heat
              transport in turbulent thermal convection.  These experiments are of
              fundamental interest for the physical understanding of convective turbulence,
              and they are also relevant to many practical applications.  The study of
              turbulent convection over a rough surface is directly related to the convection
              in the atmosphere and oceans, where the underlying surfaces are almost always
              rough.  Understanding the heat transport in turbulent convection will shed new
              light on technological improvements for more efficient heat transfer in various
              industrial applications ranging from heat exchangers to reentry vehicles in the
              space flight.  This research contains a combination of exploring new physics
              and instrumentation development.  Students involved in the project will receive
              a broad training in physics and optics, which will prepare them for a range of
              careers in academic or industrial science.   The development of a novel
              fiber-optic vorticity probe will provide a powerful tool, which can be used
              widely in the general area of fluid dynamics.


