Title       : Mathematical Modeling of MEMS Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0071474

Award Number: 0071474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82335              (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Pelesko   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a coherent research program of modeling, analysis
              and
numerical simulation of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). The
              mathematical
investigation of such devices forces the researcher to understand
              the behavior
and coupling of fluid, electromagnetic, thermal and mechanical
              forces on the
micron length scale. The focus of this project is the coupling
              of electrostatic
and mechanical forces in MEMS devices. Due to their favorable
              scaling with device
size, electrostatic forces are often used to actuate
              mechanical members of such
devices. The mathematical modeling of this effect
              requires an understanding of 
coupled nonlinear elliptic systems of partial
              differential equations. 
The system consists of the equations of
              electrostatics coupled to the 
Navier equations of elasticity. Generally, the
              equations are coupled in two ways. 
First, the electrostatic potential appears
              as a source of mechanical force in the 
Navier equations. Second, the
              boundaries of the domain for the electrostatic 
problem depend upon mechanical
              deflections and hence the solution to the 
Navier equations. This two way
              nonlinear coupling is often additionally 
complicated by the appearance of
              nonlocal terms when the device is embedded 
in a circuit. In this work, a
              sequence of mathematical models of such devices 
will be designed to explain
              phenomena associated with MEMS devices, improve 
existing or suggest new
              numerical simulation methods and ultimately
aid in the design of existing and
              future MEMS devices. 

The field of microelectromechanical systems has
              undergone a startling revolution
in recent years. It is now possible to
              produce functioning motors
that can only be seen with the aid of a microscope,
              gears smaller than a
grain of pollen, and needles so tiny they can deliver an
              injection without
stimulating nerve cells. The use of existing integrated
              circuit technology
in the design and production of MEMS devices allows these
              devices to be
batch processed, hence made in quantity, inexpensively. This in
              turn is
igniting a revolution in areas such as biotechnology, where devices
              that
once could only be dreamed about have suddenly been made possible. 
In
              order to realize the full potential of MEMS, a theoretical understanding
of
              their function is necessary. This requires the construction and analysis
of
              mathematical models of such devices. Of particular interest are devices
              which
utilize electrostatic forces to provide locomotion. This class of
              devices will
be modeled and analyzed in this project. This analysis will yield
              insight into
the operation and future design of MEMS devices. Further, by
              developing an understanding
of electrostatically actuated MEMS on a
              fundamental level, the research will suggest
techniques for efficient
              numerical simulation of more complicated structures.


