Title       : Advanced Materials for Environmental Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0071839

Award Number: 0071839
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Economy jeconomy@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is concerned with the design and development of completely new
              kinds of ion exchange materials with greatly improved properties.  Two distinct
              families of materials are proposed, namely 1) ion exchange resins coated on
              glass fibers and 2) activated carbon fibers where the surfaces of the
              micropores are functionalized with acidic or basic groups.  The use of a fiber
              form is expected to provide a 10x improvement in kinetics of exchange and
              regeneration as compared to the commercially available ion exchange beads. 
              With respect to ion exchange fibers, research will focus on two types of
              systems.  The first family consists of cationic and anionic exchange resins
              coated on glass fiber substrates.  Problems that should be overcome with
              respect to currently available ion exchange beads include minimizing osmotic
              shock effects, elimination of environmentally unfriendly solvents used in bead
              manufacture, and reducing the costs associated with the use of expensive
              containment systems.  The second family of ion exchange fibers to be explored
              is activated carbon fibers and substrates functionalized with cationic or
              anionic exchange groups.  Potential benefits of an activated carbon system for
              ion exchange are high chemical and thermal stability, which cannot be attained
              by polymeric resin systems.  Activated carbon also has a continuous microporous
              network which can be tailored from dimensions of 6 A to 28 A.  This provides
              the potential for designing ion exchange/chelating systems with even more
              selective properties.  An interesting study will be a comparison of the
              diffusional processes of swollen polymeric networks versus a non-swelling
              microporous carbon structure.

These new fibers should permit removal of
              metal contaminants to below 1ppb.  Areas of particular emphasis include
              eliminating heavy metals such as lead and mercury, radioactive wastes such as
              cesium and strontium, and arsenate(ite) ground water contaminants.

