Title       : Environmentally-Assisted Fatigue Cracking in Silicon MEMS Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0071483

Award Number: 0071483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Winston O. Soboyejo soboyejo@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0071483
Soboyejo
The project aims to develop a fundamental understanding of
              environmentally-assisted crack initiation and propagation mechanisms in well
              characterized Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) structures fabricated
              from single crystal and polycrystalline silicon.  Following an initial phase in
              which the microstructure of the MEMS structures will be studied via scanning
              and transmission electron microscopy, the surface topography of the specimens
              will be examined with atomic force microscopy techniques.  The initial
              micro-textures in the polycrystalline silicon structures will then be measured
              using orientation imagining microscopy, before conducting micro-tensile
              experiments on single and polycrystalline structures to determine their
              constitutive behavior under monotonic or cyclic loading.  The second phase of
              the program will focus on the characterization of environmentally-assisted
              crack initiation mechanisms in the silica layer that is formed on the surfaces
              of the silicon MEMS structures upon exposure to air.  The program will explore
              the hypothesis that crack nucleation occurs by stress-assisted dissolution or
              rupture processes that are induced as a result of surface reactions with water
              vapor.  To test this hypothesis, natural crack initiation experiments will be
              performed in laboratory air, and environments with controlled partial pressures
              of water vapor.  The changes in  surface topography of the silica layer will be
              monitored as a function of time and stress using atomic force microscopy
              techniques.  The onset of crack initiation will be detected from changes in the
              resonance conditions of the micro-tester/specimen configuration, and high
              magnification scanning electron microscopy.  The measured initiation conditions
              will then be compared with predictions from stress-assisted dissolution and
              crack nucleation models.

The mechanisms of environmentally-assisted crack
              growth will also be studied in Phase II using specimens containing nano- or
              micro-notches, or indentation cracks.  As in the crack initiation experiments,
              crack growth will be investigated in laboratory air, and environments with
              controlled relative humidities.  The increments of crack growth will be
              detected from changes in the resonance conditions of the micro-tester/specimen
              assembly.  The increments of crack growth and the crack/microstructure
              interactions will be determined using a combination of in-situ and ex-situ
              scanning electron microscopy techniques.  The crystallographic directions of
              crack growth will also be characterized via orientation imaging microscopy
              before performing scanning electron microscopy analyses to identify the
              fracture modes.  Mechanism-based mechanics models will then be developed for
              the prediction of crack initiation and propagation.  The models will be
              developed in collaboration with Prof. Jean Prevost and Dr. Tim Baker in a
              separately funded NSF program at Princeton.  The two NSF programs will,
              therefore, operate as a mini-center that will involve close interactions with
              Prof. Zhigang Suo and Prof. Anthony Evans of Princeton University.

The
              program will also provide the Principal Investigator with the funds to continue
              outreach and teaching programs initiated with NSF financial support over the
              past five years.  At the senior high school level, the PI will interact with a
              local high school teacher who will spend the summer working on MEMS-based
              teaching and research materials to take back to the classroom.  The teacher
              will be funded through an NSF Minority Award for high school teachers.  The PI
              will also employ two minority engineering students to work on aspects of the
              proposed MEMS project during the summer.  The students' summer salaries will be
              provided by an ongoing program that is organized by the Office of the Dean of
              Graduate Studies at Princeton University.  The program is designed to stimulate
              the interest of high quality minority undergraduate students in graduate
              studies and future academic careers.  The PI will thus try to mentor the
              students, and encourage them to pursue graduate studies in mechanics and
              materials.  At the graduate level, the PI will use some of the NSF funds to
              develop web-based instructional materials for a new course on Advanced
              Structural Materials that will be co-taught with Prof. Anthony Evans.  The
              instructional materials that will be developed, include, web-based overheads
              for every class, and case studies that illustrate the application of mechanics
              and materials to the design of structural materials.



								



	  
                 		Figure 1 - Schematic of the Three Stages of the Program

