Title       : RUI: An Automatic Photolectric Telescope Utilized by Four Undergraduate
               Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0071260

Award Number: 0071260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225021             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Dukes dukesr@cofc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1215,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              AST-0071260
DUKES

This is a group award which will allow approximately eight
              scientists, at four primarily undergraduate institutions, to continue to work
              on a series of problems requiring extensive photometric observations of stars
              without requiring time away from their teaching duties.  Since the observations
              will be done remotely, undergraduate students will be able to participate
              directly in valuable astronomical research.  This will be accomplished by the
              use of a 0.75-m telescope, at a remote location, which operates under computer
              control.  This type of telescope, known as an Automatic Photometric Telescope
              or APT yields data that is as good or better than that obtained by most manual
              observers.   Telescopes of this type are revolutionizing the observations of
              certain types of objects that require extensive, long-term, series of
              measurements. These objects have traditionally been neglected since most
              astronomers have not had the time or facilities required to go and observe them
              properly.

The schools involved in the Four College Consortium are The
              College of Charleston, The Citadel, the University of Nevada-Las Vegas, and
              Villanova University. The projects to be carried out are those in which both
              science and non-science undergraduates and occasional high school students have
              been and will be involved.  In the past three years various astronomical
              research projects at the four schools have involved at least twenty-two
              undergraduate students and three high school students.  Some of the projects
              are solely dependent on the APT data.  In other projects, the APT data provides
              crucial observational data that complements observations carried out on
              orbiting observatories such as the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), as well as
              radio wavelength observations made with instruments such as the Very Large
              Array (VLA) radio telescope.

The major long term monitoring projects usually
              involve studying stars on and near the stellar main sequence. Stars lying on
              the main sequence are those which are fusing hydrogen into helium in their
              central regions. These stars (the Sun is an example) are considered "normal"
              stars. The projects are often studies of  "peculiar" properties of these
              "normal" stars. These "peculiar" properties are also found in the Sun but are
              enhanced in stars which are on the main sequence and are cooler than or hotter
              than the Sun. Specific projects to be carried out range from observations of
              hot, massive stars to those of cool, low mass stars.  In order of decreasing
              mass these projects include:

o Mass Determination of Massive Binaries
o
              Stellar Seismology of type A and B Stars (from the main sequence to
              supergiants)
o Hot, Chemically Peculiar Stars with Strong Magnetic Fields
o
              The Sun in Time Project: A Coordinated Optical APT, UV, and X-ray Study for
              stars similar to the Sun but of a different age.
o Eclipsing Binary Stars as
              Astrophysical Laboratories
o APT Observations of Very Young, Active Red
              Dwarfs
o Search for Starspot Variability among Strong X-ray emitting Cool
              Stars

This project is funded by the Division of Astronomical
              Sciences.
***



