Title       : Molecular Assemblies in Multicomponent Linear Chain Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2001   
File        : a0071381

Award Number: 0071381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Dorset dorset@hwi.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hauptman-Woodward Med Res
	      
	      Buffalo, NY  14201    /   -

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              To characterize the solid state molecular interactions within binary and
              multicomponent polymethylene chain arrays, electron diffraction data from
              oriented single microcrystals will be employed to elucidate their crystal
              structures.  This will provide a unique opportunity to uncover information
              (e.g. packing symmetry, unit cell dimensions, co-existence of similar
              crystalline polymorphs or alternate crystal structures, accommodation of
              non-overlap molecular volumes) previously hidden to powder diffraction
              investigations due to reflection overlap.  Techniques developed in this
              laboratory will provide reliable intensity data from the most informative
              projections of the unit cell, in order to carry out quantitative direct
              structure analyses.  Low dose electron microscopic lattice imaging will also
              depict interfaces at phase boundaries.  Factors influencing the stabilization
              of solid solutions (chain length differences and length distribution,
              heterogroup and branch inclusions) will be studied, both for stable lamellae as
              well as incompletely separated lamellae that include long 'bridging molecules'.
               The progress of phase separation for two- and three-component metastable solid
              solutions within a miscibility gap will be characterized by electron
              crystallography to define the crystal packing of the final solids, in order to
              discern common features that would suggest a diffusion path.  Crystallographic
              characterizations of eutectic solids will identify interfacial interactions
              across phase boundaries, testing the general occurrence of epitaxial
              interactions between these contacting domains.
%%%
The molecular and
              structural characterization of these polymeric materials is important in
              understanding and optimizing their properties. 
***

