Title       : Nonlinear Optics of Nanocomposites in Microcavities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0071901

Award Number: 0071901
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Armstrong roarmstr@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir M. Shalaev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The optical characteristics of fractal/microcavity composites will be
              investigated in this project.  The composites are formed from nanometer-size
              metal fractal aggregates of approximate size 1.8 micrometers, embedded in a
              dielectric cavity of characteristic size several hundred micrometers  in
              diameter. A variety of nonlinear emissions from the composites will be
              investigated including lasing, multiphoton absorption, and hyper-Raman
              scattering.  Previous experiments have shown that the spectral emissions from
              these systems exhibit enormous enhancement factors (defined as the ratio of the
              optical intensity with and without the presence of the composite), which can be
              greater than 10*15 and, for certain special cases, greater than 10*21. Students
              will participate in this research.  They will thereby acquire skills and
              knowledge that prepares them for future employment in industry, government or
              academe.
%%%
A device capable of increasing the intensity of a light signal,
              i.e., an optical amplifier, will have many uses in science and technology. This
              project concerns the study of the optical properties of a remarkable class of
              optical materials, so-called fractal/microcavity composites, which amplify
              light by enormous factors. Each of the two components contributes to the
              amplification. In the composite these contributions combine multiplicatively so
              that the resulting amplification can be truly enormous.  In previous
              experiments amplification factors in excess of 1 quadrillion (1 followed by 15
              zeroes) were observed. The ultimate amplification of light signals is expected
              to be even greater and it is towards this end that the studies supported by
              this grant are undertaken.  This research will engage the participation of
              students who will thereby acquire skills and knowledge in preparation for
              advanced studies and employment in industry, government laboratories, and
              academe.
***

