Title       : Optimal Geometry: Theory and Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0071520

Award Number: 0071520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97531              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Sullivan jms@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sullivan
0071520

     The investigator, with his collaborators, studies
              geometric optimization problems like finding minimum-energy shapes for surfaces
              and knots in space.  They extend their recent classification of embedded
              constant-mean-curvature surfaces with three ends to the more general case of
              surfaces with any number of coplanar ends, and also investigate in detail
              surfaces with truncated ends.  In addition, the investigator computes these
              surfaces numerically, in order, for instance, to create interactive computer
              graphics.  This project uses Willmore's elastic bending energy, and its
              gradient flow, to discover new minimal surfaces in euclidean and spherical
              space.  The Willmore flow has been recently shown to have short-time solutions,
              but the investigator considers whether it can fail to have long-time solutions.
               This project also studies configurations for knots which minimize ropelength,
              giving new lower bounds for the ropelength of small knots, and new asymptotic
              bounds on the growth of ropelength with crossing number.  Finally, the
              investigator uses his experience with numerical modeling of curves and surfaces
              to give new understanding of geometrically natural discretizations for
              quantities related to curvature.

     Many real-world problems can be cast
              in the form of optimizing some feature of a shape; mathematically, these become
              variational problems for geometric energies.  For instance, thin films, like
              those in foams, usually minimize their area and thus are constant-mean
              curvature surfaces.  Cell membranes are more complicated bilayer surfaces which
              minimize an elastic bending energy known mathematically as the Willmore energy.
               Knotted curves achieve an optimal shape when a rope is pulled tight, or if a
              charged knotted wire repels itself electrostatically; understanding such
              configurations helps explain the behavior of biological molecules like DNA. 
              This project explores such phsically natural problems, which remain challenging
              from both theoretical and computational standpoints.


