Title       : Quantum Transport in Strongly Correlated Metals and Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0071362

Award Number: 0071362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dmitri V. Khveshchenko khvesh@physics.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports research to develop and advance theoretical and
              computational tools for analyzing the behavior of electrons governed by
              long-range and/or retarded (singular) interactions in the presence of quenched
              disorder.

In recent years it has become increasingly clear that the
              traditional methods of Fermi liquid theory fail to provide a proper description
              of systems of electrons with singular interactions.  Such interactions can be
              either of Coulomb origin or they can result from effective description of some
              short-range (e.g., screened), yet sufficiently strong, forces acting between
              electrons.  The effects of singular interactions become even more pronounced in
              the presence of disorder as well as in low dimensions and/or restricted
              geometries, the situation often encountered in nanostructures. 

Due to the
              complexity of the problem, powerful analytical and numerical methods are
              required including Keldysh functional integral and quantum kinetic equation,
              diagrammatic techniques and renormalization group, non-perturbative eikonal
              method and bosonization.  These common theoretical tools provide a unifying
              framework, within which the following topics will be considered: interference
              between disorder and inelastic electron scattering near quantum critical
              transitions in itinerant magnets; quasiparticles in normal and superconducting
              states of dirty d-wave superconductors; transport properties of compressible
              states of electrons in strong magnetic fields.

This research aims at
              developing an adequate description of, and gaining new insight into, the nature
              and classification of the observed anomalous (apparently non-Fermi liquid)
              behaviors in a variety of strongly correlated electron systems; interpreting
              experimental data and proposing new experiments on transport properties and
              spectroscopy of heavy fermion compounds, high-Tc cuprates, and the single- and
              double-layer two-dimensional electron gas in strong magnetic fields; linking
              the properties of the novel magnetic and superconducting materials to their
              structure and assessing feasibility of their practical applications.
%%%
This
              grant supports research to develop and advance theoretical and computational
              tools for analyzing the behavior of electrons governed by long-range and/or
              retarded (singular) interactions in the presence of quenched disorder.

In
              recent years it has become increasingly clear that the traditional methods of
              Fermi liquid theory fail to provide a proper description of systems of
              electrons with singular interactions.  Such interactions can be either of
              Coulomb origin or they can result from an effective description of some
              short-range (e.g., screened), yet sufficiently strong, forces acting between
              electrons.  The effects of singular interactions become even more pronounced in
              the presence of disorder as well as in low dimensions and/or restricted
              geometries, the situation often encountered in nanostructures. 

The research
              will apply a number of powerful analytical and numerical methods to deal with
              this general class of problems and its manisfestations in the cuprate
              superconductors, quantum Hall and heavy fermion systems.  While much of this
              work is of a fundamental nature, the results may well have long-range impacts
              on future technologies.
***

