Title       : SGER: The Development of Procedures for Utilizing Power-tail Distributions in
               Queueing Models of Internet Traffic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a0071185

Award Number: 0071185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Gross dgross1@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl M. Harris  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The Internet has burst onto the American technological scene rather suddenly. 
              But its rapid growth has come with some critical and well-publicized
              performance problems.  To a large degree, much of the difficulty results from
              the inability of telecommunications planners to use traditional modeling
              paradigms to study and thus effectively manage Internet congestion.  The
              objective of this grant, then, is to support research into the development of
              new types of analysis tools for Internet traffic engineering.  Recent studies
              have shown that the statistics that seem to best describe Internet packet
              arrival patterns and service requirements come from the class known as
              power-tailed (fat-tailed, heavy-tailed) distributions, for example, including
              the well-known Pareto distribution of economic theory. The key problem is that
              the use of such heavy-tailed distributions does not permit the derivation of
              reasonable congestion formulas in the standard analysis methods of queueing
              theory, the major modeling technique of telecommunications engineering. Even
              resorting to computer simulation is fraught with difficulty because of the
              unusual behavior inherent in using this sort of statistics.

This grant
              provides funding to study alternative methods for modeling long-tailed queueing
              systems.  One major portion of study would be the application of a new method
              for probability distribution approximation to generate complete analyses of
              queues with power-tail interarrival and/or service times. Extensive numerical
              and simulation experiments are planned to measure the appropriateness of our
              approaches. A further objective of the research planned under this grant is to
              attempt to apply a variety of other numerical methods to the class of
              congestion problems seen in the Internet.  Altogether, it is hoped that the
              research supported under this grant will result in the development of useful
              computational formulas for Internet traffic engineering.  These formulas could
              then be used as a foundation for Internet sizing, control, optimization,
              performance monitoring, and delivery of quality of service guarantees. 


