Title       : Diagrammatic Monte Carlo Method in Quantum Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2002  
File        : a0071767

Award Number: 0071767
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolay V. Prokofiev prokofev@physics.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9216,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports further work on some recently discovered algorithms for
              numerical work in quantum magnetism and on the properties of strongly
              correlated electrons.  The two methods, originally discovered by the PI and
              collaborators, are diagrammatic Monte Carlo (DMC) and Worm-algorithm.  The
              former involves direct simulation of diagrammatic expansions while the latter
              is a novel simulation strategy involving extended configuration space.  The two
              strategies make it possible to address various problems which have remained
              unsolved so far.  They are also an improvement in efficiency, in both speed and
              accuracy for problems which have been studied by other means.  Finally, these
              techniques are associated with either new representation (momentum instead of
              coordinate, grand canonical instead of canonical ensemble) or simulation of new
              entities (e.g. Green functions, which allow on to extract elementary excitation
              spectrum or even kinetic coefficients).  The specific problems where these
              techniques will be applied, include, polarons and exciton-polaron interaction
              in semiconductors, holes in quantum Antiferromagnets and quantum gases at ultra
              low temperatures. 
%%%
This grant is being awarded for further development of
              two new numerical techniques developed by this PI.  These are
              diagrammatic-Monte-Carlo methods and Worm algorithm.  These techniques can
              allow one to numerically attack problems which have so far resisted a solution
              or even a partial understanding.  The techniques are believed to be both
              accurate and extremely fast.  They will be used to study a variety of so far
              unsolved problems in the properties of novel materials.
***

