Title       : Brownian Motion and Models of Fragmentation and Coalescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0071448

Award Number: 0071448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356006             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Pitman pitman@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Pitman and Yor are continuing their work on explicit descriptions of  the
              distribution of various functionals of Brownian motion and related processes
              such as Brownian and Bessel bridges, meanders and excursions, and the
              development of novel methods for obtaining such descriptions.  Stimulus for
              obtaining the exact distributions of ever more complicated Brownian
              functionals, and understanding various identities, has been provided by
              applications of Brownian excursion and Brownian bridge to the asymptotics of
              random combinatorial objects such as trees and mappings, connections with the
              theory of random partitions and random discrete distributions, and the
              applications of Brownian motion in mathematical finance.  While a great number
              of explicit formulae are now known  there remain many mysterious distributional
              coincidences of the kind which have in the past provided stimulus for the
              development of novel techniques and deeper understanding through such devices
              as path transformations and  decompositions.

This award will continue
              present lines of research into stochastic processes,  particularly Brownian
              motion, random partitions, and coalescent processes. Brownian motion provides
              the foundation of the modern theory of continuous time random processes with
              continuous paths, and has applications in fields as diverse as physics and
              mathematical finance. Random partitions find applications to combinatorics,
              physics and genetics.  Coalescent processes model random phenomena involving
              irreversible clustering or aggregation in a wide variety of contexts.  This is
              fundamental research into the mathematical structure of stochastic processes.
              Progress in this direction enhances our understanding of these processes, and
              has potential for application in numerous fields of knowledge.

