Title       : Representation Theory for Reductive Groups Over Local Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0071971

Award Number: 0071971
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Kottwitz kottwitz@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator proposes to study a number of interrelated topics having to do
              with representation theory and harmonic analysis for reductive groups over
              local fields.  There are four general topics, some of which are divided up
              further. The first topic concerns a strange new formula involving characters of
              discrete series representations of real groups in the Hermitian symmetric case,
              a formula that will no doubt be needed in order to compare the Lefschetz
              formula with the Arthur-Selberg trace formula.  The second topic concerns
              transfer factors in various settings: inner forms, Shimura varieties, descent
              for twisted transfer factors.  The third topic concerns bad reduction of
              Shimura varieties.  Currently this has lower priority but that could change in
              the course of the next three years.  The fourth topic consists of five distinct
              but related questions about orbital integrals for reductive groups over
              non-archimedean local fields. 

In less technical language the investigator
              proposes to study a number of topics that belong to the theory of automorphic
              forms, a beautiful area of mathematics with ties to all three main branches of
              mathematics: algebra, analysis and geometry.  The last several decades have
              been exciting times for workers in this area, one of the highlights being the
              essential use of automorphic forms in Wiles's spectacular proof of Fermat's
              Last Theorem.  The coming decades promise many further exciting developments,
              and the investigator hopes to contribute to these  directly, by solving some of
              the questions raised in the proposal, as well as indirectly, by helping to
              train young workers in this technically demanding field.

