Title       : Exciton Dynamics and the Electronic Structure of CdSe/ZnSe Quantum Dots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0071797

Award Number: 0071797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leigh M. Smith leigh.smith@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This condensed matter physics project utilizes time-resolved spectroscopies, and
              high spatial- and energy-resolved spectroscopies to probe the static and
              dynamic character of electronic states of individual CdSe/ZnSe self-assembled
              quantum dots.  The excited state structure of the electronic levels will be
              probed by resonant, Raman and photoluminescence spectroscopies.  Polarized
              photoluminescence and magnetic field effects will be used to identify the
              symmetry properties of the states.   Dynamics of transitions among the quantum
              dot electronic states are studied by time-resolved photoluminescence or
              pump-probe picosecond/femtosecond excitations.  Of particular interest is the
              physics of interactions between closely associated quantum dots as well as
              interactions of excitations with optic and acoustic photons.  The undergraduate
              and graduate students involved in this research will be trained in modern
              state-of-the-art techniques for synthesizing and characterizing nanostructured
              materials.
%%%
This condensed matter physics project use optical methods to
              electrons and holes which are confined to nanostructures where the length scale
              is comparable to the wave nature of the particles.  Such quantum dots can be
              made by utilizing the tendency of nature to 'self organize'  itself.  Just as
              dew does not continuously wet a leaf but often organizes into a layer of
              droplets, cadmium sulfide when deposited on a zinc selenide surfaces forms
              small nanoscale solid particles which are know as quantum dots because of their
              small size.  Extensive experiments in recent years have shown that these
              structures confine electrons to states that are reminiscent of the electron
              states in atoms or molecules.  The electronic states in the quantum dots are
              not as well understood as the molecular electronic states, ant the quantum dot
              states can potentially be tuned by varying the size and composition of the
              dots.  This project will largely use high resolution optical techniques to
              probe the energy structure and dynamics of electrons in the quantum dots. 
              Graduate students and undergraduate students associated with the project will
              be trained in state-of-the-art techniques for making and characterizing
              nanostructured materials.


