Title       : Number Theory Related to Quantum Chaos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a0071503

Award Number: 0071503
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40126              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Granville andrew@math.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Par M. Kurlberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Par Kurlberg

ABSTRACT:

In this project, the Co-Principal Investigator will
              study some number theoretical questions related to mathematical physics. 
              Quantum Chaos is concerned with how chaos in classical systems manifests itself
              in terms of quantum mechanics. For instance, can chaos, or lack thereof, be
              detected in the statistical behavior of the energy levels when a classical
              system is quantized?  Pursuing this question for the ``boxed harmonic
              oscillator'', a simple system whose energy levels show interesting spacing
              behavior, led the co-P.I. to consider spacings between squares modulo highly
              composite integers.  The first goal of this project is to generalize the
              results on spacings of squares to spacings between values of more general
              polynomials, both modulo highly composite integers, as well as modulo primes. 
              In this context it is also interesting to study the distribution of the
              cardinality of the images of these polynomial maps.  Another aspect of Quantum
              Chaos is the quantum mechanical analogue of classical ergodicity.  The ``cat
              map'' is a simple model of a chaotic system, and its quantization has strong
              arithmetical features.  Using these special features, it is possible to express
              Quantum Ergodicity for the cat map in terms of exponential sums.  A second goal
              of this proposal is to prove quantum unique ergodicity for the quantized cat
              map using equidistribution results for exponential sums.

The main objective
              of this project is to explore the connection between Quantum Chaos and Number
              Theory. Quantum Chaos tries to answer important questions in Physics regarding
              quantum mechanical analogues of classical chaos.  The subject has applications
              to microelectronics, and is hence of interest to the computer and
              communications industry. Number Theory is concerned with properties of whole
              numbers and is one of the oldest branches of mathematics.  For a long time it
              was studied mostly because of aesthetic reasons, but in the last few decades
              the field has been of fundamental importance to cryptography 





