Title       : Analytical and Mechanistic Studies in Electrochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a0071787

Award Number: 0071787
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $519000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis H. Evans dhevans@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project, which is supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
              program, continues research that focuses on developing a thorough understanding
              of multi-electron reactions with emphasis on the energetics and kinetics of the
              processes.  Conducted by Dr. Dennis Evans and his group at the University of
              Delaware, the project includes several parts.  One part uses the behavior of
              certain molecules to study potential inversion, the phenomenon where the
              insertion or removal of the second electron in a two electron process occurs
              more easily than does removal of the first electron.  Fast scan cyclic
              voltammetry is then used to identify the point at which the structural changes
              associated with potential inversion occurs.  Another part of the project
              develops an improved fundamental understanding of the mechanism of electrode
              reactions.  This improved understanding is used to investigate and improve
              procedures for the electrochemical generation of acids.  Using a novel
              electric-field promoted hydrolysis, protic acids are produced by oxidation of
              hydrogen and a palladium membrane-based cell for acid generation is constructed
              and tested.  

The fundamental understanding of multi-electron-transfer 
              reactions that this research develops will help demonstrate the efficacy of
              electrochemical synthesis, which in turn could lead to more environmentally
              friendly processes in the chemical and pharmaceutical industries. 
