Title       : Beyond Mapping: The Challenges of New Technologies in the Geographic Information
               Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0071916

Award Number: 0071916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37082              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristen Krapf kkraph@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa M. Vandemark  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Rapid technological changes over the past three decades have had profound and
              challenging impacts on the cluster of disciplines that focus on the production,
              dissemination, and use of geographic information and related technologies,
              i.e., the geographic information sciences.  This 18-month study will assess the
              geographic information sciences via examination of their intellectual bases and
              associated research agendas, sources of research funding, organization within
              educational institutions, and links with other more broadly-based disciplines
              such as computer and information science.  The study will also assess the
              current and future demand for professionals in the geographic information
              sciences and future competitive prospects for U.S. industries based on the
              geographic information sciences.

The significance of this research lies in
              its ability to describe, predict, and explain current and future gaps between
              societal need and demand for geographic information sciences and a workforce
              skilled in this knowledge and these techniques.  As the technology evolves, the
              agencies, public and private, that provide data to decision-makers and
              stakeholders must also evolve.  To chart a future direction, we need a better
              understanding of the trajectory of change in the geographic information
              sciences over the past 30 years.


