Title       : A study of transient noise sources in LIGO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0071316

Award Number: 0071316
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $618000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Giaime giaime@phys.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger R. McNeil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren W. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1252      SUPPORT OF LIGO RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A recently appointed Assistant Professor at Louisiana University (LSU) and
              Principal Investigator of this award, together with two senior faculty members,
              is leading a new research effort with the Laser Interferometer
              Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO).  LIGO is designed to be the world's most
              sensitive detector for gravitational radiation and is just coming into
              operation.  LIGO is located at two widely separated sites, one in Livingston
              Louisiana, the other in Hanford Washington.  The Livingston site is located
              about 35 miles from the LSU campus.  This group intends to use the close
              proximity of the Livingston site to the LSU campus to develop diagnostic tools
              necessary to improve and sustain of the sensitivity of LIGO.

The project
              will be directed along three lines of investigation:

The on-line diagnostics
              of the LIGO interferometers at Livingston.  This group will use LIGO's  global
              diagnostic system as LIGO is brought into operation in order to gain an
              intimate knowledge of the LIGO detector components.  The goal of the group is
              to gain the information about the behavior of LIGO that will enable LIGO to be
              used as a reliable instrument.

Transient noise identification.  LIGO'
              performance is limited by stray signals, or noise, that either hide or mimic a
              gravitational wave signal from astrophysical sources.  The investigators will
              build a facility to measure the transient noise originating from various of the
              mechanical components of LIGO.

Advanced LIGO seismic isolation system.  The
              group will test prototypes of the seismic isolation systems being developed for
              the next generation of LIGO detectors. 

The group will involve
              undergraduates and graduate students in the research, both at Louisiana State
              University campus and at the LIGO site.

