Title       : Mathematical Studies in Quantum Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a0071692

Award Number: 0071692
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142993             (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Hagedorn hagedorn@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project concentrates primarily on the investigation of
mathematical
              problems that arise in the study of molecular quantum
mechanics. The nuclei in
              a molecule have large masses. Consequently, their
motion is approximately
              described by classical mechanics. By comparison,
electron masses are very
              small, and electrons adjust their quantum
mechanical states rapidly in
              response to the much slower motion of the
nuclei. This intuition is the basis
              for Born-Oppenheimer approximations.
Professor Hagedorn, his graduate
              students, and his collaborators will
study situations where Born-Oppenheimer
              approximations are not
sufficiently accurate to describe all the phenomena of
              interest. For
example, they plan to develop accurate "surface hopping models"
              to include
the possibility of electrons making quantum mechanical transitions.
              Models
of this type have been proposed in the chemistry and physics
              literature,
but they have not been derived from first principles. The main
              goal of
this project is rigorously to derive and implement such a
              model.

Motion of electrons and nuclei in molecules are well described
              by
solutions to the Schrodinger equation. No one has ever solved
              the
Schrodinger equation for a molecule, and our theoretical knowledge
              of
chemistry and molecular physics has come from approximations to
              solutions.
The principal goals of this project are to study the several
              commonly used
approximations and to develop improved approximations that will
              be useful
to chemists and physicists. In addition to theoretical
              understanding,
potential uses of this basic research are the synthesis of new
              chemical
compounds, the design of new catalysts, or the design of new drugs.

