Title       : Fractional Factorial Designs: Minimum Aberration and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0071438

Award Number: 0071438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ching-Shui Cheng cheng@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cheng, Ching-Shui
DMS-0071438
Abstract

Minimum aberration has been a well
              accepted criterion for choosing good fractional factorial designs. This
              research studies variants of the minimum aberration criterion in several
              different settings including block designs in which the experimental units are
              grouped into more homogeneous blocks to improve the precision, and split-plot
              designs in which some factors are held constant within each block.  Split plots
              arise when some factors require larger experimental units than others, or when
              the effects of certain factors are not of major interest, but they are included
              in the experiment to study their interactions with other factors.  The latter
              has a very important application to robust parameter designs in quality
              improvement. These settings have their own special features that call for
              different optimality criteria.   Existing work did not address the issue that
              there are two different errors in split-plot structures.  The ultimate goal of
              this research is to obtain general results on the structures of optimal designs
              in various settings, and to develop useful algorithms for constructing designs
              which can incorporate user-supplied prior knowledge and requirements.  For the
              former, the Principal Investigator uses tools from coding theory and finite
              projective geometry.  Finally, nonregular designs, including supersaturated
              designs, are studied under a newly introduced criterion of generalized minimum
              aberration.

Experimental design is used extensively in a wide range of
              scientific and industrial investigations.  In industrial experiments, often a
              large number of factors have to be studied, but the experiments are expensive
              to conduct.  In this case, the so called fractional factorial designs, in which
              only a small fraction of all the possible combinations are observed, are
              particularly useful.  In recent years, factorial designs have received
              considerable attention, mainly due to the success in applying them to conduct
              experiments for improving quality and productivity in industrial manufacturing.
               This research is to study the construction of efficient designs to extract
              more information, especially when systematic sources of variation (such as
              heterogeneity of experimental material or day-to-day environmental variations)
              need to be eliminated to improve the precision.  

