Title       : Study of reaction mechanisms and kinetics of heterogeneous catalysts for
               gas-solid and liquid-solid reactions by novel high-throughput spectroscopic
               techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a0071730

Award Number: 0071730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jochen Lauterbach   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Proposal Title: Study of Reaction Mechanisms and Kinetics of
              Heterogeneous Catalysts for Gas-Solid and                          Liquid-Solid
              Reactions by Novel High-throughput Spectroscopic Techniques
Proposal Number:
              CTS-0071730
Principal Investigator: Jochen Lauterbach
Institution: Purdue
              University


The goal of this proposal is to develop techniques for the
              rapid analysis of heterogeneous catalysts.  The underlying principle of the
              combinatorial approach is to systematically synthesize large numbers of
              catalyst compounds and screen them quickly.  This approach enables researchers
              to make well-informed decisions in the discovery process, find unexpected
              trends, and gather a large amount of data about the underlying reaction
              mechanisms.  A novel spectral imaging system, which permits the simultaneous
              measurement of the IR spectra of many products, permits in situ parallel
              investigation of chemical reactions.  A number of preparation techniques can be
              used to establish proper conditions; the methodology of testing a large number
              of samples lends itself to combinatorial methods.  The reaction systems
              proposed for the study include several important surface-catalyzed processes
              such as NO reduction and solid-phase supported organic reactions.  The PI has
              developed a unique instrument for FTIR analysis of compounds immobilized on
              surfaces or within organic polymer matrices.  This project may establish the
              principles for rapid advances in the development of new heterogeneous
              catalysts.


