Title       : Asymptotic Methods in Financial Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0071744

Award Number: 0071744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114896             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Pierre Fouque fouque@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Title:  Asymptotic Methods in Financial Mathematics (NSF-DMS-0071744 revised
              5/23/00)

Principal Investigator/Project Director:  Jean-Pierre
              Fouque


Technical Description:
Pricing and hedging derivatives in
              financial markets with fast mean-reverting stochastic volatility lead to
              singular perturbations of parabolic partial differential equations such as 
              Black-Scholes equation in the case of stock markets. This research consists in
              developing the  mathematical tools necessary to implement this new methodology
              in various situations such as American and exotic options in equity markets or
              term-structures of interest rates in fixed income markets.
The first step in
              this method requires an identification of the time scales present in the hidden
              stochastic volatility processes. This has been done for S&P500 by using
              variograms and spectral analysis methods. Other tools and markets will be
              investigated 
The second step consists in modeling the evolution of the price
              process by means of stochastic differential equations with volatility
              coefficients  driven by additional general ergodic processes running on faster
              time-scales. Risk-neutral probabilities are parameterized by market prices of
              volatility risk. In the Markovian case, derivative prices are obtained as
              solutions of partial differential equations, which are singular perturbations
              of the corresponding classical constant volatility equations. Asymptotic
              expansions are performed. The zero-order terms correspond to classical constant
              volatility situations. The first-order terms are shown to depend only on
              current prices and they are computed either explicitly or through the
              resolution of a partial differential equation. The case of American options
              leads to singular perturbations of free-boundary value problems that will be
              studied in detail. The hedging problem will be treated by a martingale
              decomposition approach also used in non-Markovian cases or infinite dimensional
              situations arising in fixed income markets.
The next step consists in the
              calibration of the few parameters revealed in the first correction obtained in
              the expansion. This is done by using observed derivative prices in liquid
              markets and used for pricing other exotic derivatives.
This new methodology to
              handle incomplete stochastic volatility markets gives rise to model independent
              pricing and hedging formulas easy to calibrate and to compute. Its mathematical
              analysis, the heart of this proposal, touches various fields of applied
              mathematics and leads to far reaching new tools and results.
Non-Technical
              Description:
This project addresses problems in financial mathematics of
              pricing and hedging derivative securities in an environment of uncertain and
              changing market volatility. These risk management problems are important to
              investors from large trading institutions to pension funds and to regulators of
              financial markets and economic activity such as the federal reserve.
It is
              widely recognized that the simplicity of the famous Black-Scholes model which
              relates derivative prices to current stock prices and quantifies risk through a
              constant volatility parameter is no longer sufficient to capture modern market
              phenomena, especially since the 1987 crash.
This research consists in the
              investigation of a new method for modeling, analysis and estimation that
              exploits the random nature and fast intrinsic time scale of the volatility.
              These observed volatility properties are used to derive corrections to the
              classical constant volatility formulas. These corrections reveal important
              groupings of market parameters, which otherwise are not obvious, and it turns
              out that estimation of these composites from market data is extremely efficient
              and stable.
Much attention will be devoted to the more mathematically involved
              cases of American options, which can be exercised at any time before maturity,
              or other increasingly popular exotic options, which depend on the history of
              the underlying asset.
New and original methods, based on the fundamental
              concept of martingale in probability theory, are developed to handle complex
              fixed income markets, for which the understanding of the time evolution of
              yield curves of interest rates is a real challenge. 
The goal of this research
              is to produce sophisticated mathematical results, which can be efficiently
              implemented and used by practitioners in quantitative finance.

