Title       : RUI: Radio Wavelength Studies of Early and Large Structures in the Universe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0071192

Award Number: 0071192
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216258             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. B. Partridge bpartrid@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1217,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              AST-0071192
PARTRIDGE

Where and how do large structures in the Universe
              first form and begin to emit starlight? Observations at radio wavelengths,
              since they are unaffected by obscuration by dust, can be used answer such
              questions.  A series of deep centimeter-wavelength surveys of a region of the
              sky will be made.  These observations will complement excellent optical, IR and
              X-ray data available. These surveys will enable us to determine the nature and
              abundance of faint, high-redshift, radio sources and to determine the mechanism
              responsible for their radio emission.  The star formation history of the
              Universe may thus be calculated without the need to correct for dust extinction
              as in observing at optical wavelengths.   This will enable the improvement of
              the predictions of the fluctuations, which Extragalactic radio sources will
              introduce, in current and planned searches for small-scale anisotropies in the
              cosmic microwave background radiation.  In addition, radio observations of the
              cores of X-ray bright galactic nuclei will be used to estimate the masses of
              the supermassive black holes that reside there.  Included in the planned
              research are several closely related research projects that are designed to
              have the right scope for undergraduate students.  These projects include
              improving the counts of radio sources at 8.4 GHz; archival searching of deep
              radio surveys for variable sources; improving statistics on GHz peaked spectrum
              sources; and archival searching for high resolution radio (and X-ray)
              observational data on galactic nuclei.

An important part of the planned
              activities is to repeat a successful experiment funded by a previous NSF grant.
               There is support for a postdoctoral position, which combines both
              participation in some of the research activities above and a carefully mentored
              involvement in undergraduate teaching. The postdoctoral associate will design
              and teach one astronomy course each year under the close supervision of the
              principal investigator and the co-principal investigator.   The postdoctoral
              associate will also review the pedagogical techniques.  Haverford College will
              provide support for the teaching activities. 

This project is funded by the
              Division of Astronomical Sciences.
***



