Title       : Exchange Bias: Spin Structure, Interface Disorder and Coupling Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0071968

Award Number: 0071968
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivan K. Schuller ischuller@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to a senior professor for a project
              dedicated to a comprehensive study of the phenomenon of "exchange bias."  The
              project consists of state of the art growth, structural, chemical and magnetic
              characterization, and measurement of physical properties using a broad range of
              techniques.  The aim is to develop an increased understanding of the phenomenon
              that occurs when two dissimilar magnetic materials are placed in contact with
              each other.  The exchange bias forms the basis for a number of applications
              that use the so called "spin valve" technology for magnetic storage and
              sensors.  Although the phenomenon is used in many applications, a basic
              understanding is lacking.  Issues that will be addressed by this research
              include, the influence of structural and magnetic parameters, and the effect of
              interfacial parameters such as roughness and interdiffusion.  Through a
              thorough experimental attack, a better understanding of the phenomenon should
              be obtained.  This will have a direct impact on related technologies.  Students
              and postdocs working on this project will acquire technical and fundamental
              knowledge and skills that can be lead to careers in basic or applied research
              in academia, industry, or government laboratories.
%%%
This individual
              investigator award is to a senior professor for a project dedicated to the
              study of a phenomenon known as "exchange bias", which occurs when two
              dissimilar magnetic materials are in contact with each other.  This phenomenon
              appears in a variety of material configurations (i.e. thin films, small
              particles, etc.) and is an important ingredient in a number of sensor
              applications.  Although the phenomenon is used in a 55 billion dollars
              industry, there is little basic understanding of its origin.  Basic research
              along these lines may have an important effect on the development of novel
              sensors and improved magnetic storage.  Graduate students and postdoctoral
              fellows are essential collaborators in this work.  They will not only help in
              advancing our understanding of this important phenomenon, but will also acquire
              a broad range of technical skills that will serve them whether they are
              interested in careers in academia or  the sensor and storage industries.  This
              is an ideal area of research in which basic research can have a direct,
              relevant impact on industries and technology of crucial importance to the
              nation.



