Title       : RUI: Combinatorial Control of Chaos, Symbolic Dynamics, Optimal Control and
               Inverse Frobenius-Perron Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0071314

Award Number: 0071314
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68295              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik M. Bollt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : US Naval Academy
	      
	      Annapolis, MD  21402    301/267-6100

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9141,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0071314
Mathematical Sciences: RUI: Combinatorial
              Control of Chaos, Symbolic Dynamics, Optimal Control and Inverse
              Frobenius-Perron Problem

Abstract

0071314  Bollt


This project
              addresses global control strategies for chaotic dynamical systems, based on
              transfer operator representations of dynamics on an invariant subspace. 
              Emphasis is on developing techniques useful to experimentalists.  During the
              last decade, much research has been focused on the realization that sensitive
              dependence on initial conditions and parameters allows flexible and efficient
              control of a chaotic dynamical system.  Major difficulties have been connected
              with representing the action of the dynamical system on its phase space.  In
              contrast, a complete global representation of a dynamical system is available
              in terms of its symbolic dynamics, and a graph approximation of the symbolic
              grammar is a highly efficient way to completely encode coarse-grained control
              strategies.  This project reduces the difficult problems of developing a global
              control strategy to much easier problems, concerning linear algebra if
              targeting invariant density, or combinatorics of path searching if targeting
              optimal trajectories.  In this coarse-grained approximation, paths through
              graphs model trajectories of the dynamical system. Local feedback control and
              small parameter variations are used to realize paths through the graph as true
              trajectories.  Questions under study are closely related to Ulam's method in
              the theory of Frobenius-Perron operators and also to the concept of partition
              in information theory and in symbolic dynamics.

This project develops
              techniques for targeting, finding optimal trajectories, and highlighting
              desirable states.  Potential engineering applications include Navy ship-to-ship
              transfer by cargo crane, space mission design, design of electronic circuits
              that stay within desirable operating regimes, and perhaps someday preemptive
              control of epileptic seizures.   The work involves collaboration with
              experimentalists to pursue real world applications.  In addition, the project
              investigates applications of controlling symbolic dynamics to encode
              information in chaotic oscillations.


