Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolutionary Ecology and Molecular Phylogenetics of the
               Lizard Genus Liolaemus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a0071337

Award Number: 0071337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan B. Losos losos@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan Larson  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0071337
Losos and Schulte
	The lizard genus Liolaemus (in the family
              Iguanidae) contains over 160 species, exhibiting great diversity in ecology,
              morphology, and life-history.  Species are widely distributed throughout the
              southern half of South America and are the most prominent component of the
              reptile communities in many areas.  In this project, graduate student James
              Schulte, under the direction of Drs. Jonathan Losos and Allan Larson, proposes
              to investigate whether species of Liolaemus living in different geographic
              regions but with similar ecological conditions evolve similar body shapes. 
              More specifically, groups of species in Argentina and Chile living in
              ecologically similar areas (semi-arid zone and rocky transition zone) will be
              compared to identify whether the body sizes and habitat occupation of species
              in one group match the body sizes and habitat occupation of the species in the
              corresponding group from the other area. Observations on ecology for the
              several sympatric species in each of the four study sites, combined with
              morphometric analyses of body size and shape, provide the evidence for
              adaptation to local habitats.
	Also, the genealogy among species will have to
              be taken into account to exclude the possibility that similar body shape and
              habitat use are the result of species being closely related phylogenetically,
              and not the result of adaptive convergence to similar environmental conditions.
               The genealogy will be inferred from DNA sequences of the mitochondrial genome
              spanning over 1700 base pairs and 12 gene regions.  Results from this project
              will greatly improve our understanding of the phylogenetic relationships within
              the second-largest lizard genus in the world, serve as an excellent comparison
              to previous work on other biological assemblages, and explore the reasons why
              animals and plants living in ecologically similar areas evolve similar
              features.


