Title       : Biodiversity of Sakhalin Island
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0071655

Award Number: 0071655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391128             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore W. Pietsch twp@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will conduct the initial, first-year phase of detailed biotic
              survey and inventory of the Russian island of Sakhalin.  A team of Russian,
              Japanese, and American scientists will conduct a survey and inventory of the
              plants, insects, spiders, freshwater and terrestrial mollusks, freshwater
              fishes, amphibians, and reptiles.  This work is a logical and much needed
              extension to the previous seven years of similar work by the investigators in
              the Russian Kuril Archipelago.  As one of four primary source biotas for the
              colonization of the Kuril Islands--the others being Hokkaido, the Kamchatka
              Peninsula, and the Asian mainland--Sakhalin is by far the least known
              biologically and in the greatest danger of over exploitation.  Narrowly
              separated from the continent for nearly 1,000 km and almost touching Hokkaido,
              Japan, at its southern tip, it forms a natural filter or barrier to dispersal
              of plants and animals from the Asian mainland to the Kurils.  Although
              considerable information is available for wide-ranging, commercially important
              species, such as king crab, salmon, cod, and various marine mammals, the flora
              and fauna of Sakhalin as a whole are poorly known.  At the same time, a steep
              rise in commercial exploitation of natural resources poses a serious
              environmental threat to the island.  Using standardized survey methods, modern
              computer-based inventory procedures, and dissemination of information through
              the Internet, the results of the survey will provide important baseline data on
              patterns of species diversity that can be compared accurately with the Kuril
              Islands and other regions sampled in similar ways.  Working cooperatively with
              universities and the national and local governments of the host country, the
              project will provide training for faculty, students, and government biologists.
               Finally, the work will provide a foundation of information that will promote
              long-term future research as well as conservation of the unique island biotas
              of the entire Sakhalin-Kuril administrative district.   
