Title       : FRG: P-type Transparent Conductive Oxides: Synthesis and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0071727

Award Number: 0071727
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Tate tate@physics.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Wager  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur W. Sleight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Keszler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1024,1589,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a Focused Research Group project aimed at the synthesis and possible
              novel applications of new p-type transparent conductive oxides (TCOs) with
              superior properties.  The three primary thrusts of the proposed program are:
              Selection and evaluation of new p-type TCOs exhibiting superior performance;
              Thin-film  synthesis of new p-type TCOs; Demonstration of new p-type TCOs in
              novel applications.  The exploratory synthesis of bulk p-type oxides will be
              guided by mobility trends.  The properties of the bulk form will be evaluated,
              and substitutional doping and oxygen intercalation will be explored.  The most
              promising materials will be identified and transferred to thin-film research. 
              Thin films will be synthesized by a variety of physical vapor deposition
              methods including sputtering, activated thermal  coevaporation and
              electron-beam evaporation.  The films will be extensively characterized in an
              effort to understand the optimization of conductivity and transparency.  The
              availability of both n-and p-type transparent devices suggests novel
              opto-electronic devices are possible.  Simple devices will be demonstrated
              using the best materials generated from the thin-film studies.

Transparent
              conductive oxides (TCOs) constitute an unusual class of materials with high
              transparency and high electrical conductivity, materials properties necessary
              for the design of novel opto-electronic devices.  The program exhibits a strong
              integration of research and education and is inherently multidisciplinary in
              nature and scope.  The research environment will provide an enriched
              educational experience for students who will be exposed to multidisciplinary
              perspective and will need to communicate and collaborate across traditional
              discipline boundaries.  This Focused Research Group project is a
              multidisciplinary activity jointly supported by the Division of Materials
              Research, The Chemistry Division, and The Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities within the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.

