Title       : Tunneling Spectroscopy of Electron-in-a-Box Energy Levels in Metal Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2000      
File        : a0071631

Award Number: 0071631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395821             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Ralph ralph@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This experimental condensed matter physics project deals with nanofabrication
              techniques that will enable electronic devices that operate by means of
              physical mechanisms different from existing technology. By incorporating a
              single metal particle less than 10 nm in diameter into a tunneling device, it
              becomes possible to manipulate the flow of electrons via individual
              "electron-in-a-box" energy levels within the particle, and to measure the
              spectrum of these quantum-mechanical states. This research will study the
              processes which affect electron transport in this new regime-at the level of
              single energy levels-for magnetic, superconducting, and normal-metal particles.
              In addition, the ability to measure the spectrum of quantum levels in a
              nanoparticle will be used as a tool in investigations of other fundamental
              questions of nm-scale physics.  Topics of primary interest include
              spin-polarized electron tunneling into single quantum states, the mechanisms of
              energy and spin relaxation between energy levels, the effects of electronic
              interactions on the level spectra, the mechanisms of magnetization reversal in
              nm-scale ferromagnetic particles, and the effects of impurities on quantized
              energy levels. The research provides exceptional opportunities for graduate
              students and research associates to be trained in frontier science areas that
              will prepare them for a range of careers in industry, academe, and
              government.
%%%
When a piece of metal is made less than about 10 nanometers
              in diameter, so that it contains about 10,000 atoms or less, electrons cannot
              flow through the metal particle with an arbitrary energy- they can flow only
              with only one of a restricted range of so-called quantized energies. This means
              that very small electrical devices are entering a new regime, where electrons
              can be manipulated to flow via individual energy states, in contrast to
              existing devices where the energy levels are effectively a continuum of states.
              This experimental condensed matter physics project is aimed at characterizing
              and understanding all the processes which affect electron flow in this new
              regime-at the level of single energy levels- for magnetic, superconducting, and
              normal-metal particles.  In addition, the ability to measure the spectrum of
              electronic levels in a nano-particle will be used as a tool in investigations
              of other fundamental questions of nanometer-scale physics, such as the behavior
              of the electron's spin when an electron hops onto a small magnetic particle,
              the rate at which an electron may relax from a higher-energy to low-energy
              state within a particle, and the effects of impurities on the quantized levels.
              The research provides exceptional opportunities for graduate students and
              research associates to be trained in frontier science areas that will prepare
              them for a range of careers in industry, academe, and government.
***

