Title       : GOALI/FRG: Full-Color Phosphors for Electroluminescent Displays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0071899

Award Number: 0071899
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $582435             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Wager jfw@ece.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet Tate  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sey-Shing Sun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Tuenge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Keszler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,1589,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI project is a collaborative effort between researchers at Oregon State
              University and Planar Systems, Inc., Beaverton, OR. Primary goals are to
              increase basic understanding of luminescent materials, and to exploit their
              properties to achieve bright, efficient, and manufacturable red, green, and
              blue (RGB) phosphors for use in flat-panel displays. The approach involves
              three basic routes: (i) Luminescent impurity and defect engineering of
              conventional sulfide phosphors, ZnS, SrS, and CaS., (ii) Exploratory
              development of novel, low-temperature sulfide, selenide, and telluride
              phosphors-BaS and MX (M=Mg, Ca, Sr; X=Se, Te.), (iii) Optimization of oxide
              phosphors. A variety of conventional and unconventional luminescent impurities
              will be investigated. Defect engineering will involve compensation,
              color-shifting, and/or vacancy scavenging considerations. The viability of
              oxides, e.g., Zn2GeO4:Mn and Zn2SixGe1-xO4:Mn, as phosphors will be assessed by
              identifying the physical mechanisms that limit device performance and then
              developing performance-improvement strategies. 
Phosphor studies will be
              conducted using a rapid-throughput process. New phosphor, luminescent impurity,
              co-activator materials systems will be synthesized as powders, and their
              performance assessed and optimized through photoluminescence characterization.
              In this manner, luminescent impurity incorporation, defect engineering, and
              alloying studies will be integrated with thin film processing and
              characterization which will be carried out with promising powder phosphors.
              Thin-film evaporation source material and sputter targets will be synthesized
              using solid-state synthesis/processing methods. Two techniques will be
              investigated to incorporate luminescent impurities and co-activators into
              phosphor thin films, conventional in situ doping during thin-film deposition
              and 'flux doping.' Finally, alternating current thin film EL (ACTFEL) devices
              will be fabricated and tested to appraise the viability of a given phosphor
              system for applications. This research procedure involving powder synthesis,
              processing and characterization, followed by luminescence assessment, thin film
              'flux doping', and ACTFEL performance represents a general
              methodology-additional basic materials studies to identify and gain
              understanding of fundamental mechanisms will be carried out as well. 
%%%
The
              project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science
              with high technological relevance. The basic knowledge and understanding gained
              from the research is expected to contribute to improving US competitiveness in
              the international display technology market. The availability of
              low-temperature phosphors would result in superior products at reduced cost and
              improved manufacturability. An important feature of the program is the
              integration of research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area. The multidisciplinary
              (chemistry, electrical engineering, physics) and industrially-connected nature
              of this GOALI program offers unique educational opportunities for students to
              experience a teamwork-oriented research environment from both academic and
              industrial perspectives. The project is co-supported by the DMR/EM, DMR/CER,
              and DMR/SSC programs, and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities).
***

