Title       : Asymptotic Approaches to Bayesian and Likelihood Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a0071642

Award Number: 0071642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67631              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gauri S. Datta gauri@stat.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 

Bayes and frequentist approaches are the two main paradigms for
              statistical inference.  Of late, likelihood-based methods are also being
              proposed in many inferential problems.  The proposed research falls in the
              interface and considers asymptotic inference in these paradigms.  Higher order
              asymptotic expansions play an important role in Bayes, frequentist and
              likelihood approaches to inference.  This proposal considers developing such
              expansions and using them in specific applications such as Bayesian
              experimental design, small area estimation and contingency tables.  Small area
              estimation is becoming increasingly popular in many federal and local
              government programs.  Both hierarchical Bayes and empirical Bayes approaches
              are receiving favorable attention from the users of small area statistics. 
              Hierarchical Bayes procedures rely to a great extent on the use of
              noninformative priors.  Indeed, the wider acceptance of Bayesian techniques in
              recent years both in the theory and in the practice of statistics is partly due
              to various noninformative priors.  Higher order asymptotics have been used by
              the PI in his past research to (i) develop second order accurate approximations
              to measure of uncertainty in small area estimation, (ii) calibrate naive EB
              confidence intervals, (iii) compare various adjustments to profile likelihoods
              in likelihood-based inference, and (iv) obtain frequentist validation of
              various noninformative priors.  Specifically, the following problems will be
              investigated: (a) Asymptotic comparison of adjusted likelihoods via expected
              volumes of confidence sets, mean squared errors of point estimates and other
              criteria; (b) Optimal Bayesian designs in variance components problem; (c) EB
              interval estimation with applications in small area estimation; (d) Frequentist
              validation of noninformative priors in the context of small area estimation;
              (e) Higher order expansion of null distribution of score tests in two-way
              contingency tables; (f) Robust estimation in small area estimation using survey
              weights.

Research on small area estimation has received considerable
              attention in recent years due to growing demand for reliable small area
              statistics by federal and local government agencies (e.g., the U.S. Census
              Bureau, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Statistics Canada, Australian Bureau
              of Statistics, Central Statistical Office of U.K.).  A small area usually
              refers to a subgroup of a population from which samples are drawn.  The
              subgroup may be a geographical region (e.g., county) or a group obtained by
              cross-classification of demographic factors.  Reliable small area statistics
              are needed in regional planning and fund allocation in many federal and local
              government programs.  Currently, the Census Bureau is engaged in developing
              small area estimates of number of poor children in school-going age at the
              county level, and developing adjustment factors to the census counts for
              various geographic and demographic classes.  Experimental designs play an
              important role in agriculture and industrial productions.  Optimal designs
              allow experimenters to derive maximum utility for a given budget.  Categorical
              data, which occur abundantly in every fields of quantitative study, especially
              in social sciences, consist of frequency of counts in various categories of
              interest to an experimenter.  Statistical solutions to be developed here are
              expected to lead to new and useful methodolgies on the research problems
              considered in this proposal.

