Title       : Experiments on Superfluid 3He in Bulk and in Aerogel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0071630

Award Number: 0071630
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $803490             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeevak M. Parpia jeevak@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Reppy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5939,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research is focused on the investigation of the properties of superfluid
              3He in Aerogel.  New areas of the phase diagram of superfluid 3He in aerogel
              will be explored.  The Aerogel may potentially offer the possibility of
              introducing controlled disorder into the liquid to create new physical systems.
              One project at Cornell will measure the specific heat of 3He in aerogel near
              the superfluid transition. Another Cornell project will study coherent spin
              precession in pure 3He under specific field gradient conditions that yield a
              long-lived homogenous precession mode. A collaboration at the Kapitza Institute
              in Moscow will examine the feasibility of stabilizing the B  phase of 3He in
              Aerogel, as well as explore the spin dynamics in the presence of disorder. At
              Delaware, the collaboration will focus on exploring the feasibility of new
              tailor made aerogels, having correlations that are different from those grown
              under basic conditions.  The Delaware group will also examine the feasibility
              of subjecting the aerogel to uniaxial compression to alter the density and
              provide a preferred direction into the aerogel.  Theoretical support for these
              activities will be provided by the group at the Ohio State University and by
              researchers at the Kapitza Institute. Graduate students and post-doctoral
              associates involved in this project will be exposed to sensitive signal
              detection and recovery technology, large scale project design and management as
              well as a thorough exposure to data acquisition and management. Our substantial
              involvement in research with colleagues in Russia will provide International
              perspectives and establish long-term collaborations that are important for the
              scientific community as a whole. Our training will prepare students and
              post-docs for academic, technical, and management careers. 

This work is
              directed at the study of the superfluid 3He in the presence of disorder. While
              ordinarily, superfluid 3He is the purest material on earth and supports no
              disorder or impurities, we have found that the introduction of a dilute
              nanometer scale structured silica glass allows the properties of the superfluid
              to be altered in a well-defined way. The changes to the phase diagram,
              including the ability to support new types of magnetic (spin) transport
              mechanisms will be explored in this project which is to be carried out at
              Cornell University in Ithaca, the University of Delaware, the Ohio State
              University, and at the Kapitza Institute in Moscow. The group will develop and
              use new magnetic imaging and sonic techniques, and carry out sensitive
              measurements at ultra-low temperatures. The research should provide information
              on a potentially new class of three dimensional quantum phase transitions (a
              quantum phase transition is one in which the fluctuations near the critical
              point are quantum and not thermal in nature, and quantum phase transitions are
              thought to be related to the early universe) as well as the transport of spins
              across interfaces in disordered materials, a problem of considerable
              technological importance.  Students and Post-Doctoral Associates in this
              program receive rigorous training in physics, signal recovery, data acquisition
              and management as well as project integration, and can pursue careers in either
              academic or industrial science. The International aspect of our collaboration
              also offers unique potential for human resources.  


