Title       : 'The Nonlinear Dynamical Foundations of Transition State Theory in Systems with
               Three or More Degrees-of-Freedom'
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0071338

Award Number: 0071338
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Wiggins wiggins@cds.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0071338
Mathematical Sciences: The Nonlinear Dynamical
              Foundations of Transition State Theory in Systems with Three or More Degrees of
              Freedom

Abstract

0071338  Wiggins



This research project is
              concerned with understanding the nonlinear dynamical foundations of transition
              state theory in systems with three or more degrees of freedom.  While there has
              been much progress along these lines for two degree-of-freedom systems, there
              has been little progress of a similar nature for systems with three or more
              degrees-of-freedom.  The geometrical point of view of dynamical systems theory
              offers a framework for discovering the types of higher dimensional phase space
              structures that govern reaction rates and energy flow in molecules.  We will
              apply this approach to several problems: three dimensional Rydberg atoms in
              crossed electric and magnetic fields, the London-Eyring-Polanti-Sato potential,
              rotation-vibration interaction in formaldehyde, and a study of energy flow
              through resonances in carbonyl sulphide (OCS).  In each case we will show that
              there are higher dimensional phase space structures that act as a "transition
              state."  Indeed, it may even be possible to generalize the very useful idea of
              a periodic orbit dividing surface to systems with three or more degrees of
              freedom. Our research will also focus on developing computational approaches to
              realize these geometric structures in these specific problems. We will also
              develop a wavelet-based frequency map analysis tool for studying energy flow in
              resonances. This work will be carried out in collaboration with chemists and
              physicists, as well as computational scientists.

This project investigates
              fundamental questions concerning chemical reactions.  The underlying
              mathematical questions involve the nonlinear dynamical foundations of
              transition state theory in systems with three or more degrees of freedom.  This
              is the fundamental theory that allows predictions concerning chemical reaction
              dynamics.  While there is a fairly complete understanding of this theory for
              simple, low dimensional, systems, there is as yet no analogous theoretical
              framework for more physically realistic high dimensional systems.  Such a
              theory will involve mathematical description of surfaces in dimensions larger
              than four and will require development of computational tools for realizing and
              visualizing such surfaces.  This will result in a detailed understanding of the
              dynamics of how molecules break up and of how atoms combine to form molecules. 
              The research is interdisciplinary, involving the collaboration of chemists,
              physicists, and computational scientists.


