Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Sustainability of Miskito Slash-and-Burn
               Agriculture in the Rio Platano Biosphere Reserve of the Mosquitia Rain Forest
               Corridor, Honduras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  2000        
File        : a0071243

Award Number: 0071243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9557               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Herlihy herlihy@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 5977,9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              One response to the growing world-wide attention to environmental issues has
              been the establishment of an international network of biosphere reserves, which
              have been established to protect areas of high biological and cultural
              diversity.  A special challenge of managing these reserves is determining how
              to preserve the natural ecological characteristics of places at the same time
              opportunities are provided for indigenous peoples residing in and near the
              reserves to engage in traditional and new forms of sustainable economic
              activity.  Analysis of the interrelationships between indigenous resource use
              and protected-area management is crucial to assessing the long-term viability
              of conservation initiatives in these locales.  This doctoral dissertation
              research will analyze the sustainability of indigenous Miskito slash-and-burn
              agriculture within the context of proposed conservation management guidelines
              for the Rio Platano Biosphere Reserve of eastern Honduras.  The project will
              focus on the land-use practices of Wampusirpi, an indigenous Miskito community
              along the southeastern boundary of the reserve.  For the purposes of this
              project, sustainability is defined as the length of time that agriculture in
              the reserve will be able to supply village subsistence and cash needs given
              current forest clearance, population growth, and the proposed biosphere
              land-use restrictions.  Participant observation and other ethnographic research
              techniques will be used to collect socioeconomic, demographic, and agricultural
              data from each household in the community.  These data will be used to
              construct a predictive model that simulates future population growth and
              land-use expansion for the community, thereby facilitating an assessment of the
              sustainability of slash-and-burn agriculture in the biosphere.  The project
              will document current land-use patterns of an indigenous Miskito community in
              Rio Platano, and it will provide a range of possible scenarios for future
              land-use practices, thereby identifying the pressures that subsistence and
              economic needs of biosphere residents might place on management of the reserve
              in the future.  By analyzing the sustainability of agriculture within the
              context of the Rio Platano management plan, this project will contribute to
              current debates on the role of indigenous people in conservation and the
              viability of protected areas as models to conserve biological diversity and
              provide for indigenous land and resource rights.  Project results therefore
              will valuable for the formulation of future conservation policy in Rio Platano
              and other inhabited protected areas in Latin America.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

