Title       : Statistical Methodology in Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0071681

Award Number: 0071681
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250166             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Rice rice@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                       ABSTRACT

Professor Rice proposes research on
              statistical problems arising in two large astronomical projects: the variable
              star database of the MACHO project (a search for dark matter in the halo of our
              galaxy) and Taiwanese American Occultation Survey (TAOS), a search for comets
              in the Kuiper belt.  The first involves statistical characterization and
              modeling of tens of thousands of light curves from variable stars. He proposes
              to approach these problems from the viewpoint of  functional data analysis,
              further developing and extending the methodology of this rapidly growing area
              of statistical research.   The TAOS project will monitor star fields for
              occultations by objects in the Kuiper belt, using dedicated telescopes in the
              interior mountains of Taiwan.  The primary statistical problems center around
              designing image processing and signal detection procedures that will operate in
              real time at high sampling rates to detect rare and faint signals.  Both
              projects are anticipated to make valuable contributions to both advancement of
              knowledge in astronomy and to the development of statistical
              methodology.

This is an interdisciplinary proposal involving mathematical
              statistics and astronomy, centering around two projects in astronomy: (1) The
              analysis of a large database of variable stars.  These are stars whose light is
              not constant, but changes in a periodic fashion.  Better understanding of this
              population of stars is important for models of stellar evolution and also for
              determining distances to remote objects in the universe. (2) The TAOS project
              will probe our solar system in the remote region beyond the orbit of Neptune. 
              It is thought that there may well be hundreds of millions of objects such as
              comets there, but because of their relatively small size and remoteness, they
              are very difficult to detect. Computationally intensive statistical methodology
              will play a key role in detecting these objects.  Partial funding for this
              project was provided by the Stellar Astronomy and Astrophysics (SAA)
              Program.


