Title       : Travel Support for Junior Mathematicians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  2000     
File        : a0071353

Award Number: 0071353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Maxwell jwm@ams.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Mathematical Soc
	      201 Charles Street
	      Providence, RI  029402294    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funds to support approximately 150 travel awards to US
              mathematicians within six years of receipt of their doctoral degree to attend
              the special AMS meeting in August, 2000, "The Mathematical Challenges of the
              21st Century," to be held on the campus of the University of California at Los
              Angeles. The program for this meeting includes lectures by thirty
              world-renowned mathematicians.

The phenomenal advances in mathematical
              research during the past half-century has involved both the solution of
              centuries-old celebrated mathematical problems as well as major applications of
              sophisticated mathematical concepts and tools to the other sciences and in
              applications. The U.S. mathematical community has played a central role in this
              development, as has the cadre of brilliant young mathematicians fostered by
              that community.

The turn of the century (and the new millennium) will
              undoubtedly see an intensification and acceleration of these trends. In
              particular, developments of the last two decades indicate a deeper and closer
              relation between research mathematics and other front-line areas in the
              sciences than was the case in earlier decades. At this point of transition
              between centuries, it is natural that the vital and diverse community of
              mathematicians take stock of recent mathematical advancements and look forward
              to the mathematical themes that will form the core of research developments in
              the coming century. These travel grants will enable many of the US's young
              mathematicians to be an integral part of this process.
