Title       : Equilibrium Dynamics of Dense Colloids and Polymers: X-ray Photon Correlation
               Spectroscopy Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0071755

Award Number: 0071755
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $423000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon G. J. Mochrie simon@lindy.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is an experimental condensed matter physics project that will investigate
              the dynamical properties of colloids, polymers and related fluids, commonly
              termed soft mattes. While the static structure of soft matter has been
              extensively examined, the dynamical properties on the most relevant length
              scales (10-100 nm) have been much more difficult to study. This project will
              yield new insight into the collective dynamics of soft materials, with
              particular emphasis on concentrated and entangled systems. To achieve the
              scattering wave vectors required, the emerging technique of x-ray photon
              correlation spectroscopy (XPCS) will be employed. The role of hydrodynamic
              interactions and entanglements in the dynamics of isotropic suspensions of
              colloidal rods will also be studied. Dynam-ical critical behavior near the
              colloidal liquid-colloidal gas critical point in colloid/polymer mixtures is
              another topic of interest. Understanding how a divergent viscosity, predicted
              for this dynamic universality class, affects the dynamics on length scales
              comparable to the inter-particle separation will improve our understanding of
              protein crystallization. The dynamics of entangled polymer systems will be
              investigated and compared to relevant theories. Importantly, these
              investigations will provide quantitative tests of the reptation model of
              polymer dynamics in the previously-inaccessible regime of long times, short
              distances, and flexible poly-mers. Students trained under this project will
              contribute to the pool of talent needed to fully utilize this nation's major
              investment in synchrotron-radiation-based research. In addition, the further
              development of x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy under this program will
              contribute to the scientific case for a new generation of even-more-powerful
              x-ray sources.
%%%
Complex fluids, such as fine dispersions of solid
              particles within a fluid (colloidal dispersions), blends of long-chain
              polymers, and mixtures of oil, water and soap are an important class of
              materials, commonly termed "soft matter". While the static structure of such
              soft materials has been studied extensively, the molecular motions of complex
              fluids have been much more difficult to study. In this project, a novel
              synchrotron-based x-ray scatter-ing method - x-ray photon correlation
              spectroscopy - will be used to examine very slow motions on small distances,
              and should yield new insight into the thermal movements within colloidal and
              polymeric systems. Comparisons between the results obtained and available
              theories will provide a critical test of the theories. The insights gained may
              be practically important for improved understanding and control of such diverse
              phenomena as protein crystallization or the flow of polymeric fluids. Students
              trained to carry out cutting-edge x-ray scattering research under this program
              will contribute to the pool of talent needed to make use of this nation's major
              investment in synchrotron-radiation-based research. The graduates will be
              well-prepared to carry out academic, industrial, or governmental research. The
              further development of x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy under this program
              will contribute to the scientific case for a new generation of
              even-more-powerful x-ray sources.

