Title       : Neutron and X-Ray Scattering Studies of Low Dimensional Quantum Magnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a0071256

Award Number: 0071256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Birgeneau robertjb@MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This experimental condensed matter physics project employs neutron and x-ray
              scattering techniques to investigate three classes of  materials: (a) Sr-and
              excess Oxygen doped La2CuO4 high temperature  superconductors (b) 1D and 2D
              quantum magnets (c) model materials with  disorder and/or competing
              interactions. The research in La2-xSrxCuO4 and La2CuO4+y will focus on the
              incommensurate magnetic and charge ordering and the concomitant low energy spin
              dynamics, most especially in the under-doped regime. The data will be analyzed
              in the so-called stripe picture. Research areas (b) and (c) come together
              beautifully in the diluted spin-Peierls material Cu1-xMgxGeO3 where magnetic
              and structural superlattice order compete.  This system will be studied as a
              function of x using both neutron and synchrotron x-ray scattering techniques. 
              Experiments will be carried out both at zero field and at high fields where the
              structural order is respectively commensurate and incommensurate. The "order
              from disorder" phenomenon in the 2D material Sr2Cu3O4Cl2, including the novel
              effects expected from doping-induced disorder, will be explored. Finally,
              quantum Monte Carlo techniques will be used to model the 1D and 2D quantum spin
              systems.  The materials studied have many practical applications varying from
              superconducting electronic devices to read heads in magnetic recorders. The
              students educated in this program will play a leadership role at our large
              national facilities. 
%%%
This research program investigates the microscopic
              physics of materials that fall in the technical category of "highly correlated 
              electronic materials" The best known examples are high temperature 
              superconductors. The most important  microscopic signature of such  materials
              is that the way any electron in the material behaves depends in detail on what
              the electrons surrounding it are doing. This turns out to be a surprisingly
              difficult problem of fundamental interest but with many practical
              ramifications. The general strategy here is to begin at the atomic  level and
              to look at how the properties evolve as the length scale is increased
              progressively from the microscopic to the macroscopic. As a  specific example,
              materials such as La2CuO4 as a function of doping evolve  continuously from two
              dimensional magnets to high temperature  superconductors to normal metals. The
              research goal is to understand the nature of this evolution with emphasis on
              materials which are in the transition region between different states.  As a
              result of this and related work by others we hope to arrive at a complete
              understanding of the various phases and their transitions in copper oxide
              superconducting materials. This will in turn enable the community to design
              better materials and to create new devices. Indeed, devices based on highly
              correlated electronic materials are already appearing in the marketplace.
              Students involved in this project typically pursue careers at research
              universities, national laboratories, technology-based industries and in
              management consulting and thereby contribute significantly to both U.S. science
              and the economy.

