Title       : Singular Solutions to Certain Equations in the Physical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a0071858

Award Number: 0071858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70857              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuxi Zheng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0071858
Zheng

It is proposed to study some nonlinear partial differential
              equations from 
fluid dynamics and liquid crystal physics. These equations are
              the laws of 
motion of their respective physics. The turbulent nature and/or
              defects in 
the materials make the solutions of the equations singular,
              unstable, and 
hard to calculate.  It is planned to use advanced analytical
              tools to study 
the structures of the singular solutions. In the case of the
              liquid crystal 
wave equation, for example, the plan is to study it as one of
              the simplest 
examples of nonlinear generalizations of the basic linear wave
              equation. It 
can be seen from its elegant form that there will be many
              applications of 
the equation in the future. Singularities of its solutions
              have been shown to 
exist recently by the principal investigator and his
              collaborators. It is these 
singularities that block the establishment of a
              general theory of existence, 
uniqueness, and stability of solutions. It is
              planned to do detailed estimates 
and analysis on the singularities and
              improve current compactness 
arguments to form an existence theory of
              solutions. The result of the 
investigation will be a clear understanding of
              the worst possible solutions, 
and thereby quantify our knowledge of the
              physics and offer guidance in 
numerical computations of general
              solutions.

The research will involve the study of some applied mathematical
              
problems in the fields of fluid dynamics (which includes motion of the air
              
and water) and liquid crystal physics in material science.  Scientists and
              
engineers have used mathematical equations, called partial differential
              
equations, to model the motions. The turbulent nature and/or defects in the
              
materials show up in the form of singularities and instabilities in the
              
solutions of the equations. It is these singularities and instabilities that
              
often spoil accurate numerical computations of the solutions. It is planned
              
to use the state of the art analytical tools to study the structures of the
              
singular solutions.  In the case of a compressible gas such as air, for
              
example, the principal investigator plans to isolate typical singularities
              
(hurricanes, tornadoes, shocks, etc.) and investigate their individual
              
structures. The result of the investigation will be a clear understanding of
              
the worst possible solutions, and thereby quantify our knowledge of the
              
physics and offer guidance in high-performance numerical computations 
of
              general solutions.

