Title       : Multiple Trigonometric Series and Multiple Walsh Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0071759

Award Number: 0071759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116115             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marshall Ash mash@condor.depaul.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gang Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePaul University
	      1 East Jackson Boulevard
	      Chicago, IL  606042218    312/341-8000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Abstract

A square partial sum of a double trigonometric series is
              the sum of all the
terms with both indices less than or equal to a fixed
              value. Our first goal is to
study square uniqueness for double trigonometric
              series. By this we mean that if
the sequence of square partial sums of a
              double trigonometric series converges to
zero everywhere, then the series is
              necessarily the trivial series. If this is true, we
will then try to
              generalize this result to higher dimensions. The corresponding
statements for
              circular/spherical convergence have been shown by Shapiro in
dimension 2 and
              by Bourgain in higher dimensions; and by Ash-Freiling-Rinne
and,
              independently, Tetunashvili for the unrestrictedly rectangular
              convergence
case in any dimension. There is some evidence that square
              uniqueness may
actually be false. For example, there is an everywhere square
              convergent double
trigonometric series with coefficients having faster than
              polynomial growth rate.
Our second goal is to study a related question:
              uniqueness for multiple Walsh
series under different types of summation modes.
              The new approach we will
take is to use classical harmonic analysis methods.
              By combining the traditional
martingale approach with the new techniques
              developed from recent progress
made in the area of multiple trigonometric
              series, we expect much progress
can be made here. This in turn may give
              insights into the square uniqueness
question for trigonometric series. The
              third goal is to study the long standing
open question about the pointwise
              circular convergence for Fourier series of
square integrable functions. We
              will try to shed some light on this by studying
the corresponding question for
              double Walsh series, which are special form of
tree-index and two parameter
              martingales.

Almost any surface is composed of simpler ones by a process
              called multiple
Fourier analysis. A major long standing problem in pure
              mathematics is to
show that this construction can be accomplished in only one
              way. This is called
the problem of uniqueness. There are about a half dozen
              main varieties of this
problem depending on just how the simpler surfaces are
              combined to make the
general surface. Gathering the simple surfaces in
              different orders may lead to
different resultant surfaces. For certain
              gathering procedures, uniqueness has
been proved. That is, for such gathering,
              there is only one way to produce
the resultant surface. The most important
              gathering procedure for which the
uniqueness remains an open question is
              called square convergence. We will try
to determine if uniqueness holds for
              this procedure. Another way to construct a
surface is to build it up as a
              combination of two dimensional oscillating square
waves. Such a process is
              called a multiple Walsh series. We will consider the
uniqueness question in
              this context also. We hope that understanding one of
the two methods of
              construction may lead to insights about the other.


