Title       : Topics in Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0071008

Award Number: 0071008
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30030              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Harbourne bharbour@math.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judy L. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger A. Wiegand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Marley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sylvia M. Wiegand  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal provides  support for the research group in commutative algebra
              and algebraic geometry at the University of Nebraska---Lincoln. R. Wiegand and
              S. Wiegand will study local rings of finite Cohen-Macaulay
type. R. Wiegand
              and Marley will consider homological questions in the
theory of local rings.
              S. Wiegand will study prime ideal structure in
Noetherian rings and
              constructions involving a homomorphic image of a
completion of a Noetherian
              domain. Harbourne will investigate resolutions
of ideals corresponding to
              finite sets of points (with multiplicities)
in projective space, and related
              questions. J. Walker will work on
coding theory, including codes over
              commutative local Artinian
rings. M. Walker will investigate connections
              between algebraic
K-theory and motivic cohomology.

Often, real life
              problems involve many unknown parameters which 
may be related by equations
              which are impossible to solve exactly. 
Nonetheless, using the methods of
              commutative algebra and algebraic 
geometry, much valuable descriptive
              information can be gotten about 
the sets of solutions, if not the exact
              solutions themselves. The
investigations discussed in this project concern
              central problems 
in commutative algebra and algebraic geometry. Just as
              importantly, 
many of them are continuations of successful
              collaborations
with researchers at other institutions. Funds provided under
              
this proposal will allow the UNL research group in commutative
algebra and
              algebraic geometry to continue its active involvement 
in collaborative
              research, its success in the professional development 
of graduate students
              and its maintenance as a leading research
group in these areas.
