Title       : Second-Order Investigations in Particle and Trapping Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0071504

Award Number: 0071504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66212              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sunder Sethuraman sethuram@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to investigate the fluctuation behaviors in two
              types of systems: Mass conservative particle systems, and Brownian trapping
              models.  The first type includes the exclusion and zero-range processes, while
              the second type covers variants of the "Wiener Sausage" model.  Three
              categories of problems are focused upon in these systems: Tagged particle
              problems in conservative particle systems, current fluctuations at a fixed
              location in the exclusion model, and localization structure of long time
              surviving Brownian paths in trap settings.
Stochastic dynamical systems
              following the motion of a collection of particles have been successful in the
              modeling of diverse physical phenomena such as fluid and traffic flow, queuing,
              chemical trapping behavior, etc.  Several theoretical studies have been made on
              "first-order" calculations, which describe the dominant modes of objects of
              interest, for instance, average velocities or trap survival probabilities.  The
              intent of this project is to supply the "second-order" characteristics in these
              fluid and traffic models.  The significance of second-order calculations is
              that they provide a measure of the robustness of the first-order approximations
              in applications.   Aside from this general notion, the computations involved in
              this project would shed light on the intrinsic physics of the random media
              models studied.  Also, from the mathematical view, the solution techniques of
              these challenging problems would be of great value themselves for future
              endeavors.
