Title       : Research in Topology and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0071202

Award Number: 0071202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138684             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julius L. Shaneson shaneson@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0071202
Julius L. Shaneson 

Most of the proposal concerns applications
              of relations
between continuous and discrete summation in higher 
dimensions.
               Such a relation is called an Euler-MacLaurin 
formula, and describes how to
              sum a function over a set of
lattice points in a geometric region in terms of
              integrals 
of the function and its derivatives on the region and parts 
of
              the boundary.  For polynomial functions summed on lattice 
points of a
              polytope with lattice point vertices, there are 
exact, closed formulae for
              doing this, due to the proposer 
and S. Cappell, obtained as  consequences of
              their results 
on characteristic classes of singular varieties.  For general
              (transcendental) functions, there are approximate formulae of 
given length,
              together with remainder terms involving 
differential operators whose
              coefficients are related to generalizations of the classical Bernoulli
              polynomials on 
the real line.  The capability to handle trascendental
              
functions makes possible the use Euler-MacLaurin formulae 
the study the
              growth of the number of lattice points in smooth 
regions, such as circles or
              the regions under a hyperboloid, 
as the figure expands. 

A lattice point
              can be thought of as a vertex point in a multidimensional grid or lattice-work.
              Results relating 
summation over such points to some continuous summation
              
process, i.e. some type of integration method, can 
impact numerous applied
              mathematics problems, including 
rapid integration schemes, problems in
              network capacity, and 
optimization issues in shipping and communications. 
              
In addition, questions concerning the number of lattice 
points in smooth
              regions, especially certain very symmetric 
ones like circles or parts of
              hyperboloids, are well-known 
to arise in central parts of number theory, and
              good estimates 
on these could lead to new results on the distribution of
              prime 
numbers and other important questions. Finally, these counting
              
methods might be good test cases for the problems ("P = NP") of
              logic/computer science concerning the miminum time needed 
to perform certain
              kinds of computations.

