Title       : Reactions Between Liquid Metal Alloys and Doped (Semiconducting) Aluminosilicate
               Glassmelts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a0071325

Award Number: 0071325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297468             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reid F. Cooper cooper@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Cooper - 0071325

The foundation for the research planned are
              discoveries in the PI's group that resulted in a predictive dynamic reaction
              model for the float-glass process.  In "traditional" float glass (flat glass
              prepared from floating a soda-lime silicate melt on pure molten tin, highest
              temperature of  ~1100oC), the large driving-force (energy) of reaction is
              dissipated most rapidly by a redox dynamic that is dominated by the diffusive
              motions of electron holes and network-modifying cations.  The PI's model
              explains many idiosyncratic features of the chemical profile in float glass. 
              Combined with solution thermodynamics for float-alloy design, the model was
              used to extrapolate the float-glass process to temperatures in excess of
              1400oC, opening the possibility of float-processing flat glass of distinctly
              refractory compositions (e.g., for application as substrates in high-end
              flat-panel displays).  The model also suggests a framework of understanding in
              which glass composition and float-medium composition can be engineered together
              so as to create high-value-added flat glass with unique physiochemical
              properties and performance.  The research planned represents the first steps to
              "designer"-flat-glass of unique properties.

The PI plans to conduct an
              experimental and theoretical study of the reaction(s) between molten
              aluminosilicate solutions with molten metal solutions, specifically:
(1) the
              driving force and chemical species involved in the redox couple at the
              silicate-metal interface,
(2) the physical mechanism(s) of chemical diffusion
              in the reacting aluminosilicate glassmelt in response to the chemical diffusion
              accompanying the overall reaction.
In addition, the physical
              properties/characteristics of the reacted glassmelt via its reaction with the
              liquid metal alloy allows for creation of a surface with perhaps unique
              catalytic, photonic or thermochemical (e.g., crystalline nucleation)
              responses.

Specifically, there will be two experimental thrusts: (a)
              time/temperature/distance (i.e., into the glassmelt) analyses of reactions
              between Cu-37Ge (at.%) and both iron-free and ferric-iron-doped sodium
              aluminoborosilicate (NABS which is similar to Pyrex) and magnesium
              aluminosilicate glassmelts, and (b) structural and chemical (radial
              distribution function and electron loss spectroscopy) analyses of reacted
              glassmelts as functions of chemical-diffusion-affected composition, at an
              anticipated lateral resolution of 5-10 nm, using energy-filtered transmission
              electron microscopy.

This project is being co-funded by the Ceramics Program
              in the Division of Materials Research (Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate) and the Process and Reaction Engineering Program in the Division
              of Chemical and Transport Systems (Engineering Directorate).


