Title       : NMR Studies of Optically Active Impurities under In Situ Illumination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0071898

Award Number: 0071898
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Warren wwarren@physics.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a renewal award to a senior professor at Oregon State University for a
              project that will exploit the local, chemically specific properties of nuclear
              magnetic resonance (NMR) to investigate the microscopic properties of optically
              active impurities in semiconductors and insulators.  Solid-state NMR techniques
              will be combined with in situ illumination to examine the effects of optical
              excitation on the electronic structure and local atomic arrangements associated
              with specific impurities.  Particular attention will be given to bistable
              impurities such as Ga or In in CdTe and other II-VI compounds as well as CdF2. 
              Optically enhanced host (113Cd, 125Te, and 19F) nuclear spin-lattice relaxation
              will be used as an indicator of conversion of the bistable impurities to
              conventional effective mass donors.  Impurity species NMR, especially 69Ga,
              will be used in combination with in situ illumination to search for direct
              evidence of structural rearrangements in the impurity ground state.  Impurity
              species NMR (69Ga and 63Cu) will also be used to study the local environments
              of active centers in phosphors such as SrS(Cu,M) and ZnS(Mn, Ga).  The goal is
              to elucidate a microscopic understanding of these impurities that will
              facilitate the engineering of this class of material for specific electronic
              and optical applications. The proposed experiments will provide a venue for
              Ph.D. and M.S. graduate education and undergraduate research opportunities;
              they will also be exploited for enrichment of undergraduate courses in Modern
              Physics and Solid State Physics in the form of projects and
              demonstrations.
%%%
The controlled introduction of specific impurities is
              critical in determining the properties of technologically important electronic
              and optical materials.  This renewal award to a senior professor at Oregon
              State University is for research that will focus on a class of impurities that
              are optically-active.  Such impurities change their atomic-scale properties
              when illuminated or emit light when subject to illumination or electric
              currents in the host material.  The applications of these materials include
              light emitting elements for flat panel displays and optical data storage. 
              Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is a spectroscopy that reveals atomic-scale
              details of the environments of specific chemical elements in a material.  In
              this research, NMR will be used to probe the effects of illumination on host
              atom environments, say Cd in CdTe or CdF2,  or impurities such as Ga in these
              materials and in phosphors being developed for flat panel displays.  The goal
              of this and related research is to reach a level of microscopic understanding
              that will facilitate the engineering of this class of material for specific
              electronic and optical applications.  The proposed research will be integrated
              into undergraduate and graduate education.  Ph.D. and thesis research will
              train graduates for entry into U.S. high technology industry.  Undergraduates
              will participate in undergraduate research and through enrichment (projects and
              demonstrations) of formal courses in Modern Physics and Solid State Physics at
              Oregon State University.
***

