Title       : Study of Correlated Insulators and Metals in Two Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a0071668

Award Number: 0071668
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dragana Popovic dragana@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
This project from a female assistant scientist at Florida State University and
              the Natioanl High Magnetic Field Laboratory will focus on the study of
              low-temperature transport in Si metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect
              transistors (MOSFETs).  The two-dimensional electron system in Si MOSFETs
              exhibits a metal-insulator transition that is still unexplained.  The
              experiments will lead to a deeper characterization of the insulator, the metal,
              and the transition.  The project will include measurements of long-time
              relaxation of electronic states in the insulating phase, studies of the role of
              the spin degrees of freedom in the metallic behavior, studies of the effects of
              the variation in the screening length on all different regimes, and the effects
              of different types of disorder.  The experiments will be carried out in both
              large and mesoscopic
MOSFETs.  The studies will be compared to the proposed
              theoretical models.   The results of this research are 
expected to further
              stimulate and constrain theories of the metal-insulator transition, and greatly
              improve
understanding of highly correlated systems in general.  Graduate
              students involved in the project will receive 
training in a variety of
              experimental techniques.  This training will prepare them for a wide range of
              careers
in the areas of science and technology.
%%%
Many of the novel
              materials with potentially great technological importance, find themselves
              close to the metal-insulator transition.  In all of the relevant examples,
              ranging from the long-known doped semiconductors to recently discovered high
              temperature superconductors, the metallic state is created by
chemically
              doping an otherwise insulating material.  Understanding the nature of the
              metal-insulator
transition thus represents an important issue for materials
              science and technology.  It also presents a fundamental problem in condensed
              matter physics.  This project from a female assistant scientist at Florida
              State University and the Natioanl High Magnetic Field Laboratory will focus on
              the study of the metal-insulator transition in a two-dimensional electron
              system.  The measurements will lead to a deeper characterization of the
              insulator, the metal, and the transition, and they will provide an experimental
              test of the numerous competing theories.  The results of this research are
              expected to further stimulate and constrain theories of the metal-insulator
              transition.  Graduate students involved in the project will receive training in
              a variety of experimental techniques.  This training will prepare them for a
              wide range of careers in the areas of science and technology.
***

