Title       : Large Cardinals and the Methodology of Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a0071437

Award Number: 0071437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61431              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jindrich Zapletal zapletal@math.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator studies the impact of large cardinals on the
              methodology of mathematics. All results stated below use large cardinal
              assumptions, and some such assumptions are necessary. One line of research for
              the funded project is the investigation of classes of objects with the same
              properties, so-called terminal classes. A typical result states that the Ramsey
              ultrafilters are a terminal class: roughly, they share all properties invariant
              under the Rudin-Keisler equivalence of filters. Open questions under
              investigation involve finding further such terminal classes, and more
              importantly, the quantification of theproliferation of such classes throughout
              mathematics. Another line of research pursued is the construction of models in
              which the behavior of cardinal invariants of the continuum is optimal. A
              typical result is that the Miller model is the optimal way of increasing the
              dominating number d: roughly, all projectively defined invariants which are
              consistently less than d, are less than d in this model. The dual result states
              that there is an optimal Pmax model in which the bounding number is small. Open
              problems involve finding further cardinal invariants which have canonical
              models associated with them.  More challenging is the investigation of the
              notion of duality mentioned above, and the investigation of the limits of the
              method of forcing with simply definable partial orders.

Set theorists have
              for a long time studied certain additional axioms for mathematics, called large
              cardinal axioms. While they are largely irrelevant for solving specific
              problems in most traditional fields of mathematics, they do have a strong
              influence on the methodology used. Typically the large cardinal axioms allow
              the mathematician to select an optimal approach to answering a question only by
              considering the syntactical form of the question. Frequently this information
              can serve to discover the core of a seemingly complex problem.  Three examples
              are in order.  As the first example, it has been known for twenty years that
              sets of reals with simple definitions are well behaved from the point of view
              of mathematical analysis. Second, the PI has identified several classes of
              objects in mathematical practice that are "terminal": all objects in such a
              class have the same properties. Such classes have great methodological
              significance, and the PI plans to isolate more of them. In still another
              development, the PI found that for certain mathematically important classes of
              theories, there is an optimal approach to answering the question of whether the
              theories contain no contradictions. Again, the PI continues to isolate further
              such classes. Generally, the funded project serves to show that such seemingly
              esoteric hypotheses as large cardinal axioms have direct impact on mathematical
              practice, thus promoting the interaction between logic, set theory and other
              branches of mathematics.

