Title       : A Computer-Based Assesment Model of Distance Education for Computer and
               Information Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a0071067

Award Number: 0071067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170492             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome A. Atkins jatkins@bccc.state.md.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Brigham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Excelsior College
	      7 Columbia Circle
	      Albany, NY  122035159    518/464-8570

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY

This project demonstrates methods to accelerate the
              preparation of computing professionals for upward mobility in the fields of
              computer and information technology through vendor certifications and college
              degree completion. The methodology also has the potential to level the playing
              field for access to technology education opportunity and associated employment
              opportunities by making delivery of affordable technical education neutral to
              the diversity of the client base. The project focuses on demonstrating that
              access to and proficiency in post-secondary computer and information technology
              education can be enhanced significantly through distance education via
              computer, specifically the World Wide Web, and outcomes-based assessment via
              computer based testing.

Project activities culminate with the award of the
              Regents College Associate in Science degree in Computer Information Systems.
              Project participants earn general education credits through examinations
              offered by Regents College and technical credits by examinations such as those
              offered by the Institute for the Certification of Computer Professionals
              (ICCP). Students also are able to apply credits earned by examinations for
              various IT vendor certifications, e.g., Microsoft, CompTIA, Novell. All
              examinations are administered through a national network of examination
              delivery centers. Examination preparation is available on line through
              specially developed guided learning modules in self-paced and facilitated
              modes.

The primary strategy is to use the Regents College model of the
              virtual university that stresses assessment versus instructional approaches for
              degree programs at the associate and baccalaureate levels in computer and
              information technology. As computer platforms and the Internet's World Wide Web
              become more prevalent as vehicles for educational delivery and assessment,
              these innovative programs of educational delivery at virtual universities will
              offer solutions to the looming crisis in engineering and technology employment.
              This project relies on the increasing access to personal computers and the
              Internet now documented. With that, the proposed approach offers opportunities
              that are particularly vital to training displace workers and those historically
              underserved and underrepresented in technical higher education. The project
              seeks to create a replicable model of use to other distance learning based
              programs and institutions.

