Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2001  
File        : a0071636

Award Number: 0071636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Bachmann pbachman@mc3.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley M. Gottfried  (Principal Investigator former)
              David R. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montgomery Cnty Comm Col
	      340 Dekalb Pike
	      Blue Bell, PA  194221412    215/641-6300

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A major reason cited for underrepresentation of low income students, especially
              women, minorities, and students with disabilities, in Montgomery County
              Community College's associate degree programs in computer science, engineering,
              and mathematics is financial.   To increase enrollment of academically talented
              but low income students in these fields, MCCC proposes a Computer Science,
              Engineering and Mathematics (CSEMS) Scholarship Program to assist interested
              students in meeting both college costs and daily living expenses and attaining
              academic success.
Two Principal Investigators, the Deans of Academic Affairs
              and of Student Affairs, will oversee the scholarship administration.  Their
              selection committee comprised of faculty from relevant disciplines, financial
              aid and counseling will choose recipients based on their Pell eligibility as
              verified by Financial Aid, citizenship or qualified alien status, full time
              enrollment in associate degree in CSEMS programs, and 3.0 or higher college or
              high school grade point averages as verified by Admissions & Records. 
              Applicants' descriptions of extra-curricular activities, employment, and
              reasons for choosing CSEMS programs will assist assessment of their motivation
              and potential.  	 
Assigned counselors will monitor progress and use of
              academic and student services and submit reports at the end of each semester to
              PIs who will certify continuing eligibility.
Expected outcomes: increased
              enrollments of low income, academically talented students in CSEMS fields;
              enhanced persistence and performance; successful degree completion and direct
              application of learned skills in employment or through transfer; and ensured
              program continuation, will be measured by graduation rates, overall grade point
              averages, and success in obtaining employment in their field or transferring to
              four year institutions.


