Title       : Generalized Linear Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0071726

Award Number: 0071726
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter McCullagh pmcc@galton.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Peter McCullagh will investigate a number of issues, all bearing directly or
              indirectly on generalized linear models.  The main theme of the proposal is the
              development of a framework for constructing logically consistent statistical
              models, whose hallmark is extendability or scope.  Every sensible linear model
              for a two-way layout with 4 treatments and 7 blocks must ordinarily be one
              element, or vector space, in a sequence of logically related vector spaces, one
              such subspace for each layout.  Logical consistency demands that the
              restriction of one subspace to a subset of the blocks or treatments must
              coincide with the subspace associated with this subset.  In mathematical terms,
              not only must the model be invariant under permutation of treatments and
              permutation of blocks, but the sequence of vector spaces must be closed under
              restriction to subsets.  In algebraic terminology, such a sequence of vector
              spaces constitutes
a representation of the category of injective maps on
              finite sets.  The standard factorial models (hierarchical interaction models)
              coincide precisely with the regular sub-representations of the product
              category.  The PI has developed this notion of extendability for designs,
              common in genetic studies of plant and animal breeding, in which two or more
              factors have the same set of levels.  In order to accommodate these new models,
              it is found necessary to extend the factorial model formulae
by the inclusion
              of several new operators that are relevant only for homologous factors.  The
              aim is to develop a succinct way of specifying category-invariant subspaces,
              i.e.~models, in a way that is unambiguous and can be understood by the
              computer.

This proposal aims to study statistical models from the viewpoint
              of their logical structure, and to develop new models where appropriate.
In
              each new area of application, whether it be genetics, biology or social
              science, new considerations relevant to the application emerge.
For example,
              in experiments connected with plant breeding, the same set of plants may occur
              as males contributing pollen and as females contributing ova.  Likewise, in
              citation studies, a given journal may occur as a citing journal or as a cited
              journal.  Homologous factors of this sort rarely arise in agricultural field
              trials where factorial models were first developed.  As a result, standard
              statistical models are not well suited to such applications.  It is the aim of
              this proposal to study such structures from a logical viewpoint and to develop
              new statistical models where needed.
