Title       : Interface Effects in Magnetic Tunneling Junctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  2001   
File        : a0071878

Award Number: 0071878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Q. Xiao jqx@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edmund R. Nowak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to a young professor at the University of
              Delaware for a project that investigates the fundamental aspects of how
              electrode-insulator interfaces affect spin-dependent electron tunneling and the
              magnetic properties of magnetic tunnel junctions.  These systems are promising
              candidates for new generations of highly magnetoresistive devices and for
              advancing our understanding of spin transport.  Significant issues, such the
              strong temperature and bias voltage dependence of the tunneling
              magnetoresistance, are attributed to the interfacial spins, but remain
              unresolved.  A series of electrical transport and structural investigations are
              proposed to correlate interface characteristics with spin-dependent transport
              properties and test competing theories that have been developed.  An important
              feature of this work is using samples with a wedged-shaped aluminum metal
              layer.  This allows junctions with under-, completely-, and over-oxidized
              tunnel barriers to be readily obtained.  Phenomena to be investigated include:
              charge and magnetization accumulations at the electrode-insulator interfaces, a
              spin-dependent electric field distribution in the magnetic electrodes, and a
              chemical potential splitting between spin-up and spin-down electronic bands due
              to electron-electron interactions.  The proposed research has relevance to
              semiconductor research involving gated dielectric materials, hybrid
              ferromagnet-semiconductor heterostructures, and spin-injection into
              semiconductors or metals. Graduate students involved in this project will
              receive training in physics, nanostructured materials, and device fabrication
              that is currently at the forefront scientific and technical areas.  This
              training will prepare them for a range of careers in industry, government, or
              academe.  
%%%
Thin film magnetic multilayer structures are driving a new
              approach to electronics that is based on the spin state (up or down) of the
              carriers rather than on its charge as in conventional semiconductor
              electronics.  Magnetic tunnel junctions, for example, are promising candidates
              for new generations of magnetoresistive devices and for understanding
              fundamental aspects of spin transport.  In these systems, interfaces between
              metal and insulating layers play a critical role in determining the electrical
              and magnetic properties.  This individual investigator award to a young
              professor at the University of Delaware is for a project consisting of a series
              of electrical measurements and structural investigations directed at
              correlating interface structure with spin-dependent transport properties, a
              problem of technological importance.  Fundamental aspects of
              electrode-insulator interfaces will be studied such as: charge and
              magnetization accumulation at the interface, a spin-dependent electric field
              distribution in the magnetic electrodes, and the role of electron-electron
              interactions.  Knowledge gained is anticipated to benefit new research fields
              involving hybrid magnetic-semiconductor heterostructures and spin-injection
              devices.  This project offers excellent research and education opportunities
              for students within an interdisciplinary program focused on physics and
              materials that is currently at the forefront scientific and technical areas. 
              The students will acquire rigorous training and skills in nanostructured
              materials and device fabrication that will prepare them for a range of careers
              in industry, government, or academe.
***

