Title       : Complexes of Block Ionomers With Oppositely Charged Surfactants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0071682

Award Number: 0071682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander V. Kabanov akabanov@unmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska Medical Ctr
	      987835 Nebraska Medical Center
	      Omaha, NE  681987835    402/559-7456

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The major goal of this project is to explore two types of environmentally
              responsive nanocomposite materials. The first materials are synthesized by
              reacting block (or graft) copolymers, containing ionic and nonionic segments,
              with oppositely charged surfactants. The second materials are synthesized by
              reacting cross-linked networks containing ionic and nonionic segments, with
              oppositely charged surfactants. The resulting materials combine two major
              elements. First, they contain ionic polymer segments, which are neutralized
              with oppositely charged surfactant ions to form water insoluble domains.
              Second, they contain nonionic polymer segments linked to ionic chains, which
              provide for dispersion or swelling of a whole composite in appropriate
              solvents.   For these block ionomer complexes (BIC), the PI will characterize
              the relationships between the structural parameters of the components and
              physicochemical properties of the resulting BIC, as well as examines the routes
              and extent of control of structure formation in such systems. For this purpose
              the molecular architecture of the copolymers (i.e. linear vs. branched, block
              vs. graft, length of the segment etc.) as well as the structure of surfactants
              (i.e., hydro- vs. fluorocarbon tails, number of tails and their lengths) will
              be varied. The response of these materials to pH, ionic strength, solvents and
              temperature variations will be examined. The second part of this project will
              extend the family of BIC using cross-linked polymer networks from ionic and
              nonionic hydrophilic poly(ethylene oxide)  (PEO) chains. It is expected that
              upon reacting with oppositely charged surfactants, a partially swollen
              microheterogeneous bulk material will form in which the hydrophobic clusters,
              from polyion-bound surfactant arrays, are joined by hydrophilic PEO chains. The
              size and the structure of hydrophobic clusters as well as swollen hydrophilic
              zones, their percolation and degree of swelling should be strongly dependent on
              the overall complex composition as well as the characteristics of the original
              block ionomer network. It is possible that such sensitivity will be a key to
              effective control of the properties of BIC networks allowing their use as
              environmentally responsive materials.
	
These studies will advance the
              understanding of the principles involved in designing polymer-surfactant
              dispersions and networks with controllable properties.  Complexes from polymer
              networks and surfactants might be useful as versatile environmentally
              responsive materials in a variety of applications, including resins for
              bioseparation, biocatalysis, drug delivery and drug release systems. Therefore,
              if this research is successful, it might have broader impact in various fields
              where nanocomposite materials are needed.

