Title       : Investigating Nonlinear Dynamics with Topological Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2000    
File        : a0071859

Award Number: 0071859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy A. Kennedy jkennedy@math.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project is an investigation of the interplay of topology and 
nonlinear
              dynamics from both applied and theoretical viewpoints. Complicated
topology
              arises naturally in nonlinear dynamical systems and frequently
"carries" the
              dynamics of the system. Understanding this topology is
essential to
              understanding the dynamics and the long-term behavior of the
system. Planned
              are (i) further theoretical study of the topology present
in "most" (i.e.,
              generic) dynamical systems with a given property,  (ii)
applied study of
              stirring and turbulence (with chemical engineers at
Rutgers), (iii)
              theoretical and applied study of area-preserving systems,
(iv) an
              investigation of how topology and invariant measures are
related in
              one-dimesional dynamical systems, and (v) further study of
topological
              horseshoes (with J. A. Yorke and others from the Maryland
group). The project
              builds on work already done by the investigator both
alone and in
              collaboration with other mathematicians and scientists. The
tools of both
              topology and dynamical systems are needed and will be used
to carry out the
              project. Theoretical results concerning stirring will be
backed up by actual
              experiment and observation in the lab.  

	Whenever a nonlinear dynamical
              system, such as the weather, or the 
motion of different fluids as they are
              stirred, or the solar system, is
"operating", interesting topology arises as
              sets are mapped back across
themselves. Understanding these sets is crucial to
              understanding the
complicated behavior of nonlinear systems. Sometimes the
              complicated
topology can be observed as it forms, and is a marker for  certain
              kinds
of complicated dynamics. Can this be made precise? Can it be
              "quantified"?
Consider stirring, a phenomenon of special interest to the
              investigator,
for example. Stirring occurs in every kitchen, and seems to be a
              simple
process. But this is far from the case: Stirring occurs in
              industrial
settings and in nature in many different contexts as chemicals
              or
medicines, or hot and cold air, or hot and cold water, are mixed.
              Most
often in industry achieving homogeneity of the mixed substance
              efficiently
is the goal. Experimental and simulated results by chemical
              engineers
demonstrate that those processes used today do not result in
              homogeneity.
How can those processes be improved? That is one of the problems
              to which
the results of this project should be applicable. More generally,
              the
project planned is a study of the topology of complicated
              dynamical
systems, and both the implications of the presence of complicated
              topology
for nonlinear systems and vice versa. 


