Title       : Electron Magnetic Resonance Investigations of Low Dimensional Conductors and
               Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0071953

Award Number: 0071953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287786             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen O. Hill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is an individual investigator award to a young professor at Montana State
              University for research into the ground-state properties of a variety of low
              dimensional conductors and superconductors.  The project focuses on organic
              charge transfer salts and inorganic layered oxides.  The three main parts of
              the project are 1) to study the fermiology of these quasi 1- and 2-d materials
              using a cyclotron resonance technique ; 2) to study the collective modes in the
              Sr2RuO4 system, a potential triplet pairing superconductor; and 3) to study the
              Josephson plasma resonance in the organic and layered superconductors.  A GHz
              cavity perturbation method will be used for all of the measurements.  The
              unifying goal of the studies is to probe how the various ground states of these
              unusual materials evolve from their respective metallic states, whether
              conventional or unconventional.  The students working on the project will
              develop skills that will help them find jobs in academia, government or
              industrial laboratories.
%%%
Low dimensional materials possess a variety of
              interesting characteristics, some of which hold a potential for use in future
              technologies.  These materials also form an interesting laboratory in which
              studies of novel physical phenomena can be made.  This is an individual
              investigator award to a young professor at Montana State University for a
              project to study the ground state properties of low dimensional conductors and
              superconductors.  In particular molecular conductors and layered
              superconductors will be studied using a high frequency technique.  The goal of
              the project is to probe how the various ground states in these materials evolve
              from their respective metallic states.  The research will increase our
              understanding of these interesting materials.  The students working on the
              project will develop skills that will help them find jobs in academia,
              government or industrial laboratories.

