Title       : KISS - KPNO International Spectroscopic Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0071114

Award Number: 0071114
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288521             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Salzer slaz@astro.wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0071114
Salzer

The goals of this project are to identify and analyze a
              volume limited sample of emission-line galaxies using the KPNO 0.6m Schmidt
              with an objective prism and a large-format CCD to find and measure the H-alpha
              emission from these objects. The stated objective is to locate ~5000
              emission-line galaxies in 300 sq.deg. with B<20-21. The survey is on-going; the
              analysis software has been developed and tested, and over 127 square deg. have
              already been analyzed. Once complete, the KISS sample of galaxies will  have
              numerous additional applications which cut across many areas of research in
              astronomy, including chemical evolution in galaxies, the large-scale
              distribution of galaxies, and the determination of the abundance of helium
              produced in the Big Bang.

Galaxies with active nuclei or intense starbursts
              represent the most energetic phenomena known in the universe.   Galaxian
              activity is very common and occurs on all scales, from the super-luminous
              quasars down to extremely active star formation in dwarf galaxies.  Much of our
              knowledge of active galaxies and starbursts has come about by studying galaxies
              cataloged in objective-prism surveys that used Schmidt telescopes and
              photographic plates.  The recent opportunity to use more sensitive digital
              detectors has prompted the present  program to discover much fainter active
              galaxies than were previously accessible. The KISS project (KPNO International
              Spectroscopic Survey), is designed to discover faint, distant galaxies which
              possess strong emission lines, a clear signature of galaxian activity. The
              survey technique used is extremely successful, discovering new active galaxies
              at a rate 180 times higher than the most well known previous survey of this
              type (the Markarian survey).  To date a few thousand active and starbursting
              galaxies have been cataloged. The project will be continued  by extending the
              observations to new areas of the sky.  In addition, the large, deep samples
              will be used
to study galaxian activity of all types, in order to better
              understand this activity in the context of galaxy formation and evolution. Once
              the survey observations are complete, the KISS sample of galaxies will have
              numerous additional applications which cut across many areas of research in
              astronomy, including chemical evolution in galaxies, the large-scale
              distribution of galaxies, and the determination of the abundance of helium
              produced in the Big Bang. Funding for this project was provided by the NSF
              program for Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***

