Title       : Nonlinear Wave Problems in Fluid Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a0071939

Award Number: 0071939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Milewski milewski@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0071939
Milewski

The project will consist of the study of three problems in
              fluid mechanics 
and nonlinear waves. The first project involves understanding
              certain 
aspects of dispersive wave turbulence, that is, the statistical
              description of 
a large number of interacting dispersive waves, such as those
              on the ocean 
surface. First, a reduced model will be used which contains the
              
fundamental nonlinear processes and can yield the scaling for the energy
              
transfer mechanisms. Second, spectra of two-- and three--dimensional 
ocean
              waves with a reduced equation valid for finite depth and deep water 
will be
              computed and compared with results from the reduced model. The 
second project
              involves the study of three-dimensional solitary waves in 
regimes where
              surface tension is an important part of the dynamics. These 
are waves that
              can be generated, for example, by flow of a thin fluid layer 
over a small
              obstacle. Here, it is proposed to use solutions that have 
already been
              computed to find additional solutions in regimes of physical 
interest, such
              as increasing depth. The third project is to study the 
dynamics of
              reaction-diffusion equations in the presence of spatial 
inhomogeneities, as
              for example, in models of certain chemical reactions 
where the reactant
              concentration is not uniform in space. In the spatially 
homogeneous case, one
              obtains various coherent patterns in the reaction. 
How these patterns and
              their boundaries are modified by the 
inhomogeneities will be studied.

The
              goal of this research is to understand several aspects of wave 
dynamics in
              fluids using a combination of theory and advanced 
computation. There are
              three distinct phenomena that will be studied. 
First, the evolution of wave
              turbulence will be studied: the physical 
situation in which many waves of
              different wavelengths and traveling in 
different directions are superposed.
              The simplest example is the apparent 
random mix of waves on the surface of
              the ocean. The goal is to predict 
the relative energy in the different waves
              and the mechanisms by which 
waves of different sizes exchange energy. These
              are important predictions 
whose applications range from understanding
              satellite remote sensing data 
to climate dynamics. Second, a class of water
              waves called lump solitons 
will be studied: localized coherent waves that
              travel in a particular 
direction. The goal is to obtain the range of physical
              situations in which 
these waves can exist. This work has implications in a
              variety of thin film 
and coating applications. Lastly, the dynamics of the
              components of 
biological and chemical reacting systems where the
              concentration of the 
reactants vary in space will be studied. The particular
              case where a 
catalyst for the reaction is not distributed uniformly and
              therefore the 
reaction proceeds differently in different places will be
              studied. The goal 
is to understand how the reaction varies from place to
              place and what 
happens at the boundaries where the reactions change
              character.

