Title       : Topics in Dynamical Systems and Ergodic Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0071339

Award Number: 0071339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $479110             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anatole Katok katok_a@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:

The project primarily deals with rigidity phenomena in dynamical
              systems.
One aspect  of rigidity  concerns situations when a weaker
              structure
(i.e. measurable) determines a stronger one (i.e.
              differentiable)
within certain classes of systems.  Another aspect deals
              with
preservation of the  differentiable orbit structure or some of
              its
important elements under small perturbations (local
              differentiable
rigidity) or within certain classes of systems (global 
              differentiable
rigidity). Yet another type of rigidity appears when  a
              certain
property (such as a relation between invariants, or a regularity of
              an
invariant structure) forces the system to belong to a specialized
narrow
              class.  A part of the research program deals with the
identification of
              various  rigidity phenomena  in classical dynamical
systems. An essential
              characteristic of proposed work is  a synthetic
approach which looks
              simultaneously into all three principal classes of
behavior which appear in
              dynamics: elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic
exploring  both  similarities and
              contrasts among these three
paradigms. Among the major goals is the
              identification of  new
situations where measurable  orbit structure determines
              differentiable
orbit structure.  Another part of the program builds upon PI's
              earler
successes in identifying and classifying rigidity phenomena for
              actions
of higher--rank abelian groups, i.e. dynamical systems
              with
multidimensional ``time'' which displays behavior essentially
              different
from the classical case.  Among other goals of the program is
              the
development of new techniques for construction of
              real--analytic
dynamical systems with uniform ergodic behavior including
              solution of
the  long--standing problems of existence of such systems near
              elements
of periodic flows on some simple low--dimensional manifolds  based
              on
recent  advances in that direction .
 Mathematical concept of  "rigidity"
              has many facets. Its simplest and
most basic manifestations can be seen at the
              level just above
high school algebra:  a small number of equations or
              inequalities of a
special type may imply much larger number of equation. For
              example, if
the arithmetic mean on  n numbers coincides with the geometric
              mean
(one equation) than the numbers are all equal ( n-1 equations).  
An
              example from the PI's earlier research  is conceptually
similar albeit
              technically  much more sophisticated:  a compact
surface of negative
              curvature, i.e. a  bounded geometric shape where any
geodesic triangle has the
              sum of its angles less than 180 degrees, for
which two numbers characterizing
              global and statistical volume growth
(topological and metric entropy) coincide
              has constant negative
curvature, i.e. the sum of the angles of a geodesic
              triangle is
uniquely determined by the area. Various aspects of rigidity
              appear at
the junction of several major mathematical disciplines,
              including
differential geometry, the theory of Lie groups and the  theory
              of
dynamical systems. The research program under the present grant aims
              at
identifying  various rigidity phenomena  both in classical dynamics
when
              time is one--dimensional and for dynamical systems with
multidimensional time
              where such phenomena are more pronounced and
prevalent.  Another central theme
              of the proposed research is a general
classification of dynamical phenomena
              into hyperbolic and partially
hyperbolic (roughly "chaotic" in lay parlance)
              elliptic (stable
behavior) and parabolic (intermediate complexity accompanied 
              by
peculiar special features).

