Title       : Agroforestry and Forest Ecosystem Managment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a0071147

Award Number: 0071147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285477             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred D. Stone fred@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project is developing, implementing, and disseminating an enhanced
              two-year curriculum leading to a Certificate in Agroforestry and Forest
              Ecosystem Management Technician (A.S.) at Hawaii Community College. A need
              exists in Hawaii for workers with a two-year Technician Certificate in
              agroforestry and forest ecosystem management. These include jobs with
              government agencies, private industry and small mixed forestry and agricultural
              operations. The curriculum is focusing on Hawaii, but is transferable to other
              areas in the tropical Pacific. Products include publishable course materials
              that are being disseminated statewide and nationally. A significant part of the
              Certificate program is internships with partners in government agencies and the
              private industry. Women, Hawaiians and other minority students make up a
              significant proportion of the enrollment, and specific efforts are being made
              to attract these students into the program through high school recruitment and
              publicity aimed at the target population. The program collaborates with the
              State of Hawaii's Forestry and Communities Initiative, the Workforce
              Development Council of the State Department of Labor and Industrial Relations,
              Hawaii School-to-Work Program, University of Hawaii Hilo College of
              Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Resource Management, the University of Hawaii
              Hilo Ecology and Evolution program, and University of Hawaii College of
              Agriculture and Human Resources at the Manoa campus in Honolulu. The project is
              working in synergy with the Northwest Center for Sustainable Resources to
              collaborate on materials, share information and disseminate results nationally.
