Title       : The Self as Political and Scientific Project in the 20th Century: A Symposium on
               the Human Sciences Between Utopia & Reform, University Park, PA, 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0217266

Award Number: 0217266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9998               (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg A. Eghigian gae2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 0217266

The Self as Political and Scientific Project in the 20th Century:
              A Symposium on the Human Sciences Between Utopia and Reform The Self as
              Political and Scientific Project in the 20th Century: A Symposium on the Human
              Sciences Between Utopia and Reform

Greg Eghigian, Pennsylvania State
              University


This award provides funding for a two-day conference on "The
              Self as Political and Scientific Project in the 20th Century: A Symposium on
              the Human Sciences Between Utopia and Reforml" to be held in the fall of 2003
              at Penn State University.  The organizers intend to bring together scholars
              conducting research in science & technology studies -- in particular, in the
              fields of the sociology, history, anthropology, and ethics of the human
              sciences -- for the purpose of disentangling the interaction between science
              and politics in the shaping of the twentieth-century self.  In particular, the
              forum of a symposium serves as an opportunity for scholars to discuss how
              selfhood became a crucially important focal point of scientific research and
              social engineering in contemporary fascist, communist, and liberal polities.  
              The event will be held at Penn State University-University Park campus and will
              be open to the public. 

Tentative themes for the panels are: The Making of
              the Socialist Self,  Psychiatry and Identity in the United States, Fashioning
              the Fascist Self,  Medical Ethics and the Making of the Self,   Religion and
              the Self, and Medicalization and the Self. The focus is to be broadly
              interdisciplinary and comparative, encompassing developments within and across
              Europe, the former Soviet Union, and the United States. In addition to the
              panels, planned breakout sessions will enable participants to address issues
              raised during the previous panels and provide an opportunity for participants
              and audience members to interact, discuss, and develop ideas across
              disciplinary boundaries. It is the intention of the organizers to publish most
              of the contributions in the form of an edited volume or a special issue of a
              journal.

