Title       : Development of Individual Differences in Decision Biases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0217620

Award Number: 0217620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261964             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irwin P. Levin irwin-levin@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
 There is considerable literature in the area of human judgment and
decision
              making demonstrating systematic use of simplifying heuristics and
the biases
              that can arise from them. For example, "framing effects" are
common in which
              people react to the manner in which information is labelled
by assigning more
              favorable evaluations to, say, a medical treatment that
is described as having
              a "75% success rate" as opposed to a "25% failure
rate". However, research by
              the Principal Investigator and others has
uncovered considerable variation in
              the extent to which different
individuals display such biases. Most recently,
              this research, which has
been done almost exclusively with adults, has linked
              these individual
differences to stable personality traits and decision styles.
              This
naturally brings up the dual questions of when such biases develop
              and
whether they can be linked to distinctive childhood dispositions.
              The
present series of studies is proposed to address these questions.
 A
              major resource for these studies is an available population of 5-6
year-olds
              whose social and emotional development and cognitive capacity
have been
              tracked since they were toddlers. Thus, we have the capability of
relating
              children's decision making behavior to measures such as shyness,
impulsivity,
              and intelligence. In an initial study we showed that these
traits are related
              to risk-taking in a gambling-type game. We are in the
process of developing a
              battery of tasks/games which are "child-friendly"
yet capture the essence of
              the decision processes observed in adults. An
innovation of the new studies is
              that the parent as well as the child will
complete the tasks so that we can
              correlate the two sets of responses to
learn more about the development of
              decision biases.          


