Title       : Long Term Ecological Research-Shortgrass Steppe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2002   
File        : a0217631

Award Number: 0217631
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4680000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene F. Kelly pedoiso@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack A. Morgan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ingrid C. Burke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan G. Stafford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Antolin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract (SGS LTER Renewal Proposal)

The shortgrass steppe (SGS) LTER has
              been in operation since 1982. Three questions guide its work: (1) What factors
              regulate ecological structure and function over space and time? (2) How do
              factors that regulate structure and function and coupling of biotic and abiotic
              components vary spatially and temporally? (3) What are the thresholds that
              determine the vulnerability to changes in the factors influencing structure and
              function? 

The conceptual framework asserts that ecological structure and
              function are governed by climate, natural disturbance, physiography, human use,
              and biotic interactions. SGS work is divided into three topic areas, population
              dynamics (plants and heterotrophs), biogeochemistry, and land-atmosphere
              interactions. Disturbances are of such importance that they are embedded in
              each topic area. In addition to continuing long-term experiments, SGS will
              initiate new studies that primarily focus on Question 3. 

In the area of
              population dynamics, one grass species, Bouteloua gracilis, contributes most to
              biomass and net primary production (NPP) and has been the focus of most past
              work. New long-term studies of Opuntia polyacantha (prickly-pear cactus), a
              species that makes up a small proportion of NPP, will be initiated; its spiny
              growth form affords protection to other species and therefore may have a large
              effect under cattle grazing. Even though the SGS has proven quite resistant to
              invasive plants, the introduction of species that can successfully invade the
              SGS is inevitable. So the potential for invasion by plants with different life
              history attributes will be studied and surveys conducted to detect new
              invasions. 

In the area of faunal dynamics, small mammals simultaneously
              reflect and affect both the structure and function of the SGS ecosystem.
              Long-term studies will be continued that track small mammal populations, their
              resources and predators. New research will emphasize the dynamics of the
              black-tailed prairie dog (Cynomys ludovicianus) and its effects on biological
              diversity and ecosystem function. The once abundant prairie dog is now a
              candidate for listing under the Endangered Species Act. 

Under
              biogeochemistry, SGS conceives of biogeochemical processes as an integrated
              function of biotic components and those processes responsible for carbon and
              nutrient fluxes: primary production, decomposition, weathering, mineralization,
              and trace gas flux. Variations in biogeochemistry will continue to be studied
              as a function of climatic controls, and new studies that evaluate geologic
              (textural) and topographic controls, and the N budget will be
              initiated.

Regarding land-atmosphere interactions, the processes of primary
              concern are water, energy, and gaseous fluxes. One of the most important
              alterations that has occurred and continues to occur on the SGS LTER is
              land-use change, which will be evaluated in terms of the interactions among
              human land use, biotic responses, and atmospheric processes at local to
              regional scales. 

The SGS has a major investment in simulation analysis, and
              each of topic areas has a simulation component. Models will continue to be used
              for synthesizing long-term data both within and across research areas. A new
              synthesis volume will be published during the next funding cycle.

Finally,
              data management supports SGS research and contributes to ecoinformatics. The
              building of new interactions with federal land management agencies, NGO's, and
              the interested public will be continued. Through the use of supplemental
              funding, SGS will focus its sLTER on K-12 and community outreach through
              student mentoring, curriculum development, teacher professional development,
              community partnerships, and education research.

