Title       : US-Nigeria Cooperative Research: Power Flow Control and Stability Improvement in
               Longitudinal Power Systems Using Power Flow Controllers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0217829

Award Number: 0217829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph O. Ojo jojo@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1038,5993,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0217829
Ojo

This award supports a three-year collaborative research project
              between Professor Joseph O. Ojo, with the Department of Electrical Engineering
              at Tennessee Technological University, and Professor Michael O. Omoigui, with
              the Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering at Obafemi Awolowo
              University in Nigeria.  The investigators will study power flow control and
              stability improvement in longitudinal power systems using power flow
              controllers.

Electric power systems in many developing countries are usually
              small and radial/longitudinal with little connectivity, making them operate
              like isolated systems.  They are susceptible to lengthy time interruptions,
              fluctuations in voltage currents, and poor voltage regulation, and as a result
              the transmission and distribution systems are generally overloaded.  Nigeria is
              moving away from the more traditional mechanical power systems towards a more
              electronic system that will use converter-based devices, which can then offer
              greater flexibility and improved operation.  The investigators will develop
              models for the power systems, and use them to analyze the power systems'
              performance using a unified power flow controller under varying conditions.  As
              part of the project, they will study the use of multi-terminal, converter-based
              power flow controller topologies to improve power flow capability and enhance
              the voltage system stability of weak and longitudinal power systems, especially
              in a deregulated environment.  This project combines Dr. Ojo's expertise in
              power electronics with Dr. Omoigui's knowledge of power system analysis and
              control.

Currently in the United States little study is being done on the
              unique problems of small and longitudinal power systems, but they will become
              increasingly important as more US power systems become deregulated.  It is
              anticipated that the results of this project will provide viable and efficient
              solutions to perennial power system disturbances that are common in
              longitudinal power systems.  Both investigators have a strong record in
              graduate education, and they also expect that a significant amount of knowledge
              transfer will occur among their students as a result of this project.

The
              Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Electrical
              and Communications Systems are jointly supporting this project.

