Title       : The Public Value of Social Policy Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0217813

Award Number: 0217813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9952               (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Guston guston@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elvin Wyly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bari A. Erlichson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jocelyn Crowley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julie M. Whittaker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the public value of the research funded by social
              policy agencies of the US federal government.  "Public value" refers not the
              outputs of research (in terms of papers, reports, patents, etc.), but the
              societal outcomes such research influences, according to the agencies' missions
              and as measured by the broadest available social indicators.   Studying this
              research will broaden the scholarship of public R&D management beyond such
              traditional agencies as NIH and NSF, facilitating the comparative study of
              techniques including merit review and technology transfer. Moreover, the study
              may illuminate mechanisms for producing public value from research and thus
              contribute to understanding the relationship between sponsored research and
              societal outcomes more broadly.   Examining the "public value" of social policy
              research means studying the societal outcomes of the research and the
              hypothesized causal links between mission-related research programs and these
              outcomes.  Sources for the articulation of goals and objectives include
              authorizing legislation, mission statements, and strategic plans.  Societal
              outcomes include available, systematic social indicators, as well as ad hoc
              indicators that policy makers and stakeholders have used in articulating the
              societal problem triggering the need for the research program.  The project
              will seek to learn how social policy agencies set priorities between current
              programs and investing in research, how they manage research for societal
              outcomes, how they transfer new knowledge and/or technologies from their
              sponsored research into the pursuit of their missions, how they anticipate the
              linkages between their research and societal outcomes, and what those outcomes
              may be. 

	The current funding is for planning purposes, to develop the
              necessary permissions to gather data, develop questions to be asked, and
              develop the research design, analysis and interpretation.


