Title       : Florida Georgia Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
               Program (Phase III)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0217675

Award Number: 0217675
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2999995            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph W. Turner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida A&M University
	      400 Foote Hilyer Administration
	      Tallahassee, FL  32307    850/599-3531

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Florida Georgia Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
              Program (Phase III)

Florida A&M University in coalition with Albany State
              University, Bethune-Cookman
College, Florida State University, University of
              Florida, University of South Florida,
University of Central Florida, Florida
              International University, Florida Memorial
College, University of Miami,
              Tallahassee Community College, Miami Dade Community
College, and Florida
              Community College at Jacksonville has developed a program to
significantly
              increase the quality and quantity of minority students successfully
completing
              science, engineering and mathematics (SEM) B.S. degree programs as well
              as
significantly increase the number interested in and qualified for
              matriculation into Ph.D.
SEM programs of study. Subsumed under these goals are
              the following measurable
objectives: at least quadruple the annual entry of
              minority B.S. graduates into Ph.D.
SEM programs from 100 (year 2001 baseline)
              to 500 over the next five years; (2)
increase by ten percent (baseline 2320),
              the number of B.S. degrees awarded to
underrepresented minorities in SEM
              disciplines by the year 2007; and (3) institutionalize
the FGLSAMP Project at
              each participating institution by 2006 to insure FGLSAMP
permanence after NSF
              funding ceases.

The Alliance proposes to utilize a holistic model to
              transition SEM scholars from high
school to college, positively influence
              their retention in college, enhance their B.S.
graduation rates from college
              and entry into Ph.D. degree SEM programs of study.
Project activities to
              realize these goals and objectives include developing structured
relationships
              with school systems and community colleges to attract students to SEM
majors;
              establishing workshops to increase student academic performance;
              implementing
a pre-matriculation institute; and implementing a pre-junior
              graduate school orientation
program and pre-senior research apprenticeship to
              stimulate student competence and
interest in graduate school.

The FGLSAMP
              Project will form partnerships with AGEP Projects, Ph.D. degree
granting
              institutions, other appropriate NSF agencies, national/governmental
              laboratories,
private foundations and private industry to assist in providing
              funds for research stipends
and graduate fellowships for student
              participants.

The Florida Legislature provides $640,000 in matching funds
              annually to support
participating Florida institutions in the FGLSAMP Project.
              The results from this project
will be shared with other institutions and
              scientists via reports, newsletters, FGLSAMP
EXPOs and published articles.

