Title       : Collaborative Research: A Framework for Effective Optimization via Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0217690

Award Number: 0217690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry L. Nelson nelsonb@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              We will develop algorithms (and supporting theory) for optimizing the expected
              performance of a stochastic system with respect to discrete decision variables.
               We assume that the stochastic system of interest is represented by a
              simulation model, and hence that the performance of this system can only be
              estimated with noise.  Our focus is on ``general-purpose'' optimization
              techniques that do not exploit particular problem structure, because we want
              our techniques to be suitable for inclusion in general-purpose simulation
              software. The goal is to produce algorithms that have provable asymptotic
              performance, competitive finite-time performance, and valid statistical
              inference at termination. The keys to our approach are (1) our algorithms will
              work within a global guidance framework that guarantees asymptotic convergence,
              while giving us wide latitude to be aggressive and adaptive; (2) within this
              framework, we will embed aggressive local-improvement schemes; (3) we will
              enhance the local-improvement schemes with highly efficient selection-error
              control to insure improvement even in the presence of estimation error; and (4)
              we will provide valid statistical inference at algorithm termination so that
              the solution reported as best will be the best, or near best, of all those
              solutions actually visited by the search, with a prespecified confidence
              level.

In the United States, computer simulation is widely used to design
              and improve ("optimize") manufacturing, service, military, telecommunication
              and financial systems that are subject to uncertainty. Our research will
              provide theoretically sound optimization algorithms that can be incorporated
              into new or existing simulation software packages. There is a critical need for
              this research, because every day simulation users are formulating and
              attempting to solve optimization-via-simulation problems using commercial
              products that ignore, or only slightly notice, that the simulation experiment
              incorporates uncertainty.  These commercial products often work well, but they
              can also be dramatically misled, and the user has no indication of, or
              protection against, the incorrect and costly decisions that may result.  The
              availability of optimization tools in nearly all commercial simulation modeling
              packages implies that optimization-via-simulation problems will be "solved."
              The question is whether they will be solved efficiently with theoretically
              sound algorithms that provide specific guarantees of, and inference on, their
              performance.  The goal of our research is to develop such
              optimization-via-simulation algorithms, representing a substantial advance over
              the state of the art in both theory and practice.
