Title       : Corporate Venture Capital: Innovation through Equity Investment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0217711

Award Number: 0217711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359298             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan D. Meyer ameyer@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal seeks to advance our understanding of organizational innovation,
              learning, and adaptation to technological change. It examines organizational
              structures that are relatively new and unstudied alternatives to traditional
              corporate R&D programs in pursuit of the development and commercialization of
              technology. The study will gather real-time longitudinal data on the adaptation
              and selection of organizational programs and practices in the face of
              increasingly adverse macroeconomic conditions. This research continues and
              expands on exploratory work funded by a Small Grant for Exploratory Research
              from NSF. 

This research is theoretically grounded, rooted in prior research
              seeking a better understanding of how R&D spending may more efficiently
              translate into the effective creation and diffusion of innovations. This
              project was designed and will be executed in collaboration with research
              partners in nine technology corporations: Intel, Sun Microsystems, Adobe,
              Compaq, Tektronics, Comcast, Oracle, DOW, and 3M and four venture capital
              firms. The findings should have direct practical applicability for all
              organizations, private and public sector, that are grappling with technological
              and strategic change.

A research team composed of faculty, doctoral
              students, and corporate collaborators is pursuing five objectives: 1)
              conducting an historical analysis of internal corporate venture investing (CVI)
              arms; 2) developing a typology of organizational structures for housing and
              pursuing CVI; 3) delineating the strengths, weaknesses, and effectiveness of
              these structural alternatives; 4) identifying "best practices " for pursuing
              corporate venturing and for codifying and diffusing these practices; 5)
              gathering real-time longitudinal data on the adaptation and selection of CVI
              programs and practices in the face of increasingly adverse macroeconomic
              conditions. Six interrelated studies have been designed to pursue these
              objectives. The studies collect varied types of data (secondary financial and
              economic data, semi-structured interviews, organizational documents, and
              non-participant observations).These data are being analyzed using varied
              methods (econometric forecasting, multivariate analysis, computer-based content
              analysis, and grounded theory building). The multi-method, multi-level and
              multi-theoretic approaches are well integrated with the overall theoretical
              approach.
