Title       : Collaborative Research: Complex Networks Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0217283

Award Number: 0217283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106841             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Smith rlsmith@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marina Epelman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project will  study optimization algorithms rooted in the ideas of
              game theory in the context of complex network optimization, and particularly
              decentralized network optimization. Probably the central issue in managing such
              decentralized networks has been how to set prices so as to motivate the
              competing users to evolve to an overall system optimal configuration. The
              research will investigate the powerful paradigm of economic competition in the
              framework of artificial dynamic games that are played off-line, resulting in an
              algorithm that is potentially practical for large-scale systems optimization.
              The basic paradigm that will be investigated derives from Fictitious Play which
              is an adaptive procedure wherein each player assumes that other players will
              play according to the empirical distribution of their previous plays. The
              Fictitious Play method is a novel paradigm for optimization that draws from
              several distinct disciplines and application areas, including classical
              optimization, game theory, transportation science, and queueing network
              protocols. The robust nature of the algorithm allows for the ill-structured
              black box models of real systems which seldom exhibit the kind of smoothness
              properties that classical optimization methods demand. Its applicability in the
              context of two important real-world systems: a) internet traffic routing
              protocols and b) dynamic route guidance will be tested. 

Complex networks
              optimization is an important capability in a society increasingly dominated by
              ever more complex networks of people and machines. Examples include intelligent
              transportation systems, computer networks, and supply chains of customers and
              suppliers. The success of the research will lead to the development of a
              theoretical basis for the optimization of such complex-structured systems. The
              applicability of the proposed algorithmic paradigm of game theory through its
              application to realistic problems arising in the design and operation of the
              communications and transportation networks will be tested and refined. This
              research will not only lead to potential improvements in these application
              arenas but will also necessitate significant interactions with industry and
              government to insure realism for the models and data developed. 

