Title       : Northwest Girls Collaborative Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0217212

Award Number: 0217212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. Peterson kpeterson@pugetsoundcenter.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PSCTLT
	      22002 26th Ave SE
	      Bothell, WA  980214902    425/640-1950

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

Throughout the Pacific Northwest there currently exist numerous
              organizations providing
valuable but uncoordinated activities and support
              services related to motivating and supporting
girls interest in SMET careers.
              Twenty such organizations in Washington State alone.
The activities of these
              groups are not coordinated and in fact, some groups appear to be
              in
competition for access to girls and to resources, particularly for
              resources from the corporate
community. This funding source, in the face of
              recent layoffs, is less inclined to support such
programs. Under these
              circumstances it becomes increasingly important to coordinate existing
and
              evolving activities to effectively utilize resources.
This project includes
              three primary activities:

Dissemination and Outreach: In partnership with
              the Northwest Girls Coalition,
document and promote coordination and
              collaboration among girl serving SMET
programs in Washington and Oregon and
              establish an on-going communication system
linking these
              organizations.

Creation of a Program Evaluation Rubric: In collaboration
              with the Northwest
Regional Educational Lab create a program rubric reflecting
              best practice models and
program assessment tool based on the
              rubric.

Mini-Grants: With the support of Washington and Oregon MESA, we will
              offer mini-
grants to a minimum of twenty-two girl-serving STEM focused
              programs to support
collaboration, assessment activities and projects related
              to addressing gaps and overlaps in
service.

The project is under the
              guidance of a Champions Board made up of individuals such as Dean of the
              College of Engineering at the University of Washington, current presidents of
              the state Math and Science teacher associations, and representatives from both
              the Washington and Oregon state education departments.





