Title       : The Impact of Lean Manufacturing Practices and Principles on Electronics
               Manufacturers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0217866

Award Number: 0217866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74742              (Estimated)
Investigator: Toni Doolen toni.doolen@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marla E. Hacker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9102,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research links the application of specific lean manufacturing practices and
              principles to organizational characteristics and business performance metrics
              for electronics manufacturers. Lean manufacturing is distinguished from
              traditional mass production in that it utilizes fewer resources, but results in
              more and a larger variety of products often distinguished by high levels of
              product quality and service. The emphasis of this research is on deriving from
              theory a practitioner model that can be used by organizational leaders in their
              decisions to invest in training, human resource development, equipment
              purchases, and/or process development focused on creating a lean manufacturing
              enterprise. 

Current research demonstrates that manufacturing plants have
              improved operations as a result of implementing lean manufacturing practices.
              However, there is evidence to indicate that lean manufacturing may not be
              appropriate for all manufacturers. Because of the rate at which technology
              evolves, electronic manufacturers are under constant pressure to reduce new
              product introduction cycle times, reduce product costs, and to incorporate new
              technology in supporting processes and materials. While these pressures would
              seem to create an environment ripe for the implementation of lean manufacturing
              principles and practices, there is little research that links lean
              manufacturing implementation to business results for this manufacturing sector.
              Because existing research and the supporting literature are based on the
              automotive industry or related assembly operations, this research extends the
              existing body of knowledge by studying the role of lean manufacturing in the
              complex realm of electronics manufacturing, specifically in the area of printed
              circuit board assembly manufacturing. 

The proposal describes two distinct
              projects to be undertaken in this research. The first area is the development
              of a set of printed circuit assembly manufacturing profiles that help identify
              the most relevant lean manufacturing principles based on the key identifiers
              contained in the profile. This research is accomplished through the development
              of survey targeted at understanding what lean manufacturing principles and
              practices have been adopted. Defining characteristics of these electronic
              manufacturers will be developed using a multi-site case study. The second area
              of focus in the research is linking the implementation of specific lean
              manufacturing principles and practices to organizational results for an
              electronics manufacturer. This portion of the research will utilize a
              single-site case study. This case study will focus on the specific issues of
              implementing lean manufacturing practices in the operations of a typical
              electronics manufacturer engaged in the assembly of printed circuit boards
              utilizing both surface mount and through-hole process technologies. 
