Title       : Large Displacement Soil-Structure Interaction Facility for Lifeline Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2002   
File        : a0217366

Award Number: 0217366
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joy Pauschke                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2072716            (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry E. Stewart hes1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tarek H. Abdoun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas D. O'Rourke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. O'Rourke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah L. Billington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1644      NETWK FOR ERTHQUKE ENG SIMULAT
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0217366
Stewart
The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake
              Engineering Simulation (NEES) is a project funded under the NSF Major Research
              Equipment and Facilities Construction appropriation.  This cooperative
              agreement, under NEES, establishes a NEES collaborative facility for advanced
              experimental investigations for large displacement soil-structure interactions
              in lifeline systems.  Cornell, in partnership with Rensselaer Polytechnic
              Institute (RPI), will develop advanced experimental facilities to simulate, at
              both centrifuge-scale and full-scale, capabilities for testing, evaluation, and
              analysis of soil-structure-foundation interaction (SFSI) in critical lifeline
              facilities. Full-scale testing usually is expensive and time consuming so
              supplementary centrifuge experimental models and analytical/numerical
              simulations will be used to expand the scope of the testing, as well as to
              investigate parameter sensitivity and identify possible unforeseen effects
              prior to full-scale tests.  This award is an outcome of the peer review of
              proposals submitted to program solicitation NSF-01-164, "NEES Earthquake
              Engineering Research Equipment, Phase 2." Equipment located at Cornell will
              consist of upgrading the existing servo-hydraulic system for large geotechnical
              and structural testing of lifeline systems, and includes a) a hydraulic
              distribution system with one 190 liter/min (lpm), 3-station hydraulic service
              manifold and three 1-station manifolds, each with 115 volt controls and 1 liter
              accumulator, b) electronic control systems and controllers, c) two large stroke
              hydraulic structural actuators with load capacities of 295 kN tension to 500 kN
              tension with strokes of +/- 0.91m, d) one large stroke hydraulic structural
              actuator with load capacities of 445 kN tension 650 kN compression with a
              stroke of +/- 64 m, e) one 227 lpm, 21MPa hydraulic pump, and f) friction grips
              for use in cyclic testing of advanced composites used in lifeline retrofit and
              design.  In addition, a modular reaction wall will be designed, constructed,
              and installed at Cornell to accommodate the actuators used for large-scale
              physical models of reinforced composite cementitious materials used in bridge
              structures.  Other support equipment at Cornell consists of a networked data
              acquisition system that will be tied in to the NEES data network.  Video
              cameras and operational systems also will be installed for direct support of
              teleparticipation capabilities. New equipment at RPI consists of two advanced
              large split centrifuge boxes for longitudinal and transverse movements.  These
              two new advanced containers allow for modeling large ground displacement of
              both large- and small-diameter pipeline centrifuge models, pulling on an elbow,
              etc.  In addition, special container(s) to be used with existing RPI in-flight
              shaker (the shaker is provided under a separate NEES award to RPI) will study:
              a) the effect of uplift forces on pipelines during soil liquefaction, b)
              lateral forces on pipelines due to liquefaction induced lateral spreading, and
              c) pipeline damage due to slope failure. The equipment at Cornell and RPI will
              be operational by 2004 or earlier and will be managed as a national shared-use
              NEES equipment site, with teleobservation and teleoperation capabilities, to
              provide new earthquake engineering research testing capabilities through 2014. 
              This NEES equipment site will be connected to the NEES network system through a
              high performance network.  Shared-use access and training will be coordinated
              through the NEES Consortium.  Both Cornell and RPI will integrate the testing
              equipment into research and outreach programs at the undergraduate and
              graduates levels, as well as promote additional interest in earthquake
              engineering and simulation at the K-12 levels.

