Title       : Macroeconomic Implications of Child-Labor Laws: A Theoretical Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0217051

Award Number: 0217051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191492             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthias Doepke doepke@econ.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,5937,5980,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project studies the determination and effects of child labor laws using a
              dynamic general-equilibrium framework. In the first countries to industrialize,
              child labor was widespread up to the early stages of the industrial revolution.
              Today, child labor and compulsory schooling laws are in place in all
              industrialized countries, and child labor has mostly disappeared. In many
              developing countries, child labor is still common today, and there is a lively
              debate as to whether more restrictions should be introduced.  There are a
              number of authors who have studied the welfare implications of child-labor
              laws.  There are no investigations, however, which develop political-economy
              models that can account for the evolution and effects of these laws in their
              historical context.  This proposal describes a dynamic general-equilibrium
              model with heterogeneous agents who determine child-labor restrictions (CLR) in
              a voting process.  The research, which is joint with Fabrizio Zilibotti of the
              University of Stockholm, results in a positive theory of the adoption of CLR,
              and allows a detailed analysis of the effects of CLR on the economy and
              different groups in the population. 

The key mechanism in the model is an
              interaction between parental decisions on the number of children and their
              preferences for CLR. In particular, parents with few children have little to
              gain from child labor, and are therefore likely to favor the introduction of
              restrictions. Parents with many working children, on the other hand, would be
              expected to oppose CLR. A second factor influencing preferences over CLR are
              (human or physical) capital assets: agents who own factors which are
              complementary to child labor will be more likely to oppose the introduction of
              CLR. A key result is that if voting is allowed, the model can exhibit multiple
              steady states with different child-labor policies. The reason is a feedback in
              which policies encourage behavior, which in turn leads to political support for
              the same policies. The possibility of multiple steady states can account for
              the fact that there are large cross-country variations in CLR and the incidence
              of child labor, even across countries at the same stage of development. In
              addition, since CLR build their own constituency, the model explains why CLR
              generally tend to get more restrictive over time. The model can generate a
              transition from no regulation to CLR if technological change raises the skill
              premium over time. This change induces parents to choose smaller families and
              invest in human capital, which over time creates a majority in favor of
              introducing CLR. This account of the transition to CLR is consistent with the
              observation that in a number of industrialized countries CLR were introduced
              after a period of rising wage inequality, and coincided with a period of
              rapidly declining fertility and rising education levels. 

The project
              entails a detailed documentation of child-labor reforms and the preceding
              political debate in a number of countries, and simulations of a calibrated,
              quantitative version of the model to assess how well the model can reproduce
              the actual timing of reforms, as well as the ensuing consequences of the
              legislation. The basic analysis is extended to introduce additional policies,
              especially compulsory schooling laws and schooling subsidies.  Preliminary
              results indicate that CLR are more likely to be successful if they are
              accompanied by education reforms, as they were in many industrialized
              countries. Another extension is to allow dynamic voting in a framework where
              voters foresee future policies.  Here an anticipated future introduction of CLR
              can result in a decline in child labor even before the restrictions come into
              force. This mechanism can account for the fact that some empirical studies find
              only relatively small effects of CLR on child labor supply after they are
              introduced. 

