Title       : The Evolution of Sexual Dimorphism in Plumage: A Phylogenetic Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0217817

Award Number: 0217817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184005             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin J. Burns kburns@sunstroke.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Kevin J. Burns

The Evolution of Sexual Dimorphism in Plumage: A Phylogenetic
              Perspective

	This study uses an evolutionary tree of a group of birds to
              investigate the evolution of differences between males and females in plumage. 
              Evolutionary trees of a variety of organisms are providing a new perspective to
              classical ideas about the evolution of plumage coloration.  For example, male
              ornaments can be lost frequently, and females often evolve elaborate traits. 
              In this study, DNA sequences of three genes will be used to reconstruct an
              evolutionary tree for species of tanagers and finches.  The resulting
              evolutionary tree will be used to examine patterns of evolution of sexual
              differences in plumage.  Transformations between different types of plumage
              will be tabulated and the frequency of changes in male plumage will be compared
              to the frequency of changes in female plumage.  In addition to providing
              information on the evolution of male and female plumage differences, the data
              resulting from this project will also address questions in a variety of areas
              including the biogeography of Central and South America, the prevalence of
              ultraviolet coloration in birds, the evolution of feeding characteristics, and
              evolutionary tree constructing methods.  
	Beyond scientific impacts of this
              proposal, this project will also provide training and educational opportunities
              for several students, at both the undergraduate and graduate level.  SDSU is a
              diverse campus, with no racial group making up a majority of the students.  It
              is expected that the students that work on this project will reflect the
              diversity seen on campus.  Results will be disseminated broadly within
              scientific journals, the popular media, and bird-watching literature.  Both the
              molecular sequence data and the plumage data will be made accessible online. 
              The teaching efforts of the principal investigator will also be enhanced by the
              results of this project by providing specific examples that can be included in
              lectures and inquiry-based activities.

