Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Production Technology of High Purity Pig Iron in
               Small and Medium Cupola Foundries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0217104

Award Number: 0217104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohamed A. Abdelrahman mabdelrahman@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0217104
Abdelrahaman

Description: 
This award is for support of a joint
              research project by Dr. Mohamed Abdelrahaman, Electrical and Computer
              Engineering, Tennessee Technological University, Cookeville, Tennessee and Dr.
              Ibrahim Moustafa, Foundry Department at the Central Metallurgical Research and
              Development Institute in Helwan, Egypt.  They plan to develop technology for
              the production of high purity pig iron by integrating automatic control
              technology and optimization of the composition of the charge materials. While
              cupola melting is simple in principle the actual physical and chemical details
              of the process are quite complex, and the phenomena occurring in the melt zone
              are difficult to measure directly.  Automatic control of the cupola melting
              process promises improved energy efficiency, a less environmental impact and
              improved quality of produced iron. Thus, the project would achieve two
              objectives: the first is to test and demonstrate the general automatic control
              technology for cupola furnaces developed by the American side and the second is
              to investigate the production of high purity pig iron by the integration of
              optimized charge materials with the automatic control of the cupola furnace
              

Scope: 
In this project the U.S.  PI has been leading research efforts in
              the US for developing automatic control systems for cupola furnaces.   However,
              the cost of performing the experimental testing of the developed control
              systems in the US is a hurdle that limits the demonstration of the developed
              technology and in turn the deployment of the technology in the industry.  The
              Egyptian side (CMRDI) has an experimental cupola-melting furnace with a one ton
              per hour capacity, in addition to a well-equipped metallurgical laboratory with
              facilities to measure the chemical composition of molten metal, microstructure
              and mechanical properties.  These facilities offer a relatively inexpensive way
              for developing and testing the desired technology.

