Title       : Networks and Knowledge Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0217988

Award Number: 0217988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81914              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bill McEvily bmcevily@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray Reagans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In light of the increasing role of knowledge work in the economy,  a fundamental
              understanding of effective knowledge transfer has increasingly gained currency
              in both the academic and managerial communities. Transferring knowledge across
              organizational boundaries allows individuals to benefit from the experiences of
              others and access a greater breadth of organizational, technological, and
              market know-how. There is a considerable body of research documenting the
              beneficial effects of knowledge transfer for organizational performance.
              Substantial progress has also been made on investigating the psychological
              processes underlying knowledge transfer. However, our understanding is less
              well developed for how social networks influence knowledge transfer. An
              integrative network-based theory of knowledge transfer has yet to emerge.
              Developing such a perspective is important because it: emphasizes the ongoing
              patterns of interaction through which knowledge spreads, considers the informal
              organizational influences on knowledge transfer, and broadens the focus of
              research beyond that of single individuals and dyads to larger
              collectivities.

This research tests a network-based theory of effective
              knowledge transfer, framed as a search-transfer problem. We argue that network
              patterns are important in solving both halves of the problem. For search, we
              argue that people with interactions that cut across multiple areas of expertise
              are better positioned to see how ideas developing in one area can be combined
              with ideas developing in another area. People solving the search problem can
              transfer knowledge using one of two strategies. The individual can move
              knowledge from the source to the recipient acting as an intermediary. Or the
              individual can facilitate the transfer of knowledge from the source to the
              recipient by bringing the two parties together. We maintain that the most
              effective knowledge transfer mechanism is contingent upon qualities of the
              knowledge being transferred and the amount of knowledge overlap between the
              source and the recipient. 

To test the predictions, the researchers will
              gather sociometric, human resource management, and performance data (at various
              levels) along with information about individuals' areas of expertise. Data will
              be gathered from both primary and archival data sources. The setting for the
              study will be three member organizations of the Twin Cities Knowledge
              Management Forum (TCKMF), a consortium with the mission to help its members
              implement knowledge management within their organizations by sharing best
              practices. Members of the TCKMF include Fortune 500 and other leading
              corporations (e.g., Cargill, Medtronic, Oracle, 3M Company, Unisys) located in
              the Twin Cities area. Results of a pilot study completed with one member
              organization have been presented to the consortium and the attending companies
              agree that the initial findings are promising, the questions being addressed
              are worth further examination, and the study shows clear potential for broader
              impact. 
