Title       : AAAS History and Archives Web Site Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0217498

Award Number: 0217498
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80334              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy Crumpton acrumpto@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
SES 02-17498
AAAS History and Archives Web Site Project
Amy
              Crumpton 
American Association for the Advancement of Science


The
              American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) intends
              eighteen-month project to enhance the original content and technical
              development of its AAAS History and Archives Web site
              (http://archives.aaas.org). The intent is to:  1) expand the complexity of
              searchable historical information on the site, 2) evaluate and further develop
              the usefulness of the database and applications that provide access to this
              information, and 3) publish the design code for the database and applications
              as an open source tool for use by other archives, manuscript collections, and
              libraries.

The AAAS History and Archives site uses a content management
              system that generates pages by selecting information from a relational database
              containing data on people, meetings, documents, publications, awards, and
              archives collections related to the Association's history.  Users have access
              to this information through links set between related elements in the database
              or through open queries. The site has several purposes: 1) an organizational
              management strategy for the AAAS archivist, 2) an online institutional memory
              for AAAS staff and membership, and 3) a research tool for scholars interested
              in the history of a key organization in American science or in broader issues
              related to the history of science for which the AAAS Archives might have
              pertinent information.  This project is intended specifically to evaluate,
              refine, document, and publish the software code used for the project as a
              contribution to efforts to make database building tools accessible to archives,
              libraries, and other institutions.  Interrelated with this task is the AAAS
              plan to increase the quality content of the database.  The database lacks
              information on the scope and tenure of AAAS committees and programs, group data
              that provide context for the emergence of Association meetings, publications
              and resolutions. The database also lacks online finding aids for the
              collections. Gathering and editing this information will take place in
              conjunction with developments and refinements to our software code to ensure
              that new information connects well with other aspects of the database.  

The
              AAAS History and Archives Web site is an important mechanism to publicize the
              richness of the AAAS archives and the relevance of the Association's history to
              the development of science over the past 153 years. By enhancing the site's
              searchable content we will increase the breadth and usefulness of this research
              tool for scholars, AAAS staff and members, and the interested public. By
              publishing the software code for our system, we will make a content management
              tool available without charge to repositories with limited resources. Our
              proposal complements the interests of the NSF STS program to collect, preserve,
              and make accessible primary resources on the history of science and technology.
               It also complements efforts by the NSF National Digital Library Program to
              develop electronic infrastructure for archival and library resources
              on
science, engineering, and mathematics via the World Wide Web.

