Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Integrated Seismological Studies of Crust and
               Upper Mantle Structure in Western Anatolia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0217493

Award Number: 0217493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian J. Mitchell mitchbj@eas.slu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lupei Zhu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1304,5940,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0217493
Mitchell

Description:
This award is for support of a joint research
              project by Dr. Brian Mitchell, Dr. Lupei Zhu, both at the Department of Earth
              and Atmospheric Sciences at Saint Louis University, Saint Louis, Missouri and
              Dr. Nihal Akyol, Department of Geophysical Engineering at Dokuz Eylul
              University, Izmir, Turkey.  They plan to conduct a seismological study of the
              western part of Turkey using groups of both high-frequency (2 Hz) and broadband
              seismographs.  They plan to use data from the high-frequency linear array to
              obtain a two-dimensional structural model of the grabens and underlying rock by
              using teleseismsic receiver functions and employing a stacking procedure
              recently developed by Dr. Zhu. They will use both the linear array and regional
              array recordings of local earthquakes to perform a combined inversion for
              precise event location and a tomographic velocity model of the region, and will
              use data from the broadband instruments for several additional studies.  
              Objectives of this project are to obtain models for velocity structure,
              including possible anisotropy, for the region, to ascertain the degree of
              agreement or disagreement among crust/upper mantle models of anisotropy
              obtained in different locations and by different methods, to infer from those
              models the directions and consistency of mantle flow and orientation of the
              crustal stress fields, and to determine the best methods for obtaining
              information on anisotropic structure in a region of complex structure and
              tectonics.

Scope:
The selected sites of this study are particularly
              suitable for the proposed research. Western Turkey is one of the most
              seismically active continental regions in the world, and much of it is
              undergoing extensive north-south extensional deformation. Because the region
              experiences a large number of low to medium-magnitude earthquakes it is
              particularly suitable for a seismological study of the continental crust in
              Eurasia.  The region's high attenuation values have been attributed to
              fluid-filled cracks, which tend to cause the crust to be anisotropic.  The
              project will lead to a better understanding of the tectonics of Western
              Anatolia, which comprises a portion of the Tethysides orogenic belt.  The
              project will enhance international collaborations between scientists in the
              U.S. and in Turkey. It will involve a recent PhD (Zhu), as well as
              collaboration with and training of a female seismologist from Turkey.  

