Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Drought and Development: Technocratic visions
               for progress in Brazil's Northeast, 1900-1950
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0217479

Award Number: 0217479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Feierman feierman@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project entitled "Drought and Development" is a
              social and intellectual history of scientific development and the political
              context in which such efforts take shape. This dissertation will contribute to
              the literatures of Latin American history, environmental history, and the
              history of science, preparing the author for a teaching and research career in
              those fields. Although Latin America has not been a significant regional focus
              for U. S. historians of science, scientific personnel (including experts from
              more industrialized countries) were often important promoters of national
              development there, particularly during the past century of urbanization,
              national integration and industrialization. This study compares environmental
              and social explanations for regional backwardness within a developmentalist
              discourse focused on the problem of drought, between 1900 and 1950. During the
              early decades of Brazil's First Republic (formed in 1889), sanitarians and
              engineers undertook a range of technical efforts to ameliorate drought and
              disease in the country's impoverished Northeast interior. These projects
              provoked debate among Brazilian intellectuals as to which aspects of
              Northeastern poverty were the result of natural factors and which were
              attributable instead to social structure, in particular the colonial legacy of
              latifundism and continued political domination by the landholding elite. By
              researching in archives and libraries of both Rio de Janeiro and two
              Northeastern cities, the investigator aims to uncover a variety of attitudes
              prevalent in early twentieth-century Brazil about the effectiveness of science
              as a solution to rural poverty. The author considers how the training and
              social identity of several professional groups shaped their attitude toward
              medicine and technology as modernization tools. These include medical personnel
              in Brazil's rural sanitation movement; Rockefeller Foundation International
              Health Board staff working in Northeast Brazil; and engineers of the Federal
              Inspectorate for Works Against the Drought. Additionally, the author examines
              sociological studies undertaken by Northeastern intellectuals during the 1930s
              and 1940s. These analyses of regional poverty focused more on its social and
              political history than on technological solutions. The period in question
              marked a high point for the participation of doctors and engineers in promoting
              a progressive national vision for Brazil; in subsequent decades, economists
              became the professional group deemed best equipped to deal with regional
              underdevelopment. Brazil's Northeast thus provides a lively context for
              considering the political shaping and implications of scientific development
              proposals that took place against a backdrop of debates about national economic
              integration.

