Title       : Decision Based Environmentally Conscious Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0217491

Award Number: 0217491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah L. Thurston thurston@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. Rood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to develop a new normative design decision
              making methodology especially tailored to overcome cognitive biases associated
              with environmentally conscious design. Specifically, decision analytic
              procedures will be developed to direct a cost-effective product development
              process. A new technology being developed at the University of Illinois to
              capture and recover hazardous air pollutants from gas streams will be used as
              the test-bed. It captures dilute hazardous air pollutants from air and converts
              them to a pure liquid for reuse in the manufacturing process that generated the
              pollutant. Activated carbon fiber cloth is employed. 

The primary benefit of
              this research will be a shortened development time resulting in a product that
              will be more successful in the marketplace. The decision-based design
              methodology will be integrated into an industrially sponsored senior design
              course. The research and educational infrastructure will be improved by
              establishing this interdisciplinary collaboration, and also by development of
              new interdisciplinary course materials for both undergraduate and graduate
              courses in two different departments (General Engineering, and Civil and
              Environmental Engineering). In addition, two Ph.D. students will be trained in
              this new research area. The results of this interdisciplinary research will be
              broadly disseminated across both civil and mechanical engineering research
              communities. Societal benefits also include a new technology that not only
              removes hazardous air pollutants, but also cost-effectively recovers them for
              reuse.


