Title       : PLN: Developing a Women Interested in Mathematics and Science Advancement
               (WIMSA) Network in a Rural Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0217172

Award Number: 0217172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Arledge arledge@mesastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Spalding  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mesa State College
	      1100 North Avenue
	      Grand Junction, CO  815013122    970/248-1424

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Developing a Women Interested in Mathematics and Science Advancement (WIMSA)
              Network in a Rural Community


Women's deeply ingrained negative perceptions
              of science and mathematics are directly
linked to their underrepresentation in
              these and related fields (Gottfried, 1993). The goal 
of our project is to
              increase the participation of women from rural communities in the 
fields of
              science, mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET). To achieve our goal,
              
we will initiate a program that involves women throughout the community in a
              sustained
network of support. This is an exciting, complex, long-term project.
              This proposal is for
a PGE Demonstration Planning Grant, which will enable us
              to prepare a strong, comprehensive
proposal for a full PGE Demonstration
              Grant. Our full grant will address the inequities 
experienced by girls,
              particularly in low-tech rural areas. The full grant will be used to 
create a
              program, called Women Interested in Mathematics and Science
              Advancement
(WIMSA). The WIMSA program will consist of a network of people and
              organizations, 
all with the goal of increasing the participation and success
              of females in mathematics 
and science. The full proposal will address
              recruitment of WIMSA network members, 
sustaining their membership, and
              expanding the WIMSA program. The PGE Demonstration
Planning project will focus
              on the design of all aspects of the WIMSA program.

One of the two main
              planning grant objectives will be to design our pilot project, the 
annual
              WIMSA Summer Program (WSP) for middle school girls, which will have the dual
              
purpose ofbeing the initial impetus to bring people into the WIMSA network,
              and of 
increasing the skill level of middle school girls and teachers. A
              planning committee,
consisting of two K-12 teachers, two college students, and
              the two Principal 
Investigators, will be formed to develop the summer
              program. The committee will
determine the size and scope of the program,
              design program activities and curriculum, 
and will collaborate with community
              organizations regarding WSP field activities. 
The program design will build
              on the successes of other SMET intervention programs 
for women across the
              country.

Our other main planning grant objective will be to design the WIMSA
              network connections 
and activities. We envision this network bringing
              together Mesa State faculty and students,
K-12 teachers and students, private
              businesses, government organizations, educational
associations, community
              leaders and any local programs involved with science and
mathematics. Our
              first activity will be a WIMSA kickoff meeting, hosted by Mesa State,
which
              will include people from all target organizations and will introduce them to
              the
WIMSA concept. We will create a WISMA Advisory Board that will oversee all
              aspects 
of the WIMSA project, including writing the full PGE Demonstration
              Grant. We will 
design college courses to provide ongoing SMET activities and
              training for WIMSA 
members, including a graduate credit component for K-12
              teachers. We will 
collaborate with local businesses and professionals to
              design activities for the
WSP, internship opportunities for WIMSA college
              students, job-shadowing opportunities 
for K-12 students, and presentation
              opportunities at Mesa State. In order to sustain 
such relationshipsand
              collaborations, there will be WIMSA meetings at least three
times per year.
              

Although there are no programs in our area addressing the lack of females
              in SMET fields, 
there are programs and organizations committed to improving
              our community, and many
people who wish to make a difference. The WIMSA
              program will provide an incredible 
opportunity to harness and coordinate
              these resources and create a 
very effective program that will have
              long-ranging impact.

