Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0217869

Award Number: 0217869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald Herring rjh5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

This Doctoral Dissertation investigates whether trade unions help or hinder
              economic development. Because unions affect development by creating or
              disrupting social stability, it is crucial to know what protest strategies
              unions in South Asia pursue and why they pursue them. Instead of conducting
              research along these lines, many scholars have relied on arguments supported by
              the experience of advanced industrial states. This practice has led to a lack
              of evidence on the subject and a paucity of theory appropriate to the South
              Asian context.  The Principal Investigator will work to overcome this problem
              through an examination of the political economy of labor protest in six cities
              in South Asia (Calcutta, Cochin, Colombo, Madras, Bombay, and Delhi) during the
              period 1991-2000. 

This study advances the understanding of union behavior
              in South Asia on both theoretical and empirical fronts. First, it employs a
              network-based theory of union behavior, which holds that union strategies
              differ based on a union's degree of formalized connections to employers and
              institutions of the state. Unions with more ties protest less, and use routine
              strategies of protest. Unions without ties protest more, utilizing one of two
              alternatives: extreme acts of violence or Scottian "weapons of the weak." This
              higher volume of alternative protest strategies disrupts economic development.
              

Evidence to test the theory will come from a) hundreds of interviews with
              union leaders, government officials, and managers, b) descriptions of thousands
              of protest events as reported in the Indian and Sri Lankan press and c) two
              surveys of employers and investors. The relationship between the network ties
              of unions and the strike tactics they pursue will be tested with Ordinary Least
              Squares cross-sectional regression models. In these models, measures of
              strategies and volume of strike protest will be the dependent variables and
              measures of ties to parties and unions will be the primary independent
              variables of interest. The impact of protest strategies on economic performance
              will be assessed through a variety of methods. These will include: 1) a survey
              of representatives of private sector firms in India; 2) a survey of foreign
              investors in India; 3) interviews with employers in India; and 4) firm-level
              statistical models of absenteeism and productivity. 


