Title       : Causes and Consequences of Children's Focused Interests on Conceptual Domains
               Related to Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0217466

Award Number: 0217466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73321              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathy Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joyce M. Alexander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For most children, the preschool and elementary school years are rife with
              opportunities to cultivate a wide variety of interests that set the stage for
              later learning.  Some young children develop intense, focused interests on
              narrow topics such as dinosaurs or trains and doggedly pursue their parents and
              teachers to provide them with books, videotapes, and toys that will help to
              increase their knowledge in these areas.  While developmental psychologists
              have long been interested in such children from the standpoint of examining the
              impact of heightened knowledge on children's processing of information, few
              researchers have attempted to answer the more difficult question of why some
              children develop narrow interests that could potentially lead to childhood
              expertise in the first place.  This research entails the continuation of an
              ongoing prospective longitudinal analysis of the factors that contribute to the
              development of narrow interests in a sample of 215 preschoolers.  A preliminary
              model of focused interest development has been constructed based on data
              collected through laboratory visits, bimonthly contacts with parents, and home
              visits.  One consequence of focused interests, the early acquisition of
              childhood expertise, has been examined through a detailed analysis of the
              knowledge acquisition and strategy use of 20 children with very high levels of
              interest in dinosaurs.  This research will follow children throughout the
              transition to elementary school and continue detailed analyses of the
              acquisition of expertise on dinosaurs.  The work will consider the impact of
              the transition to school on the expansion of focused interests, in addition to
              the impact of developing metacognitive awareness on children's strategy use and
              the transfer of expertise to related areas of interest.  This, this research
              will help to provide a link between research on intrinsic motivation and
              interest and research on the cognitive implications of childhood expertise.  A
              second objective of this research is to investigate the effects of preschool
              interests related to science on subsequent science learning.  During the first
              two years of the study, the majority of children with focused interests on
              topics that entailed concept learning concentrated their interests in domains
              related to science (e.g., insects, dinosaurs, horses).  Most other children had
              considerable opportunities for science learning through books, toys, and family
              activities.  Given the availability of extremely detailed information on the
              play habits and behaviors of all of the children in the sample, combined with
              psychometric data collected through yearly visits to the laboratory, this
              research is uniquely situated to investigate the impact of preschool play
              interests related to science (i.e., emergent science literacy) on children's
              achievement motivation and success throughout the transition to formal science
              instruction in elementary school.  Due to the importance of science for the
              advancement of technology and global economic competitiveness, it is essential
              that the range of factors that contribute to children's scientific competence,
              particularly through the preschool and elementary school years, be assessed.
              These studies will support such an analysis and provide answers to important
              developmental questions that might not emerge in cross-sectional studies.
