Title       : Design & Analysis of Microarray Gene Expression Studies in Plants: Toward Sound
               Statistical Procedures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0217651

Award Number: 0217651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2220275            (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Allison dallison@ms.soph.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Grier Page  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Barnes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Microarrays are a powerful new technology offering plant biologists the
              opportunity the measure the
expression of thousands of genes simultaneously.
              This potentially allows plant biologists to make major leaps
forward by
              increasing the number of factors they can examine and offering the opportunity
              to study the
complex relations and physiological coordination among entire
              genomes. For this technology to achieve its
potential, a richer understanding
              of the statistical properties of the data produced and statistically
              sound
methods for analyzing those data must be developed and made available.
              Unfortunately, many statistical
procedures currently used in microarray
              research do not have a sound statistical foundation.
This research will
              contribute novel statistical techniques to the microarray field that are, in
              all cases, rigorously validated by either mathematical proofs or computer
              simulations. Methods will be developed in three areas:
Measurement &
              Estimation, Design, & Inference. Methods will be tested on real and simulated
              data. Software
for all methods developed will be publicly available. A plan to
              educate and inform students, plant biologists
and statisticians about the
              methods will be implemented including a short course held at a National
              plant
biology meeting in year 4. The investigative team includes a cadre of
              investigators with track records in
organizing large collaborative efforts,
              developing novel statistical techniques, and disseminating methods
through
              educational activities and quality software. The investigative team is
              complemented by a blue-ribbon
panel Advisory Committee with expertise in plant
              biology, microarrays, and computer science.
Historically, plants of economic
              importance (e.g., maize, soy, wheat, pine) have been critical to our country's
              prosperity and growth. Today, America's strength in supplying food of high
              nutritional value for human and livestock consumption, cash crops for sale and
              export, and plant materials for construction remains critical.
Indeed, as the
              world population grows, the ability to produce plants for nutrition and
              construction materials
with tightening resources in a broadening range of
              environments will be essential. Given their potential to
rapidly advance
              understanding of basic plant biology, microarrays can enhance the ability to
              produce plants
with increased efficiency and enhanced characteristics in the
              greatest range of environments. Developing
valid techniques and facilitating
              use via quality software and systematic dissemination and
              educational
activities as will be done here can have greatly amplified impact
              by providing tools of use to the more than
100 other NSF-funded microarray
              grants and the vast ongoing microarray research world-wide.
