Title       : Real-time Multi-directional Testing Facility for Seismic Performance Simulation
               of Large-Scale Structural Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2002    
File        : a0217393

Award Number: 0217393
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joy Pauschke                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2593317            (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Ricles jmr5@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clay J. Naito  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Sause  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sibel Pamukcu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yunfeng Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1644      NETWK FOR ERTHQUKE ENG SIMULAT
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Ricles
0217393

The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake
              Engineering Simulation (NEES) Program is a project funded under the NSF Major
              Research Equipment and Facilities Construction appropriation. This cooperative
              agreement, under NEES, establishes a NEES large-scale laboratory equipment site
              towards real-time hybrid seismic testing at Lehigh University. Lehigh
              University will design, construct, install, commission, and operate a real-time
              multi-directional testing facility for seismic performance simulation of
              large-scale structural systems. The equipment provides the capabilities of
              integrated experimental and analytical research, and will lead to advances in
              experimental methods. This equipment will be operational by September 30, 2004,
              and will be managed as a national shared-use NEES equipment site, with
              teleobservation and teleoperation capabilities, to provide new earthquake
              engineering research testing capabilities for large structural systems through
              2014. This NEES equipment site will be connected to the NEES network through
              the Mid-Atlantic GigaPop Internet 2 (MAGPI) connection, with 155 Mb/sec
              Ethernet capabilities that can be scaled to 1 Gb/sec Ethernet capabilities when
              necessary. Shared-use access and training will be coordinated through the NEES
              Consortium. This award is an outcome of the peer review of proposals submitted
              to program solicitation NSF 01-164, "NEES Earthquake Engineering Research
              Equipment, Phase 2." The equipment will be installed at the ATLSS Engineering
              Research Center located at Lehigh University, and will make use of the existing
              strong floor (372 m2 in surface area), existing multi-directional reaction wall
              (15.2 m tall at one end that, over a distance of 32 m, steps down incrementally
              from 12.2 m to 9.1 m to 6.1 m), an existing mechanical testing laboratory,
              existing hydraulic systems, and existing static actuators. The following
              equipment is provided under this award: (1) two 2050 kN dynamic actuators
              ported for three 400 gpm servovalves, +/- 500 mm stroke, (2) three 1500 kN
              dynamic actuators ported for three 400 gpm servovalves, +/- 500 mm stroke, (3)
              ten 400 gpm high flow-rate servo-valves, (4) hydraulic distribution lines and
              service manifolds, (5) surge tank and accumulators that will enable strong
              ground motion effects to be sustained for over 30 seconds, (6) hydraulic system
              modifications, (7) digital 8-channel control system with real-time hybrid
              control packages, (8) digital video teleobservation system including a system
              of digital high quality video cameras, network video cameras, digital video
              server, data server, restricted access web server, and a public access web
              server, (9)  high speed 256-channel data acquisition system, and (10) advanced
              sensors that include wireless MEMS-based accelerometers, piezoelectric
              transducers (strain and acceleration measurement), and fiber optic strain
              gages. The experimental facility allows for multi-directional real-time seismic
              testing, combined with real-time analytical simulations, to investigate the
              seismic behavior of large-scale structural components, structural
              subassemblages, and superassemblages (systems) through the combined use of the
              dynamic actuators, reaction wall, and strong floor. The experimental facility
              is also designed to support the development of new hybrid testing methods for
              multi-directional real-time testing of large-scale structures, including hybrid
              testing of multi-substructures, where the substructures involved in such
              testing are at different geographic locations connected by the NEES network.
              Lehigh University will integrate this large-scale real-time multi-directional
              testing facility into its research program and undergraduate and graduate
              curricula, provide training opportunities for outside researchers through
              on-site courses and web-based materials, and host visiting scholars.

