Title       : GOALI: Integrating Demand Analysis into a Decision-Based Design Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0217702

Award Number: 0217702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324564             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Chen weichen1@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jie Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Chipman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Agus Sudjianto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1049,9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research deals with the integration of a Discrete Choice Analysis (DCA)
              based approach to demand analysis with a Decision-Based Design (DBD) framework
              that supports a company's goal of making profitable products.  The research
              will address four major topics, including (1) improving predictive capability
              of demand analysis, (2) incorporating behaviors of multiple market players in
              demand modeling, (3) predicting uncertainties in demand analysis, and (4)
              extending engineering modeling for DBD implementation.  The proposed approach
              and techniques will be demonstrated through a real vehicle engine design
              problem, and verified and validated based on the basic economic principles and
              the properties of a rigorous alternative selection method. 

If successful,
              the proposed research will have an immediate impact on improving the predictive
              capability of demand analysis in product design. The proposed method can
              incorporate many important factors that are currently ignored, such as the
              behavior of competitors and other players in a market and the uncertainty
              issues in demand estimation. The proposed DBD framework will offer a rigorous
              engineering design approach that supports a company's goal of making profitable
              products.  The work on extending engineering modeling is beneficial for
              bridging the gap between business and engineering modeling in product design. 
              The proposed research is expected to extend the extant knowledge in engineering
              design as well as in market research.  The research is also expected to have a
              broader impact on increasing industrial competitiveness and improving
              educational activities.  Research is anticipated to contribute to education in
              the areas of engineering design theory and methodology, decision analysis in
              engineering design, quality engineering, and market research for engineering
              design. A strong collaboration is planned among the university and industry
              teams including regular seminars, visits, and co-supervisions of graduate
              students.


