Title       : Girls Creating Games: Increasing Middle School Girls' Interest in Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0217221

Award Number: 0217221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $797802             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill Denner jilld@etr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ETR
	      4 Carbonero Way
	      Scotts Valley, CA  95066    831/438-4060

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                              The vast success of products like the "GameBoy" sends a clear
              message that technology is
the domain of boys. The Girls Creating Games
              Program is a demonstration project designed
to challenge this message by
              teaching girls to design and program a computer game. This 
project is unique
              in its approach: it puts girls in the role of producers of technology, rather
              
than simply consumers. One hundred eighty middle school girls will
              participate in a study 
to determine whether producing technology (computer
              game design) can increase girls'
fluency, interest, active participation and
              persistence in technology studies. The
specific project goals are to
              a)increase girls' knowledge, interest, attitudes, and
confidence with
              computers, b) increase adults capacity to support girls in technology,
and c)
              add to research on the kinds of programs and technologies that increase the
              interest 
and persistence of middle school girls in technology studies and
              careers.

The proposed project will take place with small groups of girls
              after school and during
the summer in a small, urban county (70% White, 21%
              Hispanic) in California.  It involves an
unusual partnership between four
              entities: 1) researchers and program developers from a 
non-profit health
              promotion agency (ETR Associates); 2) school personnel and students
from New
              Brighton Middle School; 3) staff and youth from a Boys & Girls Club; and 4)
              
female technology students, teachers, and professionals from local colleges
              and
companies. This partnership is essential for building knowledge (e.g.,
              identifying
effective program strategies to increase girls interest and
              persistence in
technology studies), and increasing social capital (e.g.,
              building the capacity of
adult female role models, teachers, and staff to
              provide a supportive environment).

Teaching computer game design holds great
              promise as an intervention strategy for
increasing girls' interest in
              technology. Indeed, interactive games have an early
influence on theskills and
              attitudes that are the best predictors of future 
technology-related behavior
              (Greenfield & Cocking, 1996; Levine & Donitsa-Schmidt,
1998; Subrahmanyam &
              Greenfield, 1998).  Only two other known programs (with 
elementary and high
              school students) have used game creation as an intervention 
strategy or as
              part of a research-driven agenda (Kafai, 1995; Miller, Chaika, &
Groppe,
              1996).  Our work extends that research by working with middle school students
              
in an informal learning (out of school) environment, and using theoretically
              and
empirically-based program activities that build on girls development
              research. 
Our project is also innovative in that it includes identity
              formation as part of the
program as a way to transform, not simply respond to
              existing gender roles
(Cassell & Jenkins, 1999). Our program strategies are
              designed to appeal to girls.
They include having fun with computers; linking
              technology with its real-world 
application; focusing the game content on
              social issues; using a collaborative 
instructional model; involving technical
              female role models, school teachers and 
program staff; and assessing the
              impact of game design on participants as well as
the teachers and
              staff.

The proposed intervention will be evaluated using a
              quasi-experimental, pre-post test
design. Two hypotheses will be tested. 
              First, compared to the control group, the 
participants in the intervention
              group will report a greater increase in problem-solving
and computer skills,
              interest in computers, positive attitude toward computers, intention 
to
              pursue computer studies, confidence using computers, knowledge about tech
              careers,
and support to pursue a career in technology.  Second, the
              instructional model that uses 
collaboration with peers and guidance from
              teachers, staff, and female role models 
will increase the adults' capacity
              and interest to support girls active participation
 in technology, and
              challenge stereotypes about who is good at computers. Data will 
be collected
              using surveys, interviews, and student notebooks. The findings will result 
in
              a replicable version of the program that can be used to increase girls interest
              in 
technology and adults capacity to support them in other school and after
              school settings.
