Title       : U.S.-Slovak Research on Properties of Glass-Forming Materials and
               Proton-Conducting Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0217129

Award Number: 0217129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Fontanella jjf@usna.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Bendler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary C. Wintersgill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. Edmondson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : US Naval Academy
	      
	      Annapolis, MD  21402    301/267-6100

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5994,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This U.S.-Slovak materials research project between John Fontanella of the U.S.
              Naval Academy and his partner, Josef Bartos of the Polymer Institute of the
              Slovak Academy of Sciences, will study the mechanisms of ion transport and
              dipole reorientation in polymer electrolytes. To do so they will draw upon
              Slovak expertise in positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS) and
              electron spin resonance (ESR) and the U.S. team's experience with electron
              relaxation and conductivity in polymer electrolytes at varying pressures,
              temperatures and frequencies.  The goal is to produce experimental data for
              analysis that can better describe the free volume microstructure of polymer
              matrices, the segmental motions of polymer chains, and the diffusional motions
              of ions.  Based on the free volume concept, theoretical methods will be
              developed jointly and applied to interpret these results, using modeling and
              computer simulations.  If successful, findings should improve current
              understanding of the conductive properties of glass-forming materials and
              proton-conducting polymers with direct implications for developing better fuel
              cells and batteries.  

This collaborative project in polymers research
              fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
              experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine complementary
              talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and
              competence. 
