Title       : City University of New York LSAMP Phase III
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0217542

Award Number: 0217542
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2700000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Neville Parker parker@tidis0.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leon P. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louise Squitieri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              City University of New York  LSAMP Phase III

The New York City Louis Stokes
              Alliance for Minority Participation in Science, Engineeringand Mathematics
              (LSAMP) was initiated within CUNY in 1992 to promote interest in science
              engineering and mathematics among underrepresented minority students. The main
              goal of
LSAMP Phase III is to build a permanent CUNY infrastructure through
              augmentation of our
demonstrated productive capacity and output built in Phase
              I and Phase II, with a
coordinated program of summer and academic year
              research, teaching and service
opportunities for participants. The NYC LSAMP
              Phase III will continue to work for systemic
changes that will ensure the
              increased production of minority SMET graduates, and address
the areas
              delineated by the NSF as national priorities. The areas are: 1) The
              Educational
Continuum; 2) Institutionalization and Best Practices; 3)
              Undergraduate/Graduate
Transition; and 4) Mentoring.

Since 1992, minority
              undergraduate enrollment in science, mathematics, engineering and
related
              technology courses has increased from 4,216 to 6,976 in 2001, an increase of 65
              %.
In that same period, those earning baccalaureate degrees increased from 404
              to 755 per
year, an increase of 86 %. The total number of minority graduates
              since 1992 exceeds
5,800. LSAMP programs now serve more than 14,000 CUNY
              undergraduates annually. Clearly,
the LSAMP has had a positive impact in the
              University during a period when CUNYs overall
total enrollment, both minority
              and non-minority, decreased from about 230,000 to 200,000,
and is testimony to
              the success of the LSAMP initiative.
NYC LSAMP Phase III will augment and make
              permanent the following systemic changes and
reforms:
- A hierarchical
              organizational structure to foster delivery on its goal.
- Restructuring of
              gatekeeper calculus, chemistry and physics courses.
- Science and mathematics
              learning centers on CUNY campuses.
- Seamless academic transitions at all
              critical points, from high school to graduate
school.
- The universitys
              investment in undergraduate research as integral to the
undergraduate
              experience.
- An undergraduate student and faculty research program across
              college boundaries.
- Sustainable agency and industry collaborations.
- Joint
              planning and resource commitment with other systemic initiatives.
- Tracking
              individual student persistence to the baccalaureate and graduate level.
-
              Producing a steady stream of high school students entering SMET
              curricula.

Alliance activities in Phase I and Phase II centered on
              curriculum reform (Phase I), and
integrating research into undergraduate
              education (Phase II). The strategy of increasing
the enrollment in the SMET
              disciplines via curriculum reform in Phase I, led in a systemic
manner to
              positioning students to take advantage of the increased research
              opportunities
in Phase II. The Alliance Course Restructuring for gatekeeper
              calculus, chemistry, and
physics courses included an emphasis on collaborative
              learning, a non-competitive approach
to problem solving, and workshops
              conducted by specially trained peer tutors and faculty
members. For the period
              1997-2001, CUNY enrolled over 46,000 students in NYC LSAMP
institutionalized
              or restructured courses. It was in this context that over 5,800
              students
graduated with SMET degrees at the BS level, with increased numbers
              of students participating in LSAMP activities as research assistants. Phase III
              activities will involve a systemic approach to increase the number of
              participants that continue on to graduate school or teacher education at the
              graduate level.

