Title       : Regulation of Axonal Neurofilament Dynamics by Phosphorylation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0217838

Award Number: 0217838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Shea Thomas_Shea@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1192,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Neurons, the cells of the brain that allow us to think, feel and move, have a
              very unique shape, which is referred to as "polarized."  Extending from one
              side of the neuron are many fingerlike extensions ("dendrites") that receive
              information from other neurons, and extending from the other side is a longer
              extension (the "axon") that transmits the sum of this information to the next
              neuron.   How neurons assume this unique polarized form, and then maintain it
              for the lifetime of an individual, is not entirely clear.  However, it is
              dependent at least in part upon a fibrous network of proteins referred to as
              the "cytoskeleton."  This network forms a sort of skeleton for the neuron,
              which helps it maintain its shape.  Unlike bones, however, the parts of the
              cytoskeleton are constantly replaced.  This poses a difficult situation for
              neurons, since all proteins are synthesized in the cell body, and then must be
              assembled and transported into and along axons by a process called "axonal
              transport."  This process must be highly regulated, or the proteins will
              assemble incorrectly, or clump up within the beginning of the axon, and the
              neuron may die.  In some neurons, axonal transport must be carried out over
              long distances. For example, the sciatic nerve, which runs all the way down our
              leg, receives all of its cytoskeletal proteins from a small cell body near the
              spine.
Our studies examine how the neuron regulates axonal transport of one
              set of cytoskeletal proteins called neurofilaments.  The neuron has a set of
              modifying enzymes, called "kinases," that reversibly modify the neurofilaments.
               One simple analogy for such modifications is to put a cap on a pen.  When the
              pen is capped, its writing function is altered.  When the cap is removed, its
              function is restored.  Rather than having to synthesize a new pen every time we
              need to write, we instead cap the pen until it is needed again.  Kinases
              similarly turn various protein functions on and off.  Our ongoing studies
              indicate that these modifications regulate how neurofilaments assemble, undergo
              axonal transport, and provide structural support to axons, and that certain
              modifications switch the neurofilaments from transporting along axons to
              instead interacting with other neurofilaments to form a strong bundle that
              supports the axon.  Using genetically-engineered kinases and neurofilament
              proteins, we will monitor these changes.  These studies will provide important
              information about axonal transport and stabilization.





