Title       : In-Situ Film Thickness and Stress Measurement Using Infrared Sensing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0217469

Award Number: 0217469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Mackin t-macki@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research project presents a new method for measuring the thickness
              of thin films. A non-destructive, non-contacting infrared imaging system is
              synchronized to an AC heat source located within or below the film layer of
              interest. An AC approach is chosen to exploit differencing schemes that enable
              high-resolution thickness measurements. The proposed method provides a new tool
              for measuring the thickness of film coatings with implications in both research
              and technology. Preliminary experiments have shown that the proposed method is
              perfectly suitable for measuring film thickness in the range of several microns
              to millimeters. This proposal aims to extend the method to nanometer thick
              films by utilizing a radiative heat transfer scheme. The proposed experimental
              method can be implemented into a production environment for closed-loop
              feedback control during film deposition. The method is also amenable to quality
              control in high throughput production environments. As such, the proposed
              experimental method will significantly improve coating processes and
              dramatically decrease the time and expense required to improve coating
              performance and reliability.

Using the infrared sensing technology developed
              in this program, film thickness, integrity and stress can be quantified at any
              stage of the coating process, both during deposition and/or after manufacture.
              The ability to monitor film thickness in-situ is a critical need for many
              applications, as current techniques are based largely on empirical processing
              studies and post-priori destructive evaluation. Add to that the ability to
              quantify stress and the method emerges as a significant contribution to the
              technology of thin film processing and characterization. The proposed method
              can be used in an enormous range of industrial applications, including (but not
              limited to): microelectronic fabrication and assembly, MEMS fabrication and
              performance, thermal barrier coatings used in the energy conversion industry,
              metallic coatings on glass, and paint or protective coatings in everything from
              airplanes to cell phones.

