Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Semi-Analytical Treatments of Nonlinear
               Stochastic Dynamical Systems with Application to Control Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0217453

Award Number: 0217453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian-Qiao Sun sun@me.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5940,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0217453
Sun

Description: 
This award is for support of a joint research
              project by Dr. Jian-Qiao Sun, Department of Mechanical Engineering at the
              University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware and Dr. Ghazanfer Unal, Engineering
              Science Department at Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey.  The
              goal of this project is to develop analytical and numerical methods to study
              the stochastic dynamical systems.  The investigators plan to extend Lie's
              theory for deterministic differential equations to nonlinear stochastic
              dynamical systems. Specifically, they will extend their previous results on the
              approximate symmetries to stochastic dynamical systems in a manner which will
              remain consistent with the normal form theory of stochastic systems.  An
              immediate use of the approximate symmetries of the stochastic dynamical systems
              would be to obtain their approximate conserved quantities.  Furthermore, they
              will extend the results to the Fokker-Planck equation in order to obtain
              analytical approximate solutions. The analytical solutions to be obtained in
              the project by Professor Unal will be integrated with the cell mapping method
              studied by Dr. Sun.  The approximate symmetries and the related conservation
              laws can help identify a sub-space in which the cell mapping method can be
              applied. This is expected to substantially reduce the computational effort for
              analysis and control of nonlinear stochastic systems by using the cell mapping
              method.

Scope:
Success in determining approximate symmetries and the
              related conservation laws would make it possible to identify a subspace in
              which cell mapping can be applied with much less resources than currently
              possible. The two scientists have complementary strengths, as Dr. Sun's
              expertise is in cell mapping, while Dr. Unal's expertise is in Lie's theory and
              in symmetries and approximate symmetries of dynamical systems.  Research
              results will be integrated with graduate programs at both universities, and an
              exchange program of graduate students between the two universities may also
              result.  Dr. Unal will travel to the United States in the first and third years
              while Prof. Sun will travel to Turkey in the second year.  The project will
              lead to long-term collaboration between them since they will tackle difficult
              problems that require new insights, as well as advanced computational tools.

