Title       : Collaborative Research: GOALI: New Directions in Very Large-Scale Neighborhood
               Search
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0217359

Award Number: 0217359
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199790             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravindra K. Ahuja ahuja@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amit Mukherjee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with solving several classes of difficult
              combinatorial optimization problems using very large-scale neighborhood (VLSN)
              search algorithms. The VLSN search algorithms are neighborhood search
              algorithms where the size of the neighborhood is very large, possibly
              exponential in terms of the input size parameters, and enumerating all
              neighbors and evaluating them is prohibitively expensive. The research relies
              on the use of improvement graphs for searching large neighborhoods. Improvement
              graphs allow optimizing over very large neighborhoods quickly. This methodology
              has been used to solve some classic combinatorial optimization problems as well
              as scheduling problems that have arisen in airline and railroad industries. 
              For the problems that we have addressed, VLSN search algorithms, when
              implemented well, are robust and provide excellent solutions. 

The research
              project addresses VLSN search algorithms for three problem classes. The first
              problem class will be large-scale partitioning and constrained partitioning
              problems arising in clustering, data mining and timetabling. The second
              problems class will be integer multicommodity flow problems arising in
              logistics and telecommunication. Integer multicommodity flow problems are
              multicommodity flow problems where the flow of each commodity on any arc is
              required to be integer. The third class of problems to be investigated will be
              optional flight generation problem arising at United Airlines. The objective in
              the optional flight generation problem is to determine a set of good potential
              candidates for additional flight legs to be added to an airline schedule to
              improve overall profitability. The research of the PIs on VLSN search
              algorithms is motivated by the need to develop effective and practical
              heuristic (approximate) solution procedures for large-scale and structurally
              complex combinatorial optimization problems. The goal is to enhance the toolkit
              for heuristic search by developing new methodologies with broad applicability.
              We anticipate we and others will successfully develop and apply VLSN search
              techniques to a wide range of important combinatorial problem including
              problems arising in logistics and transportation and substantial savings will
              accrue by the use of these methods.

