Title       : GeoSoilEnviroCARS: A National Resource for Earth, Planetary and Environmental
               Science Research At the Advanced Photon Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0217473

Award Number: 0217473
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark L. Rivers rivers@cars.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon E. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. Weidner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Sutton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0217473
Rivers

GeoSoilEnviroCARS (GSECARS) is a national user facility for
              frontier research in the earth sciences using synchrotron radiation at the
              Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory.  GSECARS provides earth
              scientists with access to the high-brilliance hard x-rays from this
              third-generation synchrotron light source.  The research conducted at this
              facility is advancing our knowledge of the composition, structure and
              properties of earth materials, the processes they control, and the processes
              that produce them.  All principal synchrotron-based analytical techniques in
              demand by earth scientists are being brought to bear on earth science problems:
              (1) high-pressure/high-temperature crystallography and spectroscopy using the
              diamond anvil cell; (2) high-pressure/high-temperature crystallography using
              the large-volume press; (3) powder, single crystal and interface diffraction;
              (4) inelastic x-ray scattering; (5) x-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS)
              spectroscopy; (6) x-ray fluorescence microprobe analysis; and (7)
              microtomography.  The unique capabilities of the APS and GSECARS have allowed
              groundbreaking experiments to be conducted in research areas relevant to the
              NSF-Earth Science program.  This project will provide funds to: (1) to support
              the continued operation of GSECARS as a national-user facility; (2) to increase
              significantly the available beamtime by enabling simultaneous operation of the
              two experimental stations on the undulator beamline and completion of a second
              station on the bending magnet beamline; and (3) to develop and implement new
              experimental instrumentation to extend the capabilities of the facility. Major
              new instrumentation to be developed includes: (1) x-ray optics and shielded
              transport for tandem operation on the undulator beamline; (2) beamline
              components and diffraction instrumentation for a new side-station on the
              bending magnet beamline; (3) a monochromator for use at high-energy on the
              undulator beamline; and (4) tooling for deformation experiments in the
              multi-anvil press.  Our mission is to provide a research environment where
              users receive expert assistance in planning and conducting experiments, and in
              analyzing data.  This collaborative mode of operation, which allows the
              facility to be accessible to synchrotron radiation novices, requires a staff of
              highly qualified beamline scientists and technical personnel.  
***


