Title       : ITR: Visual Deictic Reference in a Collaborative Virtual Environment for Visual
               Search Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0217600

Award Number: 0217600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313361             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew T. Duchowski andrewd@cs.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel S. Greenstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anand K. Gramopadhye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1655,9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research will study the interpersonal activity between trainer/trainee in a
              collaborative visual inspection Virtual Environment and will involve a new
              Collaborative Virtual Environment (CVE) capable of real-time capture and
              visualization of eye movements of one of the participants in the CVE. Of
              particular importance is the recording and real-time depiction of visual
              deictic references made with the eyes by either instructor or student in the
              environment.  Deictic references are associated with pointing and verbal
              expressions (such as "look at this" or "see that?").  Collection of explicit
              visual deictic references, as made by the eyes, will facilitate task-based
              analysis and modeling of visual attention during human-human interaction in
              Virtual and Physical Reality.

The main objective of this project is to
              develop a new interactive 3D visual inspection system in Virtual Reality, based
              on an existing single-person virtual aircraft inspection environment.  To allow
              the measurement of visual deictic reference, it will extend the current
              single-person Virtual Environment (VE) to a Collaborative Virtual Environment
              (CVE) which will allow the simultaneous participation of two individuals.  The
              main technological innovations are extensions to available eye tracking
              techniques to allow real-time capture and visualization of eye movements of one
              of the participants during simultaneous participation in the CVE.  The
              fundamental exploration of visual deictic reference will be addressed during
              evaluation of visual inspection of the environment by the instructor (expert)
              and the trainee (novice).

Existing approaches have failed to yield
              significant improvements in inspection performance. The successful completion
              of this research will provide a better understanding of the issues related to
              human-human interaction and training.  Results from this research are expected
              to advance our understanding of complex multi-party environments where
              gaze-based communication is employed.  The CVE will allow visualization and
              analysis of human attentional factors in shared-space environments.  The study
              of visual deictic reference will lead to novel insights into human learning and
              behavior, notably learned improvement of visual search strategies. The research
              effort involves a multidisciplinary team of researchers with expertise in
              virtual reality systems, vision based research, human/machine systems design,
              inspection systems design, and training and computer supported collaborative
              work.

Educational activities involving the curriculum and laboratory
              training will be closely integrated with the research, involving both
              undergraduate and graduate students.  Although primarily focused on aircraft
              inspection, the anticipated results have the potential to impact a wide range
              of tasks in the maintenance and service industries, such as inspection of
              products in a manufacturing environment, flight crew systems training and
              training of air traffic control personnel, real-time military target
              acquisition, process control monitoring, and baggage inspection (aviation
              security).

