Title       : Life Stories of Moral Exemplars in Computing: A Cross-Cultural Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0217298

Award Number: 0217298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89461              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Huff huff@stolaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Olaf College
	      1520 St. Olaf Avenue
	      Northfield, MN  55057    507/646-2222

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              There are celebrated cases where individual moral decision making in computing
              has mattered greatly, but there is little systematic work on how moral
              decisions are made by individual computer professionals. The literature on
              organizational issues in computing has focused on variables such as status,
              power, and organizational imperatives.  It leads us to focus on situational
              parameters. This important perspective ignores or underestimates the influence
              of the individual decision maker in the process.   This study explores the life
              stories of moral exemplars in computing in two cultures, those of Britain and
              Scandinavia. These two cultures are an interesting contrast because the
              associated countries have been heavily involved in computing research and
              design, but their national cultures differ markedly in their approach to
              workplace values. This case-based study, based on in-depth interviews and
              questionnaires, examines how particular moral exemplars in computing develop
              over time in their moral reasoning and action.

This study will be done while
              the investigator is in residence at the Centre for Computing and Social
              Responsibility (CCSR) at De Montfort University, Leicester, UK.   A panel of
              experts in computing ethics refines criteria for selecting moral exemplars in
              computing in British and Scandinavian cultures, and then helps develop a
              snowball sample of those moral exemplars. Once selected, the moral exemplars
              are asked to participate in interviews using a format called the "Life Story
              Interview" in which interviewees are asked to relate narratives of important
              episodes in their life (e.g. a peak experience, a nadir experience, a turning
              point). The interviews are transcribed and coded to identify important
              developmental milestones and influences.

This research breaks new ground by
              combining developmental work in moral psychology with concern for moral values
              and behavior on the part of computer professionals. It will be of interest to
              psychologists studying moral reasoning and action and to the interdisciplinary
              field of computer ethics. Scholars in the related field of social informatics
              will also be interested. Finally, this exploratory research will provide an
              excellent foundation for a continuing research program in the moral development
              of computer professionals.  Much effort has been expended in talking about
              teaching computer ethics and we have various curricula as guidelines for
              teaching computer ethics. If we knew something about what actually motivates
              computer professionals to be ethical, it might well change what (or how) we
              teach computer 

