Title       : Affect and processing ease
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0217294

Award Number: 0217294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Piotr Winkielman pwinkiel@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A program of research investigates the hypothesis that affective responses
              reflect the ease of mental operations involved in stimulus processing. This
              hypothesis promises to integrate a variety of apparently unrelated preference
              phenomena under a common theoretical framework. It is proposed that a single
              process -- enhancement of processing fluency -- underlies the following
              phenomena: (i) the mere-exposure effect (repetition increases liking for
              objects), (ii) beauty-in-averages effect (prototypical objects are liked more
              then nonprototypical ones), (iii) preferences for objects presented with higher
              clarity or higher figure-ground contrast, (iv) preference for objects presented
              at longer durations, and (v) preference for objects when mental processing of
              their attributes has been facilitated with perceptual or semantic
              primes.

This research offers a systematic analysis of the relation between
              processing fluency, affective responses, and evaluative judgments. The studies
              employ a variety of preference tasks (liking for pictures, persons, words,
              categories of objects, abstract shapes) and a variety of manipulations
              (semantic priming, visual priming, repetition, clarity). Specific psychological
              mechanisms underlying the fluency-affect-judgment connection are explored and
              the nature of the underlying affective reactions are examined with
              psychophysiological measures.

This research project will advance our
              understanding of the relation between affect and cognition. Specifically, it
              will: (i) identify a new source of affective reactions (processing dynamics),
              (ii) provide an account of classic phenomena, such as the mere-exposure effect
              and beauty-in-averages effect, (iii) predict new preference phenomena, such as
              the influence of priming on affective responses that are not mediated by the
              semantic interpretation of the target, and (iv) identify potential biases that
              may result from differential fluency during social perception tasks.

