Title       : Biomedical Technologies, Ethics, and Islam in Contemporary Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0217176

Award Number: 0217176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9605               (Estimated)
Investigator: Faye Ginsburg faye.ginsburg@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation project posits that biomedicine, even in the face of mounting
              ethical dilemmas raised by Islamic scholars' condemnations of new
              body-modifying and life-altering possibilities such as organ donation,
              maintains authority and social legitimacy in the culture of contemporary Egypt.
              Further, the project proposes that the Egyptian state plays a crucial role in
              maintaining biomedical authority and its cultural legitimacy by closely
              mediating the relationship between Egypt's biomedical community and
              the
opinions of Islamic legal scholarship. The project seeks to critique the
              polarization of "Islam" and "science," predominant in local and international
              discourse, by uncovering the ways in which the production of knowledge about
              bioethics in the domains of biomedicine and Islamic scholarship in Egypt in
              fact occur within the same social and structural field. This study further
              questions how patients' interests and understandings of bioethical dilemmas fit
              within this institutional complex in Egypt through a detailed ethnography of
              the reception and application of emerging biomedical technologies, Islamic
              legal decisions about them, state legislation, and their consumption by the
              general public. The politics of organ donation, currently the central
              problematic in contemporary Egyptian bioethics, constitutes a primary site
              through which to analyze how these various institutions manage bioethical
              debates. The project will rely on ethnographic analysis of biomedical practice
              involving organ donation in clinical settings (based in Kasr el Aini Teaching
              Hospital) in order to analyze patients' lived experiences of these debates.
              Specifically, it will examine the ways in which physicians and patients
              encounter and manage ethical dilemmas. Further evidence will be drawn from
              analyses of medical training in ethics (whether explicit or implicit),
              interviews with Islamic legal scholars and state legislators, and textual
              analyses of contemporary bioethical debates in Egypt (including Islamic legal
              texts, state legislative reports and decisions, media reports, and biomedical
              treatises). This project will contribute significantly to the study of how
              Islamic scholarship deals with, and may often be overshadowed by, new
              scientific knowledge. It will also offer a non-western case study to the
              emerging field of science studies, in which scholars have provided analyses of
              the ways in which biomedical knowledge is produced and codified into daily
              practice. By focusing on ethics in an Islamic context, this study will offer
              new insights into the role religion plays in simultaneously embracing and
              shunning new biotechnologies. The study focuses on the place of an "Islamic
              response" to biotechnologies within the confines of the modern state, and
              within the context of global debates about bio-ethics. Results from this
              research will have broader implications for understanding what the collusion
              among dominant fields of knowledge (Islamic scholarship, science, and state
              legislature), in their negotiation of bio-ethical concerns, means for ordinary
              people faced with new technological possibilities for the management of their
              lives.

