Title       : Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Indiana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2002   
File        : a0217615

Award Number: 0217615
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2312116            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally K. Mason unknown  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Indiana

The LSAMP
              Indiana project is a result of collaboration among Ball State University;
              
IndianaUniversity, Bloomington; Indiana University Purdue University
              Indianapolis;
Purdue University, Calumet; and Purdue University, West
              Lafayette. Each university
surveyed existing studentretention and minority
              programs. At many of our universities,
there are a substantial number of K-12
              outreach programs designed to enhance initial 
interest in Science, Math,
              Engineering, and Technology (SMET) disciplines, as well as
numerous programs
              to help freshmen transition from high school into college. In addition,
there
              are a substantial number of programs to support research projects by
              upper-division
students in SMET disciplines. However, there are fewer (if any)
              programs across the 
participating universities to help first-year students
              identify with their SMET discipline 
and help them to sustain that initial
              identification through research and mentoring
experiences over their next two
              years of college. In response to this finding, the 
involve institutions
              formed an alliance to increase the number of minorities receiving
              
baccalaureate degrees in SMET disciplines by providing (1) early research
              enrichment 
experiences; (2) sustained teaching and mentoring opportunities in
              gatekeeper as well 
as upper-level courses; (3) personalized interactions with
              graduate students and faculty
mentors beginning in the students' freshman
              year; and (4) professional and personal 
development opportunities. These
              early experiences with research and teaching are 
designed to encourage
              students to forge and sustain an academic and a social 
identification within
              their SMET discipline. These goals will be reached by the 
implementation of
              the following three programs:

Summer Transition and Academic Research
              Programs (STAR Programs) -- The STAR
programs will help LSAMP students'
              transition from high school to college by 
exposing them to research and
              career enrichment experiences designed to enhance 
the student's
              initialcommitment to a SMET discipline beginning in the summer
before their
              first year of college. Importantly, to sustain this initial commitment,
the
              STAR programs then continue to provide research and career enrichment
              
experiences from the students' freshman year through the summer after their
              
sophomore year. STAR programs will provide research and career enrichment
              
experiences that include such activities as the following: (1) participation
              in a
summer bridge program with a "hands on" introduction to research
              experiences 
component; (2) formal and informal meetings with faculty and/or
              graduate mentors; 
(3) visits to laboratories that emphasize the active
              involvement of students; 
(4) participation in a higher-level summer research
              experiences between their first
and second years of college; and (5)
              participation in the annual LSAMP Indiana Research
and Alliance Enrichment
              Conference.

Supplemental Instruction (SI) -- SI programs offer participants
              the chance to lead 
and/or participate in review and study skill sessions to
              supplement course instruction. 
Some of the universities in this alliance have
              established SI programs for a few of the 
historically high-risk 100and 200
              level "gatekeeper" courses, and they are particularly 
effective in raising
              participants'(especially minority participants') G.P.A. and
retention rate. As
              an alliance, therefore, we are interested in the following: (1) beginning 
the
              SI program in SMET courses at universities with no SI program; (2) expanding
              the
SI program to (more) SMET courses at universities with an established SI
              program; and 
(3) adding SI to upper-level courses known to be difficult for
              students (i.e., 2 nd level
 gatekeeper courses).

Coordination and
              Development Programs -- To forge the Alliance, all parties involved in
LSAMP
              Indiana will be invited to conferences in order to: (1) enhance the alliance by
              
sharingdata, program experiences (successes and failures), and ideas for
              improving
programs and the alliance; (2) provide conference experiences that
              serve academic
and social identification needs; (3) build a supportive network
              of SMET scholars 
(faculty, graduate students, administrators, and students)
              working toward a shared
goal who can help guide the alliance; and (4) develop
              diversity competencies among 
faculty, administrators, support staff, graduate
              students, and undergraduate
students affiliated with LSAMP Indiana by
              developing new and innovative workshops
that are then adapted and administered
              on each campus.

