Title       : Energy Markets Solutions by Adaptive Agents Seeking Risk Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0217677

Award Number: 0217677
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald B. Sheble gsheble@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The electric utility industry is in the transition from operating in a
              monopolistic environment to one that is regulated as a competitive marketplace.
              At this point in time, over eight markets have failed. The objective of this
              research is to analyze this new emerging electricity marketplace from the
              viewpoint of including reliability as a product dffferentiator as solved by
              adaptive agents. Reliability is a key feature of electric energy delivery and
              has provided national economic growth for almost a century. This research is
              interested in how a company would compete effectively for long term growth
              potential and for continuous financial performance.

This is a computer
              simulation of the portfolio analysis of various electric contracts with various
              levels of reliability. All players must use complex decision making to properly
              bid and to make a positive profit. This effort proposes to use classical
              optimization techniques in conjunction with decision analysis for the buyers
              and sellers of electricity in such an electric marketplace. This project will
              investigate the steady state results for the application of forecasting and
              decision methods to determine if price discovery occurs using various learning
              algorithms. Previous research by this author and others has lead to new
              algorithms based on real option analysis.

This effort proposes
              computer-learning algorithms (Modified Roth-Erev, genetic algorithm, genetic
              programming, and neural networks). Agents will be implemented with these
              techniques to generate a sustainable profit from the various energy markets.
              The long-term goal is to develop adaptive agents to assist humans who play the
              electric marketplace.

