Title       : US-Egypt Workshop: Explaining the Worldviews of the Islamic Publics: Theoretical
               and Methodological Issues, Cairo, Egypt, December 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0217716

Award Number: 0217716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mansoor Moaddel SOC_moaddel@online.emich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0303000   Conflict Resolution                     
Program Ref : 0000,5944,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0217716
Moaddel

Description: This award is to support a US-Egypt Workshop on
              Explaining the Worldviews of the Islamic Publics: Theoretical and
              Methodological Issues, to be held in Cairo, Egypt, December 2002.  The
              organizer is Dr. Mansoor Moaddel, Professor, Department of Sociology,
              Anthropology and Criminology, Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan.
               The co-organizer is Dr. Abdel-Hamid Abdel-Latif, Professor of Sociology, Ain
              Shams University, Cairo, Egypt.  This meeting will bring together the social
              scientists from the United States and Islamic countries who were involved in
              carrying out national surveys of the attitudes and value orientations of the
              Islamic publics in Algeria, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran, Jordan, Morocco, and
              Pakistan. This is the first time that comprehensive comparative surveys have
              been carried out in several major Islamic countries, generating a
              sociologically important data set. The questionnaire used in these surveys was
              based on key batteries of the World Values Survey questionnaire, as well as a
              series of items that were specifically designed for Islamic countries.  To
              advance the fundamental knowledge of Islamic societies, the participants will
              address in a collective fashion several methodological and theoretical
              concerns. These include comparison of different translations of the
              questionnaire, an assessment of the final sampling frame used in the study, and
              an analysis of the findings within varying cultural and political contexts. 
              

Scope: This meeting expands the basis of social science understanding of
              Islamic societies by strengthening the network among social scientists that the
              comparative survey has generated.  It deals with a topic that is of current
              importance in the United States and in the Islamic countries.  The project is
              funded jointly by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the
              Division of Social and Economic Sciences.

