Title       : Visualization & Optimization Techniques For Analysis and Design of Complex
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0217836

Award Number: 0217836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean P. Meyn s-meyn@csl.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns several interrelated approaches to managing complexity in
              large interconnected systems. Specific application areas addressed in the
              proposal include phase transitions in molecular models, and resource allocation
              in large network models. Ideally, we wish to build a collection of
              'microscopes' that allow us to view these systems on various scales, and filter
              away irrelevant information. The PI has recently developed methods that are
              intended to perform exactly this task. Over the proposed funding period he will
              develop these and new approaches for addressing visualization and optimization
              problems in complex systems.
Specific analytical approaches to be developed
              include, (i) Relaxation techniques based upon separation of fast and slow
              time-scales. This involves 'workload-relaxations' in the network domain, and
              recent approaches to spectral theory for diffusion models.  (ii) General theory
              of Markov processes and diffusion models, especially recent results concerning
              large deviations theory and entropy.
(iii) Methods for including prior
              knowledge to speed simulation and on-line learning for complex stochastic
              models, and for predicting and simulating rare events.  (iv) Extend fluid model
              techniques for addressing control and sensitivity in network optimization in
              realistic settings.
The PI will collaborate with graduate students at
              Illinois, researchers in applied mathematics at Brown University, and others in
              computer science and physics at research institutes in Germany. The expected
              impact of this research is far-reaching, and it is likely that
              cross-fertilization between all of these mathematical and application areas
              will be significant. In networks applications, these results will provide new
              methods for providing intuition about the behavior of large networks, new
              approaches to design, and efficient approaches to simulation and on-line tuning
              of policies. If successful, the research on spectral theory and diffusions will
              provide alternative-modeling techniques for molecular systems that capture
              essential dynamics and can be easily simulated.


