Title       : Theoretical Comparisons of Forms of Exchange
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0217287

Award Number: 0217287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda D. Molm molml@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-0217287
PI (s): Linda Molm
University of Arizona


The research is part
              of a long-term project investigating how different forms of social exchange
              affect major exchange outcomes.  In previous work the PI established that
              negotiated exchange-in which actors jointly bargain over the terms of strictly
              binding agreements, and reciprocal exchanges-in which actors individually give
              benefits to each other without negotiation, have very different effects on
              behavioral and affective outcomes.  Reciprocal exchanges produce weaker power
              use, greater feelings of trust and affective commitment, and stronger
              perceptions of fairness than equivalent negotiated exchanges.  The goal of this
              research is to test the independent effects of three causal mechanisms proposed
              to account for these differences: (1) the risk and uncertainty of exchange, (2)
              the relative salience of the competitive or cooperative aspects of exchange,
              and (3) the value of voluntary reciprocity. The research focuses on affective
              outcomes (feelings of trust, commitment, fairness, and solidarity), and extends
              the analysis to a third form of exchange, generalized (or indirect) exchange,
              that entails even greater differences in risk, salience of competition, and
              reciprocity.

Five laboratory experiments test predictions related to these
              goals.  Experiments will be conducted to test the effects of risk and
              uncertainty on trust and commitment by manipulating whether negotiated
              agreements are binding or non-binding and whether actors can communicate their
              intentions in reciprocal exchanges.   Another experiment will test the effect
              of increasing the salience of competition on perceptions of fairness in
              reciprocal exchange, by allowing actors to choose not only which partner to
              reward, but also how much benefit to give. Finally experiments will test the
              value that actors place on frequency and predictability of reciprocity,
              relative to the magnitude of benefits received and compare indirect
              (generalized) exchange with the two forms of direct exchange (negotiated and
              reciprocal).

The research will contribute to expanding the scope of
              contemporary theory and research on social exchange to include the full range
              of exchange forms that characterize social life.  Findings will also help
              explain why these forms of exchange have such different effects on the
              development of trust and affective ties

