Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Assisted Reproduction in Ecuador: Social Implications of
               In-Vitro Fertilization and Gamete Donation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0217709

Award Number: 0217709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy Scheper-Hughes nsh@sscl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In 1984 the first South American in-vitro fertilization (IVF) baby was born in
              Columbia. Since
then clinics that offer assisted reproductive techniques like
              IVF and gamete donation have begun
operations in most Latin American
              countries. This dissertation research study investigates the social impact of
              IVF and gamete donation in urban Ecuador. It asks what happens when
              reproductive biotechnologies travel
from their initial sites of development in
              Europe and the United States to nations often considered
marginal to
              scientific practice and research. The investigators will examine how religious
              practices,
issues of political economy, and kinship narratives affect the way
              that IVF and gamete donation have
been understood and put to use in Ecuador.
              The author's preliminary research in three infertility
clinics in Ecuador
              shows that local Catholic practice plays a critical role in IVF laboratories in
              Quito
where images of the Virgin Mary are used to bless eggs and sperm to aid
              in fertilization. In addition to
documenting how local practice reshapes IVF
              in Ecuador, this study will examine how assisted
reproduction affects
              Ecuadorian society. For example, how does the technoscientific production
              of
children alter local understandings of overpopulation and the Ecuadorian
              ictraditionalli family?
This study will focus on four Ecuadorian IVF and
              gamete donation clinics. Using the
ethnographic tools of participant
              observation, semi-structured interviewing and discourse analysis, the
authors
              will investigate how IVF and gamete donation are understood and practiced by
              clinical
personnel and patients undergoing infertility treatment. To elucidate
              both the production and
consumption of public narratives concerning assisted
              reproduction interviews will also be conducted
with religious leaders,
              lawmakers, reporters and lay citizens about their perception of IVF and
              gamete
donation. Although IVF and gamete donor clinics now operate worldwide,
              the vast majority of the social
science literature concerning assisted
              reproduction has focused on North America and Europe. The
data generated from
              the author's study of assisted reproduction in Ecuador, concerning issues
              of
political economy, religious and kinship practices, will be used
              comparatively in a point by point
reexamination of the Euro-American
              literature. This rigorous comparative approach to the study of
bioscientific
              practice brings the cultural dimensions of science and technology to the
              forefront,
elevating this study beyond a specific focus on reproductive
              technologies or Latin America.
Ultimately this knowledge will allow for a more
              complex understanding of how the biosciences
everywhere, both in nations
              considered "developed" and "developing", are constituted and affected by
the
              local social realities surrounding their practice.

