Title       : Modeling and Optimization Studies in Reactive In-Mold Coating - The
               Enviromentally Friendly Alternative to Painting for Plastic Parts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0217664

Award Number: 0217664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284262             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose M. Castro   (Principal Investigator current)
              Blaine Lilly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project will model the complex interactions that occur during the in-mold
              coating of thermoplastic and composite parts. The goals of this processing
              model will be to predict mold and molding machine deflection during filling and
              coating, as well as optimal injection parameters for the process. Plans to
              experimentally validate the use of this model for coatings for injection molded
              thermoplastic parts where issues such as substrate compressibility play a key
              role in the filling stage and subsequent coating performance In-mold coating
              has the potential to greatly reduce the need for spray painting and coating of
              plastic parts, a major environmental hazard in contemporary
              manufacturing.

In-mold coating compounds have been used for many years to
              improve the surface properties of parts made from sheet molding compounds. To
              date, the process has not been applied to injection-molded thermoplastic parts,
              although the potential environmental benefits and cost savings resulting from
              elimination of painting are enormous. The major stumbling blocks have been the
              difficulty of predicting the behavior of the thermoplastic substrate during the
              coating process, and associated problems in mold design. Another potential
              application of large environmental benefit is as a substitute of gel coats for
              boat manufacturing.  This work will have an immediate impact on the automotive
              and consumer products industries, and will be directly applied to manufacturing
              courses in polymer processing and mold design at Ohio State University. The
              potential for alleviating a major environmental hazard is clearly very large.
              Another major potential application of large environmental benefit is as a
              substitute of gel coats for boat manufacturing. The Director of the Women in
              Engineering Program will actively engage a diverse student participation. 


