Title       : DEM (Informal) Science on Patrol
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0217188

Award Number: 0217188
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bonnie Brownstein bonniebrownstein@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst for Schs of Future
	      123 West 77th St., Suite 4A
	      New York, NY  10024    212/629-4763

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Science on Patrol (SOP), a demonstration project of the Institute for Schools of
              the 
Future and the Police Athletic League in collaboration with the Manhattan
              Robbery Squad,
the Crime Scene Unit, the Arson and Explosion Squad and other
              units of the New York City
Police Department Detective Division, selected New
              York City public schools, community
outreach organizations, science
              professionals and database and Web designers, is designed
to promote interest
              and achievement in science by providing youngsters compelling 
problems
              ('crimes') they can solve by applying the scientific processes and
              skills
actually used by crime scene investigators to solve crimes. This
              approach capitalizes on 
the interest in high profile crimes treated in the
              popular press, movies and current
television programs. The informal science
              project is aimed squarely at raising the level of
participation and
              achievement in science for adolescent females and other members of
              
underrepresented minority groups by achieving thee goals:

1. using
              research-based strategies to attract and retain underrepresented minorities,
              particularly
     females, in informal science programs;
2. increasing their
              interest and achievement in science knowledge and skills; and
3. raising their
              awareness and interest in science-based careers.

This project will roll out
              through an existing structure, PAL centers in the Bronx in Year
One, in PAL
              centers throughout New York City in Year Two and in PAL centers across 
the
              country in Year Three. Interdisciplinary teams comprising PAL center
              instructors,
educators, police detectives, instructional designers, and
              scientists will work 
collaboratively to: (1) develop, field test and revise a
              minimum of 12 crime scenarios
for the youngsters to solve; (2) develop
              additional course materials, including a
Facilitator's Guide, the Science on
              Patrol website, a Student Activities Kits which
include case folders for each
              of the 'crimes', and a manual for mentors and/or volunteers;
(3) increase the
              participants' capacity to apply science knowledge and processes to solve 
real
              world problems; and, (4) build the capacity of faculty to implement compelling
              and 
challenging problems in environments that are gender-neutral, promote
              collaboration, 
encourage problem-solving and reflect both research and best
              practice for increasing 
participation and achievement in science-based
              areas.

Decades of research on the root causes and outcomes of the under
              representation of 
females in mathematics, science and technology have amply
              demonstrated that the culture
and context of K-16 schooling clearly lies at
              the heart of the issue. Yet the literature
shows the very factors that
              constrain participation and achievement of females and other
underrepresented
              minorities in higher levels of mathematics and science are
              alterable.

Science on Patrol is an innovative project that links science
              knowledge and skills with 
the real world applications of forensic specialists
              in a highly motivating course of study
for middle and high school students.
              The key element, however, is the comprehensive use 
of research-based findings
              to shape learning environments specifically designed to attract 
and retain
              females and other underrepresentedminorities to advanced study of science
              and
science-related careers. Science on Patrol does not single out specific
              research-based
factors that promote success for female and other
              underrepresented minorities.
Instead, it integrates all in an integrated and
              coherent manner to create learning 
environments that are friendly to the
              target population. Information about the culture
and context of these learning
              environments will be disseminated broadly and serve as a 
model for other
              informal science efforts and for school-based K-16 classrooms.
