Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Investigation of Activity along the Himalayan
               Main Central Thrust-Present Geomorphology and Past Slip, Garhwal, NW India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0217598

Award Number: 0217598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Catlos catlos@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Marston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5919,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0217598
Catlos 

Description: This award supports US-India Cooperative
              Research: Investigation of Activity along the Himalayan Main Central Thrust-
              Present Geomorphology and Past Slip, Garhwal, NW India.  US PI Elizabeth Catlos
              of Oklahoma State University (OSU) and Indian collaborator Chandra Dubey of the
              University of Delhi will study mass movements within the Himalayan Main Central
              Thrust (MCT) shear zone and profiles of major rivers that cross the zone to
              gain understanding of the mechanisms involved during continental collision. 
              The goal is to use a combined geochemical, structural, and geomorphologic
              approach to test the hypothesis that the MCT shear zone accommodated slip and
              has sustained seismic activity since the Miocene.  They will also investigate
              the temporal and spatial distribution of mass movement within the MCT shear
              zone in NW India.  The Himalayas are an ideal natural laboratory for studying
              continental convergence and this research will have broader significance and
              implications for most other mountain belts.               

Scope: The US PI
              is a first-time NSF awardee and new Ph.D. of considerable promise.   The
              collaboration is career launching and will provide a framework for future
              interdisciplinary studies.  The international collaboration, which pairs the
              field expertise of the Indian team with the analytical capabilities of the US
              team, will enhance this research and offer mutual benefits.  For the Indian
              side, Dubey and his graduate student will be trained in electron and ion
              microprobe analysis in the U.S.  OSU students will gain an international
              perspective through Dubey's participation in the OSU School of Geology Seminar
              Series.  The PIs will present their findings to the Geological Society of
              America, Nov. 2003.  This project is cofunded by the Indian Department of
              Science & Technology (DST) under the NSF/DST joint program.    
              


























