Title       : The Case of Missing Human Potential
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0217109

Award Number: 0217109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111196             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith S. Brenneke jbrenneke@wviz.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WVIZ/PBS
	      4300 Brookpark Road
	      Cleveland, OH  441341191    216/739-3832

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will produce a one-hour general audience television program for
              Ohio and
the surrounding region designed to raise the awareness of the viewing
              audience to the 
problemof gender inequity in our sciences, mathematics,
              engineering and technology 
workforce. Wewill engage our audience by tracking
              the root cause of this inequity back 
into our schools by examining the
              research done by NSF on women in SMET and exploring
the ways that teaching
              methods can be either a window of opportunity to young women 
or a closed
              door.

To maintain the attention of this general TV audience, the problem
              will be presented as a
fast-paced mystery, why are we missing all this human
              potential in SMET? A top-selling
mystery writer, Les Roberts, will host our
              audience in this investigation and he will be 
assistedby a young woman of
              high school age. His special guide in this quest will be 
Dr. Kathryn
              Sullivan, the first woman to walk in space.  The program will
              examine
NSF-identified researchthat will introduce and examine the problem. We
              will then 
explore a variety of efforts by school, community, and businesses
              to correct this
inequity. The program will conclude with suggestions on what
              the viewing audience -
- parents, community members, business, and educators
              -- can do to channel the future 
potential of girls into SMET.  Once it has
              been broadcast in this region, The Case of
Missing Human Potential will be
              offered to the national PBS network for national
distribution.

An
              interactive Web site designed to provide further information, suggestions
              for
improving the situation, and links to existing summer camps and programs
              will be
promoted during the show. All participating stations will be
              encouraged to set up 
"call-in" sites staffed by local SMET teachers and
              researchers to address questions
from the viewing audience. This special
              effort will be addressed during pauses in the
broadcast and will be designed
              to help the audience take action as a result of the
interest stirred up by
              this broadcast.

To draw new viewers we will publicize the show on all the
              PBS stations in Ohio; use
the state designated TIMSS Consortia of schools
              (representing about 500,000 Ohio 
students) to advertise the importance of
              this problem to parents and community 
members and to invite their
              involvement; highlight the upcoming show through 
OhioDL one of the primary
              communications means for schools using distance 
learning in Ohio; and
              advertise the problem of gender inequity and the need for 
family and
              community action revealed in this TV program via the communication 
networks
              of the Ohio Mathematics and Science Coalition.
