Title       : Genomics of Loblolly Pine Embryogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0217594

Award Number: 0217594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1380910            (Estimated)
Investigator: John Cairney john.cairney@ipst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. Robin Buell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald S. Pullman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Quackenbush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Paper Sci & Tech
	      500 10th Street NW
	      Atlanta, GA  303185794    404/853-9508

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The formation of embryos within the seeds of pine trees differs from seed
              formation in traditional crop and vegetable plants. While in both cases an
              embryo forms inside a seed, develops and finally germinates to form a plant,
              the morphology, biochemistry and genetics of the processes in gymnosperms (e.g.
              pine) and angiosperms (e.g. carrot) are distinctly different. Embryogenesis is
              the result of a regulated program of gene activity and the elucidation of the
              program for loblolly pine is the goal of this project. The multiplication of
              pine embryos in a laboratory setting and the production of plantlets, has great
              implications for reforestation 

After corn, forest products are the second
              most valuable US agricultural product. Loblolly pine (Pinus taeda L.) is the
              primary commercial species in southern conifer forests covering 13.4 million
              hectares, and over 1.5 billion loblolly pine seedlings are planted annually.
              Somatic embryogenesis, a tissue culture technique for embryo multiplication, is
              an excellent experimental tool for investigating embryogenesis in this tree. 
              However, success of the technique is genotype-dependent and remains
              inefficient. Knowledge of the program of gene expression in natural and
              laboratory-cultivated embryos will provide insight into varying metabolism of
              these embryos and a basis for protocol improvement.

A cDNA library will be
              created from loblolly pine zygotic (natural) and somatic
              (laboratory-cultivated) embryos.  Together, these will represent a combined set
              of transcripts expressed during all stages of embryogenesis, thus giving a
              'snapshot' of genes participating in the formation of the pine embryo. Randomly
              selected cDNA clones will be 5' end-sequenced to generate 35,000 Expressed
              Sequence Tags or ESTs. These ESTs will be clustered and assembled to construct
              a non-redundant pine EST database (TIGR Gene Index). 

The non-redundant cDNA
              clone set will be used to obtain gene expression profiles during various stages
              of zygotic and somatic loblolly pine embryogenesis. This approach should
              identify the genes active in embryogenesis allow determination of their
              identities and temporal expression patterns. A comparison of profiles from
              laboratory-grown and natural embryos will allow insights into embryogenesis to
              be gained, and further development of improved protocols for loblolly pine
              somatic embryogenesis. Together, these data will provide the first detailed
              overview of genome-wide gene expression patterns in conifer embryo development.
               In the long-term, this kind of information will be useful in developing
              strategies to accelerate clonal propagation.

