Title       : Inter-organizational Trust in Business to Business Electronic Commerce
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2002    
File        : a0217550

Award Number: 0217550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pauline Ratnasingam ratnasingam@bsad.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Business-business e-commerce involves the use of computers and
              telecommunications in routine business relationships. It mostly affects the
              organizations' operations and daily relationships with their suppliers,
              customers, banks, insurers, distributors, and other trading partners. Although
              most popular accounts of e-commerce focus on business-to-consumer e-commerce,
              business-to-business e-commerce is becoming the key in inter-organizational
              relationships, (Keen, 2000; Lee and Turban, 1999). The close coupling between
              buyers and suppliers (sellers) form inter-organizational relationships. Trust
              in e-commerce participation has received a lot of attention, especially in the
              recent years. However, to date there has been no systematic examination or
              formulation of a model of inter-organizational trust for business-to-business
              e-commerce. Much of the literature on trust has tended to focus from a
              psychological rationale, while neglecting factors such as trading partner trust
              behaviors, and the process involved in developing trust and its impact on
              organizational and social issues within which e-commerce operations take place.
              The purpose of this research project is to increase the growth of
              business-to-business e-commerce in Vermont by examining how trust mechanisms
              evolve and contribute to business-to-business e-commerce adoption in Vermont.
              Therefore, the core objective of this research project is to investigate,
              explore and examine the impact of trust mechanisms in business-to-business
              e-commerce. By doing this, success factors in business-to-business e-commerce
              can be identified and utilized to provide guidelines to enhance the growth of
              businesses in Vermont that will in turn create more jobs. This will in turn,
              increase the awareness of trust behaviors among e-commerce practitioners.
              E-commerce organizations in Vermont will be able to practice
              business-to-business e-commerce more confidently (by enforcing best business
              practices); thus improving their chances of surviving in a competitive global
              market environment (particularly against their neighboring cities such as
              Boston and Montreal). Indeed the geographical location of Vermont makes it even
              more attractive to conduct e-business. Experienced e-commerce practitioners
              (trading partners) will be able to observe the behaviors of their trading
              partners and will be able to monitor, assess, and evaluate trust behaviors of
              themselves and their trading partners. Although governance mechanisms (in the
              form of legal contracts, trust and security-based mechanisms in e-commerce)
              provide technological assurances (using digital signatures, encryption
              mechanisms, functional acknowledgment procedures, and trading partner
              agreements) that help mitigate perceived risks of e-commerce, this research
              project will emphasize on the importance of developing collaborative
              trustworthy trading relationships. A key strength of the research is that the
              respondents will include practitioners from a wide range of organizations and
              occupations. Therefore, while the organizations and their people will not be
              selected randomly, quite a diverse group from a cross-section of industries
              will participate that will in turn benefit the entire Vermont business
              community. 
