Title       : PLN - Creating the Next Generation of Women Leaders in Science, Technology,
               Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0217007

Award Number: 0217007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Debbie S. D'Amore ddamore@schools.co.pima.az.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Center for Educational Dev
	      130 West Congress 4th Floor
	      Tucson, AZ  85701    520/740-8451

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PLN - Creating the Next Generation of Women Leaders in Science, Technology,
              Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)

The Pima County Superintendent of
              Schools, a local education agency (LEA) will 
develop and pilot an after
              school program for Hispanic 5th and 6th grade girls --
Creating the Next
              Generation of Women Leaders in Science, Technology, Engineering
and
              Mathematics (STEM). Creating Leaders combines innovative leadership training
              
with enhanced STEM programming. The Creating Leaders program is innovative
              and 
builds on research that has identified elements of successful programming
              for Hispanic 
girls. Innovative components of this program include:
              1.combining leadership development 
training with STEM enrichment; 2. teaching
              practical applications of mathematics in finance 
and investment; 3. linking
              STEM with politics and public policy; 4. developing partnerships
between women
              in STEM careers, 5th and 6th grade girls and their parents; and 5. awarding
              
STEM mini-grants to elementary and middle school girls.

Outcomes of the
              planning grant will include:
1. A more extensive literature search to inform
              curriculum design and program planning;
2. The development of curricula for
              the after school program to be utilized with Hispanic
 girls in 5th and 6th
              grades and their parents;
3. The development of an Advisory Board;
4. The
              development of partnerships for implementing the program at multiple sites;
5.
              A pilot test of the after school program in one elementary school;
6. Focus
              groups with participants in the pilot; and
7. The development of a full
              proposal for the Creating Leaders program.

The Creating Leaders after school
              program will be piloted in the Elvira Elementary
School in Tucson, Arizona.
              The culturally relevant program components are designed
to work
              synergistically to make SMET fun and relevant to real life, raise SMET
              literacy,
reinforce learning through hands-on activities, allow girls to
              practice their newly 
acquired skills and knowledge through community problem
              solving, and inspire girls to
pursue STEM coursework, careers, and leadership
              positions in STEM fields. Program 
activities include:
1. Playing the Real
              Game which teaches students about the global economy while 
reinforcing the
              importance of teamwork and cooperation.
2. Raising financial literacy by
              playing the Cashflow Game which teaches about investing,
rate of return,
              business ownership, and calculating cash flow;
3. Attending field trips to
              organizations which employ women in STEM careers and 
local colleges and
              universities.
4. Utilizing women in STEM careers and high school students to
              serve as role models
 and mentors.
5. Leadership development activities.
6.
              Teaching girls to develop proposals for funding and receive mini-grants to
              solve a 
community problem using STEM.
7. Learning about the relationship
              between STEM, politics and public policy.
8. Developing STEM educational and
              career goals through academic and career planning.
9. Involving family members
              in supporting girls STEM educational and career goals.
10. Developing on-line
              e-tools for teachers and girls in the program.

This multi-disciplinary
              program will provide significant advances in knowledge in
the fields of
              education, leadership development, public policy, and the wide range
              of
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math fields. The activities proposed
              will broaden 
the discovery and understanding of how to successfully reach
              underrepresented groups
and will promote teaching, training, and learning
              among K-12 staff and administrators, 
students, families, women in STEM
              careers, and organizations which employ them.
Creating Leaders will impact
              knowledge capital through the creation of a curriculum for
use with Hispanic
              5th and 6th grade girls and their families, social capital through
the
              creation of a community-based partnership designed to improve the STEM
              achievement 
and career attainment of Hispanic girls, and human capital in the
              improvement in STEM 
educational and career attainment of Hispanic girls.
