Title       : Collaborative Research: Majorities and Minorities: A New Look at
               Ethnonationalism and Electoral Extremism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0217499

Award Number: 0217499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99319              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason Wittenberg witty@polisci.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Scholars agree that multi-ethnic democracies are vulnerable to the polarizing
              and zero-sum political competition that breeds anti-liberal politics. Yet
              despite this consensus there is still fundamental disagreement about who
              defects from liberal democratic politics and the conditions under which this
              occurs. This proposal will identify the social bases of extremist voting in
              multi-ethnic democracies. An original data base of 20 elections and matching
              censuses from the interwar era (1920-1939) in five East European countries will
              be assembled.  Settlement-level voting data will be matched with census data on
              ethnicity, language, religion, occupation, social class, settlement size,
              industrial structure, and the structure of land holding. Estimates of social
              support for extremist and non-extremist parties among discrete social and
              ethnic groups will be derived using aggregate data analysis and ecological
              regression techniques. Causal models of extremist voting will also be developed
              using the derived individual estimates as dependent variables. 
This project
              serves three broader objectives. First, the estimates obtained will bring new
              information to bear on a number of questions regarding the social bases of
              political radicalism, in particular the contexts under which minority and other
              groups defect from liberal democratic politics. Second, in explaining electoral
              behavior in countries that would eventually fall victim to fascism and
              communism, this project will shed new light on deeply divisive scholarly and
              political debates concerning the loyalty of ethnic minorities and the role of
              both ethnic minorities and majorities in undermining first wave democracies. 
              Finally, the resultant data base as well as estimated vote choice will be put
              in the public domain, allowing others to explore their own questions and
              theories concerning electoral behavior in multi-ethnic democracies. 

