Title       : A Landscape Approach to Archaeological Variability at the Acheulian to Middle
               Stone Age Transition in the Kapthurin Formation, Kenya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0217728

Award Number: 0217728
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274176             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally McBrearty mcbrearty@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the National Science Foundation a team of archaeologists and
              geologists led by Dr. Sally McBrearty will carry out three seasons of field
              work in the Baringo region of Kenya.  The team will investigate how Middle
              Pleistocene landuse patterns changed with the appearance of Homo sapiens in the
              East African Rift Valley about 300,000 years ago.  They will focus upon three
              stratigraphic intervals within the Kapthurin Formation, where sites containing
              Acheulian artifacts, thought to have been made by Homo erectus, are
              interstratified with those containing Middle Stone Age artifacts, thought to
              have been made by Homo sapiens.  The ancient topography will be reconstructed
              by geological mapping with laser transit, and a three-dimensional model of each
              target interval will be reconstructed using GIS software.  The ancient plant
              and animal communities will be documented through the study of mammalian and
              plant fossils, as well as fossil soil and fossil tooth stable carbon and oxygen
              isotopes.  Surface collection, trial trenches, and horizontal excavation at two
              sites per stratigraphic interval will provide evidence for early human behavior
              in the form of stone tools and fossil bone which has been processed for food by
              early hominids.  Patterns of association of these behavioral traces of with
              topographic features and plant communities will be sought for each target
              interval.  A change in landuse patterns with early Homo sapiens, reflecting
              greater cognitive abilities, technical competence, and geographic range, can be
              predicted on anatomical and archaeological grounds, but the evidence to date
              has been drawn from widely dispersed sites which are not well dated.  The
              Kapthurin Formation is confined to a single depositional basin, and the ages of
              the stratigraphic intervals to be studied are well calibrated by the 40Ar/39Ar
              dating method.  Any landuse patterns detected in the three stratigraphic
              intervals will be compared to assess the nature and tempo of change through
              time.  Dr. McBrearty and her collaborators will focus on five questions: 1) Is
              there a detectable change in landuse patterns between the Acheulian and Middle
              Stone Age? 2) Did Middle Stone Age hominids use a broader array of
              microhabitats than Acheulian hominids, such as uplands and distal floodplains,
              in addition to stream and lakeside settings? 3) Were Middle Stone Age hominids
              able to range further from sources of water or raw material for stone tool
              making than Acheulian hominids? 4) Were either Acheulian or Middle Stone Age
              tool makers designing specific implements to exploit particular habitats?  5)
              How does the competence of Acheulian hunters compare with hunters of the Middle
              Stone Age?  This research is important because it will illustrate the nature of
              the behavior of the earliest members of Homo sapiens and illuminate some of the
              processes leading to the origin of our species.
