Title       : Fundamental Understanding of Anisotropic Conductive Film (ACF) for Flip Chip
               Packaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0217910

Award Number: 0217910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. P. Wong cp.wong@mse.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to advance the fundamental understanding of the
              behavior of anisotropic conductive adhesives that could replace lead-containing
              solders in electronic packaging. Of particular interest is the capability of
              creating a thin film (ACF) of this material that is stable, with a high current
              density capacity. Replacing lead-containing solder with alternative
              interconnect material would significantly impact the manufacturing processes of
              microelectronic packaging systems, such as flip-chip, ball grid array (BGA),
              chip scale package (CSP), and surface mount technology (SMT). ACFs are one of
              the candidates to replace lead-containing solder as interconnect material.
              Currently, the reliability and performance of these ACF materials are not
              competitive, and improvements require a better understanding of the interfacial
              behavior developed in electronics packaging processes. 

In this project,
              chemical and physical properties of ACA materials will be studied, and the
              interfaces in ACF joint will be investigated.  Then, the interfaces will be
              modified to maintain the electrical properties in extreme environment by using
              corrosion inhibitors and or sacrificial alloys.  To improve the current density
              of ACA, the interfaces will be modified with self-assembling molecular (SAM)
              wires.  The mechanically bonded interface between ACA and chip pad/substrate
              pad will be modified by SAM, which has been known to be able to deliver high
              current density. A computational modeling of the processing - property
              relationship will be developed. During the period of award, the PI will
              continue to address the integration of research and education with specific
              activities focused on high school teachers and students from underrepresented
              groups in local high schools. 


