Title       : Identification and Characterization of Cell Wall Mutants in Maize and
               Arabidipsis using Novel Spectroscopies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0217552

Award Number: 0217552
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas C. Carpita carpita@btny.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Two methods, discriminant analysis of Fourier transform mid-range and near
              infrared spectra, have been developed as high throughput approaches to
              identifying mutations in plant cell wall polysaccharide components and wall
              architecture.  

These methods will be employed to identify in insertion
              tagged populations of maize and Arabidopsis a broad range of mutants involved
              in the biogenesis and dynamic alteration of plant cell wall architecture during
              growth and development. A systematic protocol using biochemical, spectroscopic,
              and imaging methods has been devised to categorize defects in wall structure
              and architecture related to development into one of six stages of wall
              biogenesis or disassembly.  Maize lines carrying Mu-insertions and Arabidopsis
              lines carrying T-DNA tags will be used as primary material for both forward and
              reverse screens.  
 
A major practical goal of the project is to generate
              plants with genetically defined variation in wall composition and architecture
              that will permit assessment of modifications on wall properties and plant
              development.  Since cell walls are an enormously important source of industrial
              raw material, we anticipate that several of the genes we identify and
              characterize, as well as several of the plants with genetically defined
              alterations, will be of economic importance. As the heritability of the
              mutations is confirmed and information on the possible function of the genes
              identified is obtained, the plant biology community will be informed of them
              through a web site that has been created as a repository for all cell-wall
              related genomics.  Maize and Arabidopsis stock centers will be provided with
              all materials to dispense to the community at large.

