Title       : Integration of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Research, Education, and Outreach:
               Systematic Tailoring of Carbon Nanotubes to Designed Electronic Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0217061

Award Number: 0217061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun Jiao jiaoj@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Title	Integration of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Research, Education, and
              Outreach: Systematic Tailoring of Carbon Nanotubes to Designed Electronic
              Properties

Investigator	Jun Jiao

Sponsor	Portland State University
P.O.
              Box 751
Portland, Oregon 97207-0751

Abstract	

This proposal aims at the
              development of an integrated research, education, and outreach program in
              nanoscience and technology at Portland State University, with an emphasis on
              carbon nanotube research. The objectives of the proposed research are focused
              on (i) developing a reliable method for synthesizing carbon nanotubes of
              controlled properties; (ii) studying the growth mechanisms of various forms of
              nanotubes as a function of preparation conditions, and establishing the
              correlation between microstructure and preparation conditions; (iii)
              investigating the electron field-emission properties of carbon nanotubes in
              relation to their geometrical configurations; (iv) fabricating individual
              carbon-nanotube field emitters and exploiting their use as electron sources for
              electron-beam instruments such as TEM, SEM, and electron-beam lithography
              systems. 

The innovative aspects of this research are <1> to combine
              nanotube synthesis, microstructural characterization, electron field-emission
              measurements, and individual nanotube field emitter fabrications into a single
              project, and <2> to explore the special requirements of electron-beam
              instruments, as opposed to flat-panel displays. The effectiveness of this
              approach is that progress at each stage will provide immediate feedback to
              advance the improvement of the others. The research program is highly
              multidisciplinary, involving close collaboration with colleagues in Physics,
              Chemistry and Electrical Engineering Departments, with Pacific Northwest
              National Laboratory, and with a local high-tech company (FEI). One Ph.D.
              graduate student will be trained through this program, in addition to eight
              undergraduate students and two high school students who will each year be
              offered opportunities to participate in the research activities. All of them
              will receive excellent training in preparation for careers in science and
              engineering.

The educational objectives of this program include (i)
              incorporating research findings to develop a new curriculum. New courses,
              introducing students to up-to-date knowledge and state-of-the-art techniques,
              will be developed; (ii) involving undergraduate and high school students (in
              particular, female students) in research and science-education activities, and
              motivating them to pursue careers in science and engineering; (iii) enriching
              outreach activities by collaborating with local educational institutions to
              increase the awareness of local citizens with regard to the future impact of
              nanoscience and nanotechnology. 


