Title       : US-Botswana Cooperative Research: Geologic and Geophysical Investigations of the
               Southwestern Branch of the East African Rift System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0217831

Award Number: 0217831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Estella A. Atekwana atekwana@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
Program Ref : 1304,5928,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0217831
Atekwana

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Estella Atekwana, with the Department of Geology and
              Geophysics at the University of Missouri-Rolla, Professors Motsoptse Modisi and
              Henri Kampunzu, with the Department of Geology at the University of Botswana,
              and Professor Stanislas Sebagenzi, with the Department of Geological Sciences
              in the University of Lubumbashi, in the Democratic Republic of Congo.  They
              will study geologic and tectonic processes during incipient rifting in the East
              African rift.

Rift basins represent the initial stages in the development of
              passive margins.  They are also target areas for sediment accumulation, and
              these sediments typically contain paleoenvironmental and climatic indicators
              that can provide important clues to past climate and global change.  The
              seismically active Southwestern Branch of the East African Rift system (EARS)
              is one of the few places in the world where embryonic rifting can be studied at
              the beginning of continental extension--before volcanism has occurred. 
              Atekwana and her colleagues will conduct kinematic studies, using a combination
              of field data and remote sensing data from sites in Botswana, Zambia, and
              Democratic Republic of Congo, in order to: 1) assess the role of pre-existing
              structures on rift basin development; 2) determine fault kinematics and
              direction of the extension; 3) characterize the geometry of the basins, and the
              underlying crustal and lithospheric structure of the Southwestern Branch; 4)
              assess current models for fault array development and linkage to form border
              faults; and 5) develop tectonic and geologic models for the evolution of rifts
              during the incipient stages of continental extension.  The group will also map
              zones of potential earthquake activity.  This project combines Dr. Atekwana's
              expertise in environmental geophysics and tectonics, with Dr. Kampunzu's expert
              knowledge of African geology, and that of Dr. Modisi, who is a structural
              geologist.  Dr. Sebagenzi has worked on the extension of the Southwestern rift
              in the Democratic Republic of Congo and Zambia, and he will contribute field
              data for those locations as well as his gravity data.  The project also
              includes the participation of a student from the University of Missouri-Rolla
              as well as a student from the University of Botswana.   

The results of this
              project should expand the current knowledge about the geologic and tectonic
              processes that occur during the earliest stages of continental extension.  The
              maps on potential earthquake activity will provide valuable hazard and
              mitigation information that can be applied to similar rifts that experience
              some of the largest and most damaging earthquakes in the world.  The maps will
              also provide a detailed picture of the subsurface geology of this part of the
              Kalahari, which may be important for mineral resource exploration. 

The
              Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Earth
              Sciences are jointly providing support for this project.


