Title       : ITR/Collaborative Research: FPGA Wavelet Image Compression Systems for Mobile
               Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0217894

Award Number: 0217894
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan E. Carletta carlett@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

In many imaging applications, mobile agents--such as untethered
              reconnaissance robots and micro air vehicles--transmit and receive
              bandwidth-intensive image data over wireless networks.  A key issue in
              developing small, mobile agents is minimizing their power requirements.  The
              most significant source of power dissipation in a wireless communications
              system is the transmission of data over the wireless link.  Compressing the
              data before transmission is a direct way to significantly decrease power
              requirements; thus, effective image compression algorithms are critical to
              realizing a mobile, wireless, real-time, high quality imaging
              system.

Various hardware platforms can be considered for mobile computing.
              Of these platforms, field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) are the most
              compelling for wireless, mobile, fast, low-power, handheld/wearable/embedded,
              image compression devices.FPGAs can be used as the basis for implementations
              that are low cost, easily updated, and significantly faster than
              microprocessor-based implementations.
 
The objective of this project is
              twofold: to design new, efficient image compression algorithms and to design,
              build, demonstrate and evaluate FPGA implementations of state-of-the-art image
              compression systems. Our close-knit interdisciplinary team of image compression
              and hardware specialists will allow for end-to-end system performance
              analysis.This critical assessment is almost never performed and yet it is
              important to understanding the combined effects of algorithmic and
              implementation design choices.

In addition, two or three real-world
              interdisciplinary projects that can be utilized in senior-level digital signal
              processing and digital design classes will be designed and published. 


