Title       : Further Studies of Directional Recrystallization Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0217565

Award Number: 0217565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300039             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Baker ian.baker@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold J. Frost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project is a fundamental study of directional recrystallization processing,
              the process whereby one or a few grains or crystals nucleate at one end of a
              specimen and grow along with a moving hot zone. Directional recrystallization
              has a number of advantages: net-shape processing; potential energy and cost
              savings compared to directional solidification; and the ability to process
              materials not amenable to directional solidification.  The overall goal is to
              understand how key microstructural parameters (the size and spacing of
              particles, and the grain size and orientation) interact with the processing
              conditions (rate of hot zone movement and temperature) to control the
              microstructure.  How the initial microstructure and processing conditions can
              be exploited to produce columnar grains or single crystals of a particular
              orientation will be explored in polycrystalline nickel sheets.  The role of
              particles will be examined in a model system of copper (both single crystals
              and polycrystals) containing finely-dispersed particles that can coarsen during
              processing.  Determining the role of particle coarsening or dissolution is key
              to understanding how columnar grains or single crystals can be produced in many
              commercial alloy systems.  

The work will involve a close coupling of
              experiments with computational microstructural simulation of the processing
              utilizing a front-tracking grain growth model.  While working on specific
              materials, the goal is to understand directional recrystallization processing
              at a fundamental level so that this generic technology and the associated
              modeling can easily be applied to many materials.  In addition to graduate
              education, activities with the Women in Science Project and / or Dartmouth
              Presidential Scholarships will be encouraged to expand participation of a
              diverse group of undergraduates on this project. In addition, material
              developed with the aid of a high school teacher will be presented to high
              school students.

