Title       : Wide Bandgap II-VI Compounds for Quantum Cascade Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0217646

Award Number: 0217646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria C. Tamargo tamar@sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Munoz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Quantum Cascade Lasers (QCLs) are a new kind of semiconductor laser based on
              intersubband transitions within a quantum well (QW). Among the more attractive
              features of QCLs are their unipolar transport, high power emission, ultrafast
              modulation (>100GHz) and generation of wavelengths in the mid and far infrared,
              not ever obtained before. Considerable advances have been achieved in the
              development of the QCLs during the last few years, which have led to the
              appearance of the first commercial thermoelectrically cooled QCLs.

However,
              there are still many limitations of these lasers. A critical one is the
              unavailability of QCLs operating in continuous wave (CW) mode at room
              temperature (RT). Another is the absence of QCLs operating at short
              wavelengths, such as l=1.55mm, needed to develop ultrafast optical
              communications. Both of these drawbacks are due to insufficient electron
              confinement in the materials combinations presently used. Therefore, new
              systems based on wide band gap materials are required.

This program proposes
              to explore the use of wide bandgap II-VI materials for the development of QCLs.
              The large conduction band offsets and deep QWs offered by the II-VI
              semiconductors, such as ZnCdMgSe/ZnCdSe, provide the possibility of higher
              electron confinement (and consequently the opportunity to obtain QCLs operating
              at RT in CW mode) and of QCLs that operate at 1.55mm for a new generation of
              ultrafast optical communications lasers. An important issue in favor of using
              II-VI semiconductors for QCLs is the fact that these devices are unipolar and
              do not require p-type doping, which traditionally has been a problem in most of
              the II-VI systems. While GaN-based materials are an alternative, the
              difficulties associated with the growth of high quality multi-layered
              structures of the nitride materials make them less attractive than the near
              lattice-matched, well-developed II-VI material systems.

Several II-VI
              systems that are particularly promising for QCLs with low threshold current,
              operating at RT and some of them that should be able to generate emission at
              1.55mm will be investigated. The QW properties, such as the energy levels
              available for intersubband transitions, will be investigated using modulation
              spectroscopy and other optical techniques. Such techniques have also been
              extensively utilized in the past by the PIs. Once a system has been identified
              to have potential for QCL applications, the QW structures will be optimized and
              incorporated in device structures to investigate the emission and lasing
              characteristics.



