Title       : (DIS) Think Again...Girls Can!
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0217200

Award Number: 0217200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96734              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice A. Grackin jgrackin@notes.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane L. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

The goal of this dissemination project is to develop a model public service
              ad campaign
that will advance the participation of women and girls in SMET
              through effecting a
positive shift in attitudes among parents, educators,
              students and others in the community
regarding girls' pursuit of interests /
              careers in SMET. The projects lead institution is 
Stony Brook University and
              collaborating organizations / institutions include the Long 
Island Fund for
              Women and Girls, Briarcliffe College, and television stations WLIW21 (PBS)
              
and WLNY55.

This informal education project will develop a series of
              dynamic television spots, to be
disseminated through local television
              broadcasts and through online links. The target 
audienceconsists of parents,
              educators and other authority figures, as well as peers, who 
have a great
              deal of influence over young peoples' perceptions of their educational and
              
future professional options. Spots will reflect research findings that
              illustrate current
gender inequities in SMET education and careers, and
              "de-bunk" some of the commonly 
accepted beliefs regarding gender-related
              causes for these disparities; information 
about often ignored or unremarked
              historical and current contributions of women in
SMET; and national statistics
              on professional shortages in the SMET
employment pool.

This video campaign
              will attempt to re-shape public attitudes regarding the gender
appropriateness
              of girls' SMET pursuits. Using psychosocial research as a guide, the
project
              will disseminate information in ways that may directly alter attitudes
              among
individuals in the targeted groups, as well as encourage new behaviors
              that may then
trigger compensatory attitude changes. This is a novel approach
              which combines
technology-based applications, marketing strategies, and
              psychosocial research to target 
change in specific underlying public
              attitudes that hinder the participation of girls and
young women in SMET.
