Title       : RES: Bringing Young Girls Into Science With Books And Inquiry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0217144

Award Number: 0217144
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333585             (Estimated)
Investigator: Danielle J. Ford djford@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy W. Brickhouse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

This project will study the gendered nature of learning science in the
              elementary grades.
Standards-based science instruction largely consists of
              students engaging in first-hand
investigation of scientific phenomena. This is
              in contrast to traditional science 
instruction that relies heavily on
              textbooks. The justification for investigation-based 
instructional design has
              typically been that the authority for scientific belief ought to
reside in the
              actions of children rather than the authority of text. However, this
              
unfortunate dichotomy between investigation and text undermines the potential
              uses 
of both.

Girls are typically strong readers- an attribute that ought
              to make them strong in science.
After all, at some point they must be able to
              read scientific text to excel in science classes.
Unfortunately, research on
              text preferences shows that although girls are strong readers, 
they prefer to
              read fiction rather than nonfiction. The primary objective of the project is
              
to learn how science-related text embedded in inquiry science instruction can
              be used to 
engage girls.

The first year of this three year study willbe
              spent in four third grade
classrooms to observe how science-related texts are
              used. This will include documentation of text experiences created by teachers
              and created by girls in encounters with text supplemental to regular
              
instruction (e.g., library visits, classroom-reading centers, books from
              home). This will be
supplemented by classroom observations and interviews with
              girls, teachers, librarians 
and parents to collect additional data on the use
              of and interest in science books.

The second year of the project will
              consist of design experiments in the classrooms
during which the teachers and
              researchers work together to analyze classroom activities 
and design
              instruction in cycles that allow research and teaching practice to influence
              
one another. Data from the first year will be used to better understand how
              girls may 
engage with science text and design instruction to maximize girls
              interest in science
and learning from science inquiry instruction that
              includes the use of text.

The research questions are as follows:
1. What
              role does text play in girls classroom science experiences?
2. How do teachers
              view the role of text in girls' learning of science?
3. What texts are present
              in girls' homes and how are they used?
4. What science texts do girls prefer
              when exposed to a large range of text genres and
uses?
5. How do girls uses
              of text enable and/or constrain their engagement and development
of scientific
              ideas?

The final year will be spent analyzing results of the design
              experiment and conducting 
cross-year analyses, preparing research papers for
              submission to science and literacy
education journals, and developing a
              web-based curriculum unit for use in teacher
education programs, including our
              own NSF-sponsored science teacher education reform 
effort.
