Title       : Explanatoids: Gender-Sensitive Signage to Seed Science Talk in Public Places
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0217033

Award Number: 0217033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $896092             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret L. Stubbs stubbs@fci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : FCI
	      4802 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152132957    412/687-2990

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

Children can develop a wealth of knowledge about science and technology from
              their
everyday experience. When visiting museums, watching educational TV,
              surfing the Web, 
or reading science-oriented books, children are actively
              developing proto-scientific 
reasoning skills, nascent theories for scientific
              domains, knowledge of interesting science
facts, knowledge about famous
              scientific narratives, and early ideas about what different
kinds of
              scientists do in their professional work. When children encounter science
              
instruction in elementary and middle school, when they dream about what they
              might do 
when they grow up, and when they make choices about the courses they
              want to take in 
high school and beyond, those with experience and interest
              practicing scientific and
technical thinking are more likely to seek it out
              and to succeed.

Virtually all children and their parents come equipped with
              the tools needed to cultivate
early math or scientific literacy, but these
              conversations and activities need to start 
from a seed a simple observation,
              an unexpected outcome, a question. For families with 
high levels of
              scientific literacy and interest, these seeds can be sown from
              personal
experience. Indeed, more than three quarters of scientists in a
              recent National
Science Foundation survey reported developing their passion
              for science in early,
out-of-school activities such as nature walks with their
              parents, family visits to 
museums, or taking apart radios or launching
              rockets at home. We have no doubt that
museum-based and media-based informal
              science infrastructure will have a positive 
effect on scientific literacy and
              science achievement, but the biggest effects will be for
those who already are
              most likely to enter the educational and professional pipe-line 
for science
              and technology--the children of families that go to museums, watch
              
educational programming, and visit educational web sites.

Interestingly,
              boys more than girls are most likely to reap these benefits within
              highly
motivated families. There is evidence to suggest that parents are less
              likely to bring 
their daughters to science museums than their sons, and that
              even among museum-going
families, parents were more than three times more
              likely to explain the science of an 
exhibit to boys than to girls (true even
              when the boys and girls were as young as
one to three-years old). 

What of
              families who may not be as comfortable with or as interested in pursuing
              
science? These parents, already less likely to visit science museums for
              family
recreation, may also not be aware of how many "teachable moments" exist
              in everyday 
life to prompt conversations with their children about math,
              science and technology, and
especially so if they're parents of
              girls.

Building on a successful pilot project we propose to seed the
              development of scientific
and technical literacy by developing, placing, and
              maintaining engaging gender-sensitive
science-oriented signage in the places
              where the broadest cross-section of Pittsburgh's 
children and families
              gather.  We call these signs "explanatoids." While science museums 
and
              science-oriented media are important forces for informal science education,
              children
and their families must seek them out over other forms of leisure
              activity.  In contrast, 
our explanatoids bring science to the people, in a
              way that includes girls fully in that 
outreach.

We are asking for support
              for three years to develop our pilot work into a full-scale
regional project
              that can be replicated elsewhere as a gender-sensitive model for
enhancing
              math/science literacy within a community.  The project will include
              the
development and installation of gender-sensitive signage as well as the
              production 
of associated support materials for parents and teachers
              throughout the Southwest
Pennsylvania region. The project will leverage unique
              partnerships already built between
Family Communications, Inc. (producers of
              Mister Rogers Neighborhood), local foundations,
Carnegie Mellon University,
              the University of Pittsburgh's Learning Research &
Development Center,
              Kennywood Amusement Park, The Pittsburgh Teachers Institute,
The Pittsburgh
              Children's Museum, and The Pittsburgh Parks Conservancy. Formative 
and
              summative evaluation will provide quantitative and qualitative measures of the
              ways
that the project (1) counters negative stereotypes about girls and women
              in math, 
science and technology; (2) enhances girls' interests and successful
              participation in 
those arenas in schooling and career aspirations; and (3)
              advances the recognition that
math, science and technology are integral to the
              regions future economic well-being.


