Title       : Does Involving Girls as Designers Result in Girl-Friendly Science Education
               Software? Comparing Processes and Outcomes of Same-Sex 5th and 8th Grade Girl
               and Boy Design Teams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0217197

Award Number: 0217197
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550978             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carrie Heeter heeter@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rhonda Egidio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Punyashloke Mishra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              OBJECTIVES: Virtual environments are increasingly being called upon to advance
              science learning.
With possibilities for interactive multimedia displays and
              learner customization, these environments hold
great promise. But are these
              environments friendly to girls? Computer games, designed by young men for
boys
              and young men, epitomize technology's exclusion of girls, their interests, and
              values. Less obvious
but more devastating, this technological estrangement
              exacerbates girls' lack of interest and self confidence
not just in computers
              but in science. Technology itself and even the design of technology-enhanced
              science
experiences may disadvantage girls, turning them away from SMET
              instead of engaging them. Experts
urge more women and girls to become involved
              in software and hardware design, to begin to transform
computer culture. The
              ihInvolving Girls as Designerslg (IGD) project will look at what can happen
              when
girls design their own technology-enhanced science learning experiences.
              Do girls and boys approach the
design process differently? If so, what are the
              characteristics of a girl-friendly design process? Do all-girl
design teams
              create products that are more appealing to other girls than products designed
              by all boy
teams? Are gender differences more strongly polarized by the end of
              middle school, or are they equally
evident even in fifth grade?
METHODS: IGD
              will invite small teams of girls to experience and critically assess a series
              of high quality
science-learning experiences diverse in their technology and
              extent and form of interactivity, ranging from
planetarium show to role play
              simulated mission to Mars, from CD-ROM games to exploring space science
on the
              web, television to immersive virtual reality. These young, newly expert
              technologists will then
design their ideal science learning experience, with
              the goal of teaching science and inspiring kids to be
interested in SMET. IGD
              will profile girl reactions to the diverse forms of science learning. The
              design
process and design outcomes of the all-girl design teams will be
              analyzed and compared to all-boy teams.
IGD will compare fifth grade girls
              (whose enthusiasm for science parallels boys) with eighth grade girls
(whose
              enthusiasm and self confidence in science has declined), looking for
              similarities and differences in
technology attitudes, design process, and
              design outcomes. Professional software developers will create
visualizations
              of each team's prototype. With no indication of the gender of the designers,
              each set of
visualizations will be shown to same-age students to discover
              whether boys and girls prefer prototypes
developed by their own
              gender.
INTELLECTUAL MERIT: IGD will test the assertion that involving girls
              as designers can impact
design process and product and describe gender and age
              differences. IGD will contribute concrete
understanding of girls' attitudes
              toward diverse forms of technology-enhanced science learning.
BROADER IMPACTS:
              IGD could provide compelling evidence to software developers about the
              critical
importance of involving girls as designers and ways of enabling
              girl-friendly design processes. IGC could
provide guidance to teachers and
              curriculum designers about choosing among technology-enhanced science
learning
              experiences. The PIs teach graduate design research classes (in education and
              digital media
design). They will involve their students in the research and
              integrate findings into their courses. New
understanding about girl-friendly
              science education designs will be incorporated into the Mars Pioneer
Learning
              Adventures initiative and into the overall Comm Tech Lab software design
              process and College
of Education and Digital Media Arts curricula.
