Title       : Engendering Engineering: An Intellectual, Institutional, and Social History of
               Women's Engineering Education in the US
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0217330

Award Number: 0217330
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy S. Bix abix@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract

SES # 0217330
"Engendering Engineering: An Intellectual,
              Institutional, and Social
History of Women's Engineering Education in the
              U.S."
Amy Bix, Iowa State University


This project traces the history of
              technical training for women in the United States from the 1800s through 1980s,
              concentrating on forces which transformed engineering from a male-defined field
              to its current status as a permanently yet tensely co-educational discipline.
              Bix presents a series of case studies showing how colleges approached
              engineering coeducation, how administrators and faculty in different
              institutions at
different times dealt with both practical problems and social
              questions about attracting and integrating women. This work further examines
              the history of female engineering students themselves, looking at their
              attitudes and actions in light of changing opportunities and obstacles during
              the early twentieth-century, World War II, and the Cold War.  Finally, analysis
              of events during recent decades discusses the role of support groups such as
              the Society of Women Engineers and the ways in which women worked to gain
              control over their own future in the masculine world of engineering.  This
              research represents a multidisciplinary approach to science, technology and
              society, combining history of engineering and professionalization with issues
              in U.S. history, education, women's studies, and policy. To date, there is no
              comprehensive account of how women's engineering education developed. Bix's
              work builds toward such systematic analysis, addressing fundamental questions
              about technology and gender.

This book on the engineering education of women
              promises to attract widespread interest across scholarly disciplines. For
              historians of technology, this work should add new dimensions to current
              understanding of American engineering. It should also carry significant
              interest for students of American history, women's studies, sociology, and
              education.   Finally, this book should have a timely appeal to a broader
              audience, including female engineers and male and female engineering educators
              themselves, who have already expressed interest in better understanding how
              events of the past connect to ongoing debates about the place  of women in
              engineering and in engineering education today.

