Title       : Imaging Subsurface Hydraulic Properties From Spectral Electrical Tomographic
               Images: Artificial Neural Network Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0217318

Award Number: 0217318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred K. Boadu boadu@akoto.egr.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Geo-environmental, hydrogeological and geophysical studies of the earth's
              subsurface involving aquifer characterization, transport of contaminants and
              design of contaminant remediation strategies demand accurate and reliable
              prediction of the spatial variablity of hydraulic properties.  The primary goal
              of this research is to develop an integrated approach, which incorporates
              physico-chemically based model developments, laboratory measurements,
              interpretational and imaging tools using artificial neural networks, to predict
              hydraulic conductivity and porosity images of the earth's subsurface from
              frequency dependent resistivity images.  Models describing the frequency
              dependent resistivity of soils based on physico-chemical principles will be
              developed that will include hydraulic and petrophysical parameters as primary
              variables.  Laboratory experiments will be designed to measure frequency
              dependent resistivity as well as the petrophysical and hydraulic properties of
              over 100 sil samples fromdifferent geological environments aiming to obtain
              adequate variablity in soil textural andstructural properties.  These
              measurements will allow a comprehensive investigation of how spectral
              electrical responses of soils are influenced by their petrophysical and
              hydraulic properties.  The soil samples will be fully characterized by
              measuring their hydraulic conductivity, porosity, density, moisture content and
              particle size distribution in the laboratory.  The capabilities of artificial
              neural networks (ANN) to adapt, generalize and identify non-linearities in
              relations among variables, will be explored to determine the functional
              relationships between the spectral electrical response of soils and their
              hydraulic properties.  Fieldmeasurements of resistivity and phase at specified
              frequencies will be conducted at selected geologic sites with known information
              on the hydraulic properties.  An inversion procedure using a regularized
              Newton's method is proposed and will be utilized to obtain frequency - scanned
              tomographic images of electrical properties of the subsurface.  Subsurface
              images of hydraulic properties will be predicted from the field measured
              tomographic images of electrical propertiesusing transformations to be
              developed based on ANN functional relationships.  Uncertainties in the proposed
              prediction method due to noise and model parameter misrepresentations and
              inefficiencies in the training method will be assessed.  The outputs of the
              method from field measured hydraulic properties will be compared to that of
              existing ground truth information.  
