Title       : Verification of Complex Forms Using Coordinate Metrology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0217563

Award Number: 0217563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159575             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shivakumar Raman raman@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This research will examine sampling and zone estimation within an
              integrative framework for the form verification of cone, sphere and torus
              features.  The objective is to develop a comprehensive and integrative approach
              to the inspection of these complex forms using coordinate metrology. 
              Individual research problems within this integrative context include sample
              point location determination for complex forms using alternative strategies,
              probe path length optimization, and minimum zone estimation using alternate
              formulations and solution methodologies. The impact of sample size and strategy
              and the optimization method used will be assessed on the computed tolerance
              zone.  Experiments will be conducted on actual Coordinate Measuring Machines
              and the role of multiple factors and their interactions determined.  The
              applicability of appropriate models and methods for specific part inspection
              problems will be suggested through a decision support software system that will
              be developed using the research results.  A 'guidelines' repository will be
              attempted for effective dissemination of research findings.  Research will be
              deployed to education, through multiple channels, throughout the project.  
  
                Sufficient number of industrial parts such as nozzles, frustrum cylinders,
              dies, tapered holes, and balls, tapered rollers and roller races in bearings
              possess complex features that must be efficiently inspected for form. 
              Considering these applications of complex features, and their impact on
              interchangeability, it is logical that these features be studied more
              exclusively and extensively.  If successful, this project will lead to better
              standards and solutions for complex feature verification.  Further, the
              mathematical developments for these advanced forms will be useful to other
              inspection methodologies.  In addition, the integrative analysis will be useful
              to the development of formal guidelines for part-based inspection.
