Title       : Linking Teacher "Talk" and the Development of Children's Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0217206

Award Number: 0217206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396442             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Ornstein peter_ornstein@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              During the elementary school years, children become increasingly skilled in the
              use of a broad array of techniques for the storage and retrieval of
              information.  For example, kindergartners and fifth-graders differ markedly in
              the ways in which they rehearse and organize to-be-remembered material. 
              Unfortunately, however, even though much is known about the memory skills of
              children of different ages, relatively little information is available
              concerning the ways in which the skills of individual children change over
              time.  Moreover, even less is understood about the factors that influence the
              emergence, modification, and effectiveness of these abilities.  To a
              considerable extent, these gaps in understanding reflect the widespread use of
              cross-sectional research designs in which age differences in performance are
              examined by assessing different groups of children at each of the ages of
              interest.  Although these methodologies can yield precise descriptions of the
              skills of children at different ages, they do not permit statements about
              developmental change.  To do so requires a commitment to a longitudinal design
              in which a sample is established and then assessed repeatedly over time as the
              children mature and reach specified age points.  In this way, it is possible to
              identify contrasting developmental patterns and also to explore potential
              mediators of change.  This research will address these issues using a
              short-term longitudinal study of memory development in the first and second
              grades of the elementary school.  A sample of 120 first grade children, drawn
              from 12 first grade classrooms, will be followed for two years, with a wide
              range of memory assessments being made four times each year.  In addition, in
              order to understand the forces that propel developmental change, the research
              will examine key features of the children's classrooms thought to influence the
              acquisition and consolidation of mnemonic skills.  An extensive series of
              observations in the classrooms of the participants will emphasize in particular
              the nature of "teacher talk" about remembering, the memory demands that are
              expressed, the specific strategies that are modeled or discussed, and the
              expectations that are transmitted by teachers.  The focus on linkages between
              the classroom and individual memory development emerges from a number of lines
              of evidence that suggest the role of formal schooling in the development of a
              repertoire of effective techniques for remembering.  The multiple measures,
              both of the individual children and of the classrooms, will enable the research
              to describe in considerable depth children's changing skills as well as the
              context in which they develop.  Moreover, the research will relate the
              children's trajectories of memory performance over time to various
              characteristics of the "teacher talk" to which they are exposed in their
              classrooms.  The results of the research should have clear relevance to the
              educational enterprise in terms of helping to craft teaching strategies that
              will encourage the development of effective memory strategies in children and
              thus encourage them to reach their educational potential.
