Title       : Evaluation of Policy Impacts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0217032

Award Number: 0217032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85712              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher R. Taber ctaber@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The first project covered in this grant is a continuation of  work with on the
              estimation of general equilibrium models of the labor market (supported by
              NSF-SBR 9730657). It is well known but rarely addressed by applied
              microeconomists that one can not properly evaluate national policies in a
              "partial equilibrium environment." This is particularly true for policies that
              address skill acquisition. When using data to perform policy analysis, labor
              economists typically only concern themselves with the supply of skill and
              ignore demand. The problem is that as the number of individuals possessing a
              particular skill increases, the value the skill in the labor market falls. This
              effect discourages skill formation. Our previous research shows that accounting
              for general equilibrium effects when performing policy evaluations can alter
              the results by as much as a factor of ten. The major weakness of our work to
              date is the empirical approach. We have estimated the parameters of the
              individual worker using standard methods which implicitly assume that the labor
              market is not changing over time. This "steady state" assumption is clearly
              questionable as there has been a large literature demonstrating the changes in
              the wage structure. The biggest problem is that the model we estimated is not
              consistent with the general equilibrium model that we used when we simulated
              it. The main goal of this work is to estimate a dynamic general equilibrium
              model of the U.S. labor market over the last thirty years. This involves
              simultaneously estimating and simulating the model accounting for the changing
              U.S. labor market. This procedure guarantees similarity between the simulated
              model and the U.S. economy. We are using the estimated model to examine several
              different policies aimed to address the increasing inequality in the workforce.
              A major goal of these programs is to lower earnings inequality. This version of
              the model will provide a consistent estimate of the distribution of earnings in
              the economy and will allow us to do a much better job of estimating the effects
              of the policies on earnings inequality than our previous work. We are also
              extending the model to consider the effects of welfare policies and wage
              subsidies aimed a low wage workers as well as a number of other policies aimed
              at addressing earnings inequality.

The goal of the second project is to
              address one particular aspect that is likely to be very important in most
              implementations of  difference-in-differences  estimators. Identification of
              the key parameter often arises when a unit "changes" some particular policy.
              Researchers typically assume that the product of the number of observations and
              time period  is large when they perform inference in their models. However,
              even when the number of units or time periods is large, the number of actual
              policy changes observed in the data is typically small. In this case these
              standard methods that researchers use for inference in these models are not
              appropriate and may be wildly misleading. We are developing two different
              approaches which allow researchers to perform inference in these models. For
              the first approach we assume that there are a finite number of policy changes
              in the data, but use asymptotic approximations as the product of the number of
              observations and time period gets large. In the second, we avoid large sample
              approximations altogether by using exact tests.

