Title       : LTER: PALMER, ANTARCTICA LTER: Climate Change, Ecosystem Migration and
               Teleconnections in an Ice-Dominated Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0217282

Award Number: 0217282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 15,  2002   
Expires     : September 30,  2008  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4290000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh W. Ducklow duck@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7000

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1302,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Palmer, Antarctica, Long-Term Ecological Research Project (PAL) seeks to
              understand the structure and function of the Western Antarctic Peninsula's
              marine and terrestrial ecosystems in the context of seasonal-to-interannual
              atmospheric and sea ice dynamics, as well as long-term climate change. The PAL
              measurement system (or grid) is designed to study marine and terrestrial food
              webs consisting principally of diatom primary producers, the dominant herbivore
              Antarctic krill, and the apex predator Adelie penguin. An attenuated microbial
              food web is also a focus. PAL studies these ecosystems annually over a regional
              scale grid of oceanographic stations and seasonally at Palmer Station. Sea ice
              extent and variability affects ecosystem changes at all trophic levels. In
              recent years, sea ice extent has diminished in response to a general warming in
              the region. Long-term population trends of ice-dependent Adelie penguins in the
              region provide a clear example of impact of the climate warming trend in the in
              the region. Adelie populations at the five major colonies studied near Palmer
              Station have all shown a gradual decrease in numbers over thirty years. The
              Peninsula runs perpendicular to a strong climatic gradient between the cold,
              dry continental regime to the south, characteristic of the Antarctic interior,
              and the warm, moist, maritime regime to the north. North-south shifts in the
              gradient give rise to large environmental variability to climate change.
              Currently more maritime conditions appear to be replacing the original polar
              ecosystem in the northern part of the peninsula as the climatic gradient shifts
              southward. To date, this shift appears matched by an ecosystem shift along the
              peninsula, as evidenced by declines in Adelie populations that require longer
              snow-cover seasons for successful recruitment. The main hypothesis is that
              ecosystem migration is most clearly manifested by changes in upper level
              predators (penguins) and certain polar fishes in predator foraging
              environments. This is because these longer lived species integrate recent
              climate trends and because individual species are more sensitive indicators
              than aggregated functional groups. Analogous modifications are expected to be
              manifested at lower trophic levels in the marine parts of the system in the
              years ahead. However, these lower level changes are likely to be observed only
              through long-term observations consistent with the concept of expansion and
              contraction of ecosystem boundaries along the Peninsula. The PAL-LTER will
              continue to investigate ecosystem changes at lower trophic levels along the
              Peninsula, in response to the continued, dramatic climate warming and pole ward
              shifts in the climatic gradient.  In addition to the long-term research
              activities, graduate student training, the involvement of K-12 teachers and
              web-based education are an integral part of the PAL-LTER.
