Title       : DEM: Hear Our Voices: Girls and Technology at the Computer Clubhouse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0217138

Award Number: 0217138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $894733             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail J. Breslow gbreslow@mos.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Museum of Science
	      
	      Boston, MA  02114    /   -

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Hear Our Voices is a Demonstration initiative that links twenty Clubhouses from
              the 
Computer Clubhouse Network in creating new opportunities specifically for
              girls and
young women, to develop fluency with computer technology, and to
              learn valuable career
and life skills as well. Hear Our Voices will serve as a
              model for the future in other 
Computer Clubhouses in the Network, as well as
              like-minded informal educational
programs for girls and young women at other
              institutions.

Founded at the Computer Museum in Boston in 1993, the Computer
              Clubhouse has grown
into a Network of 48 Clubhouses in 13 states and the
              District of Columbia, plus 11
Clubhouses overseas, touching the lives of
              thousands of young people. The Computer 
Clubhouses provide a successful,
              innovative, andempowering after-school learning
environment for young people
              (ages 8-18) from underserved communities. A safe and
welcoming milieu, skilled
              and caring mentors, and high-end hardware and professional
software tools help
              Clubhouse youth become confident learners through a variety of
              creative
computer applications.

The flagship Computer Clubhouse moved to
              the Museum of Science in 1999, when the
Computer Museum joined forces with the
              Museum of Science. Since then, the Network 
of Clubhouses has grown rapidly;
              with the support of Intel Corporation and other
sponsors, more Clubhouses are
              now being planned and implemented. Based on community
interest and the success
              of the Clubhouse learning model in transforming young people's
lives, current
              plans call for growth to more than 100 Clubhouses by 2004. Located
primarily
              in youth-serving organizations such as Boys & Girls Clubs and Urban
              Leagues,
Computer Clubhouses serve inner-city neighborhoods as well as smaller
              communities 
with a high proportion of under-served populations. The Computer
              Clubhouse community
is diverse, made up of African-Americans, Latinos,
              Asian-Americans, Native
Americans, recent immigrants, and Whites.

In an
              effort to recruit and retain more girls and young women in a field that has a
              
dearth of participation by women -computer technology - the flagship Computer
              Clubhouse
in Boston since 1995 has pioneered several programs especially for
              girls, providing them
with access to rich technology resources, female mentors
              and role models, a 
community of peers, and a positive, creative, and
              supportive learning environment. 
The new Hear Our Voices program will
              significantly expand the flagship Clubhouse's
programming for girls and young
              women, to 20 new venues and with new, locally-designed
programming.
              Specifically, it will enrich opportunities for girls in four ways:

*Twenty
              of the Computer Clubhouses within the United States will receive funding and
              
support to hire and train staff dedicated to gender equity and girls
              programming, and to
launch locally-based Hear Our Voices programs at their
              Clubhouses, including at least 
one component of girls-only hours or days at
              each participating Clubhouse.
*Leveraging the experience gained at the
              flagship Computer Clubhouse, Network staff
from the Museum of Science will
              provide professional development and program assistance
for girls'programming
              to Clubhouse Coordinators across the Network.
*Building on the momentum and
              resources of the growing Clubhouse Network, a digital 
network called the
              Clubhouse Village will support both a real and a virtual community
              of
Clubhouse youth.  An area on the Village will be designated especially for
              girls'
activities, and the Village will also support interaction among staff
              and mentors for
mutual support and for sharing best practices. The Clubhouse
              Village will consist of a
secure, private Intranet, using Internet technology
              and tools to enable Clubhouse youth 
to communicate with each other and
              collaborate on creative projects.
*The virtual community will be made more
              viable by a face-to-face gathering of 
participating youth and staff at a
              Computer Clubhouse Youth Summit in the summer of
2004.
