Title       : The Origins and Determinants of Technological Change in Late Nineteenth Century
               Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0217001

Award Number: 0217001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward N. Beatty ebeatty@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 0217001 -- The Origins and Determinants of Technological Change in Late
              Nineteenth Century Mexico
Edward Beatty, University of Notre Dame

Where
              domestic invention and subsequent innovation largely underlay early
              industrialization in Britain and the United States, later industrializing
              nations relied heavily on the importation of technologies from abroad. Yet new
              machines and processes rarely transferred across national borders without
              substantial friction and adaptation in new environments. Moreover, transfer did
              not always or automatically lead to the diffusion of productivity gains and, in
              many places, had little impact on domestic technological capabilities. This
              historical project uses late nineteenth century Mexico to explore current
              conceptions in the economic and social construction literature about technology
              transfer and its impact on domestic capabilities. 

First, the project
              reconstructs Mexico's late-century experience of technological change.
              Historians of Mexico have long known that new productive technologies lay at
              the center of accelerating economic and social change in these decades. But
              they have conventionally viewed this experience as one dominated by foreign
              technologies, initiated by foreign entrepreneurs, and limited to a relative
              handful of industries and regions. Railroads, electricity, and metallurgy
              provide the classic cases in a limited and anecdotal literature. Most assert
              that there was little diffusion of know-how, arguing implicitly or explicitly
              that imported foreign techniques had little or no impact on domestic
              capabilities. Yet no systematic work on these issues has been done. Using 
              quantitative evidence and several case studies, this project traces and
              explains central patterns of technological change.

Second, the project
              explores those factors which shaped the relationship between technology
              transfer and domestic technological capabilities.   This requires moving beyond
              attention to the physical importation of machines and processes. Disparities
              between imported technology and the local environment (including the economic,
              political, and socio-cultural context) condition whether technology transfer
              leads to dependence or to an increased capacity to invent, improve, and
              innovate. In late nineteenth century Mexico, these disparities were
              substantial, and the question remains, to what degree did they retard diffusion
              and domestic capacity or, in contrast, were surmountable? Recent work suggests
              that in some cases (but not all) socio-cultural differences were malleable and
              technology transfer could effectively stimulate an initially laggard domestic
              capacity.

Based upon the archival research supported by this award, the
              project makes contributions to the study of Mexican economic history as well as
              to historical studies of technology.  The PI adopts insights from both economic
              and social approaches to technological change and ultimately seeks to integrate
              these in publications and teaching.  Collaborative work with scholars in Mexico
              and Spain broadens the reach of this work. In addition to detailed case
              studies, one by-product includes a computer database of 11,000 Mexican patents
              registered between 1850-1910. The database is to be made available to
              researchers in Mexico and elsewhere.  Other projected outcomes of the project 
              include a series of articles and a university press monograph.

