Title       : NanoXerography: The Use of Electrostatic Forces to Pattern Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0217538

Award Number: 0217538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heiko O. Jacobs hjacobs@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen A. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this program is to develop a method to print nanoparticles on a
              substrate with 100 nm resolution. The proposed method uses electrostatic forces
              to drive the assembly. This program includes three components: 1) the use of
              patterned surface charges to trap and position nanoparticles; 2) the use of
              externally biased electrodes to generate electric fields to trap and position
              nanoparticles; and 3) the study of the interrelation of electrostatic field
              strength at a substrate surface, thermal energy of the particles, and particle
              localizability. The mid-term goal of this research is to enable parallel
              fabrication of nanotechnological devices that use nanoparticles as building
              blocks. Device examples that can be realized using nanoparticles as device
              components are single and few electron transistors, quantum-effect-based
              lasers, photonic bandgap materials, filters, and wave-guides. As a first
              application the assembly of silicon nanoparticles to fabricate nanoparticle
              based transistors is proposed. It is difficult to overstate the broader impact
              of this research, if it proves successful.  For example, materials could be
              created as nanoparticles in the vapor or in solution, where they could be
              processed using well established methods. The ability to localize particles and
              small components of arbitrary materials on arbitrary substrates would allow the
              merging of technologies based on otherwise incompatible materials. Examples of
              applications include quantum electronic devices (addressed in this proposal),
              data storage, integrated circuits on plastics or fabrics for wearable
              intelligence, and merged optical/electronic structures for optical off-chip and
              cross-chip communication. 

The educational objectives of this proposal focus
              on creating awareness and transmitting excitement about the PI's research as
              well as exploratory, interdisciplinary research in general. It emphasizes on
              the importance of providing continuous opportunities for student involvement
              throughout their academic careers: 1) high school students and teachers will
              get a first hand impression of research through lab tours and lab experiments;
              2) undergraduate students will be addressed through seminars where the PI
              presents different aspects of the proposed research and by providing the
              opportunity of direct research involvement through research assistantships, and
              honors thesis projects; 3) graduate students from different disciplines will
              benefit through participation in an interdisciplinary lecture in the area of
              Micro- and Nanotechnology that the PI proposes to develop within this program.
              Societal Implications: "Advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology promise to
              have major implications for health, wealth, and peace in the upcoming decades.
              Knowledge in this field is growing worldwide, leading to fundamental scientific
              advances. In turn, this will lead to dramatic changes in the ways that
              materials, devices, and systems are understood and create." - after Mihail C.
              Roco. The proposed research is one element to advance knowledge. It suggests a
              dramatic change in the way that devices and systems are created.
 

