Title       : US-United Arab Emirates Cooperative Research: Space-Time Coding with Antenna
               Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0217549

Award Number: 0217549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tolga M. Duman duman@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 5988,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0217549
Duman

Description: 
This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Professor F. Tolga Duman, Department of Electrical Engineering,
              Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona and Dr. Ali Ghrayeb, Department of
              Electrical Engineering at the American University of Sharjah (AUS) in Sharjah,
              United Arab Emirates.  Their research deals with providing voice and data
              services over the wireless channel. They have shown that for a multiple
              transmit multiple receiver antenna system over a quasi-static fading channel,
              with antenna selection, regardless of the underlying space-time code, the
              diversity order remains the same as that of the full complexity system.  In
              this project they plan to: extend their earlier results to the case of antenna
              selection principles for space-time codes over various realistic fading channel
              models (e.g., block fading, frequency selective fading), conduct performance
              analysis and develop optimal code design principles for space-time codes when
              antenna selection is employed, consider the use and design of turbo coded
              modulation schemes and low-density parity check codes for multiple antennas and
              address the antenna selection issues in that context, and study space-time
              coded orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) systems (to convert the
              frequency selective fading channel into a frequency flat one) when antenna
              selection is employed.  The two scientists have studied the problem from a
              channel coding perspective and produced some initial promising results. 
              

Scope:  
Transmitting voice and data services over the wireless channel is
              prone to several impairments such as fading and interference.  "Diversity" is a
              most effective way of combating the adverse effects of fading.  The research
              seeks to simplify the receiver complexity by employing antenna selection at the
              receiver that results in a great reduction in complexity, as only one receiver
              circuit is needed.  Dr. Duman is presently carrying out research at his
              institute on coding for wireless communications and on smart antennas for
              wireless communications.  This project will help his current research through
              the interaction with Dr. Ghrayeb (a Jordanian faculty member at AUS).  Ghrayeb
              will visit Arizona State University during summers and Duman will visit the
              American University in Sharjah during winter break to continue the project. 
              The proposed work will also have an educational impact both at ASU and the
              American University of Sharjah, and will result in a continued collaboration
              between the communications groups of the two institutions.  The research
              results will be incorporated in educational material at both institutes.

