Title       : A Protein Interaction Database For Rice Protein Kinases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0217312

Award Number: 0217312
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6047772            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Fromm mfromm@unlnotes.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wen Y. Song  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jian-Kang Zhu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela C. Ronald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Gribskov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The cereals, including rice, maize, wheat, barley, sorghum, and the millets, are
              the most important group of plants in agriculture, and environmental stress is
              the major limitation to their productivity.  Increasing their tolerance to
              abiotic and biotic stress is an important goal in agriculture and considerable
              progress has been made in discovering the mechanisms of cell signaling that
              regulate the response to these stresses in plants.  This project will
              dramatically enhance this progress by generating a protein-protein interaction
              database for 275 rice protein kinases, that represent each of the protein
              kinase subfamilies present in the recently sequenced rice genome.  The protein
              interaction data will be obtained using both the yeast two hybrid method and a
              method utilizing mass spectrometry analysis of affinity-tagged protein
              complexes that will be purified from transgenic plants.  Additionally, 100
              representative orotein kinases will be mutated by either insertional mutations
              or RNAi silencing, and their mutant phenotypes analyzed.  This combined
              information will available at the PlantsP website and will advance the
              understanding of cell signaling pathways.  The knowledge of the mechanisms that
              plant cells use to regulate their tolerance to environmental stress will be
              critical for improving the agricultural productivity of the cereals.   
