Title       : Cellular CO2 Transduction In Avian Intrapulmonary Chemoreceptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0217815

Award Number: 0217815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315477             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Hempleman Steven.Hempleman@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Pierotti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1185,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Carbon dioxide is a major waste product of cellular metabolism and an important
              determinant of body fluid pH in all air-breathing vertebrates.  Body CO2 levels
              are detected by CO2 sensitive neurons (respiratory chemoreceptors) that provide
              critical feedback control of CO2 elimination by the lungs.  Failure of CO2
              regulation causes metabolic impairment or death, and is, unfortunately, a
              common complication of severe cardiopulmonary disease or neurological injury. 
              Because the problem of CO2 sensing and regulation is fundamental for active
              air-breathing vertebrates, animals have evolved a variety of CO2-sensing
              neurons (respiratory chemoreceptors) in diverse locations including the
              brainstem, systemic arterial system, and lung airways.  We are studying
              CO2-sensitive intrapulmonary chemoreceptors (IPC) in avian lungs to understand
              the fundamental steps of cellular CO2 transduction (i.e. mechanisms that alter
              IPC action potential discharge rate when CO2 levels change, thereby encoding
              neural information about lung CO2). Avian IPC are a powerful cellular model of
              respiratory chemoreception because they are extremely CO2 sensitive, their
              axons are easily accessible for measuring action potentials, the CO2 around
              their sensory endings can be precisely controlled in the laboratory, and they
              have a unique inverse response to CO2 (i.e. low PCO2 excites IPC, high PCO2
              inhibits).  Here we test the following novel hypotheses about IPC CO2
              transduction: that IPC sense CO2 through changes in intracellular pH; and that
              at a given CO2 level the intracellular pH of IPC is uniquely determined by a
              dynamic kinetic balance between the rate of intracellular CO2 hydration
              catalyzed by carbonic anhydrase, the rate of intracellular H+ buffering, and
              the rates of transmembrane H+ and HCO3- extrusion by pumping mechanisms and
              antiports.  We also hypothesize that IPC membrane excitability and action
              potential generation are coupled to changes in intracellular pH.   Specific
              aims for this study include: (1) development of a mathematical model of CO2
              chemotransduction to test the kinetic transduction hypothesis, (2)
              histochemical identification of IPC sensory endings in the lung and cell bodies
              in the nodose ganglia, (3) use of molecular antagonists, agonists and
              neurotoxins targeting specific ion channels, antiports and neurotransmitters to
              determine their role in CO2 transduction, and (4) altering intracellular pH
              buffering to test its role in CO2 transduction.  Northern Arizona University
              emphasizes laboratory-based undergraduate biology education.  Accordingly, this
              project is an efficient vehicle for introducing students to neurobiological
              research (so far ten students have been significantly involved, half of whom
              have been minority students--including two Navajo Native Americans).  This
              remains a priority for the continuing grant cycle. 
