Title       : LTREB: The Evolution of Alternative Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2002    
File        : a0217463

Award Number: 0217463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaina M. Tuttle LStuttle@scifac.indstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana State University
	      200 North Seventh Street
	      Terre Haute, IN  478091202    812/237-3551

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this proposal is to help determine why individual variation (e.g.
              alternative strategies) is maintained in natural populations.  In order to be
              maintained over the long-term, alternative strategies must have the same
              long-term success.  If one strategy is better than the other, it will become
              fixed in the population and the poorer strategy will be lost over time.  Both
              temporal and spatial factors can contribute to the success or failure of a
              particular strategy.  Dr. Tuttle proposes to examine the maintenance of
              alternative strategies in the North American songbird, the white-throated
              sparrow (Zonotrichia albicollis).  This species is unique because males and
              females can have either tan or white crown stripes.  White birds behave
              differently than tan birds; they are more aggressive, sing more often, and are
              more promiscuous than tan birds.  Tan birds are less aggressive, guard their
              females more, and spend more time caring for their young than white birds.  Tan
              birds almost always mate with white birds and this unusual mating system
              ensures that both types always occur in the population.  

Dr. Tuttle
              proposes to test two hypotheses.  One, that these two alternative strategies
              (white and tan) may be affected by different environmental and social
              "demands", and two, that each strategy does best under a different set of
              environmental conditions that might occur in space and time.  For example
              during a year of limited resources and high predation, the more parental tan
              strategy may be more successful.  However, during good years, the promiscuous
              white males may be more successful.  Although these two strategies may have
              different success rates in the short term, long-term cycles may cause each
              strategy to have equal success over time thereby maintaining stability in the
              system.  Long-term trends in previously collected data (13 years) and data to
              be collected over the next 5 years will allow testing for the effects of
              differential selection and environmental cycling.  While pursuing the goals of
              this proposal, Dr. Tuttle will incorporate new technologies such as relational
              databases, GIS, and GPS.  In addition, Dr. Tuttle proposes to develop web-based
              instructional materials based on the long-term data that will be
              obtained.
	

Since empirical evidence is often lacking, factors maintaining
              variation in natural populations have long been debated.  The white-throated
              sparrow system may prove to be a classic vertebrate example of how individual
              variation is maintained in nature.  Study of this species will provide insight
              into similar mechanisms affecting diversity in other species, as well as how
              evolution proceeds in general.

