Title       : Aerodynamic Mechanisms of Animal Flight
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0217229

Award Number: 0217229
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Dickinson flymanmd@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1155,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Whether winding through alpine meadows, migrating across continents, or circling
              garbage cans, insects display impressive aerodynamic agility. Although the
              science of aeronautics is sophisticated enough to design airliners, space
              shuttles, and stealth fighters, scientists are only just beginning to
              understand the aerodynamic mechanisms that enable tiny insects to fly and
              maneuver. This research program builds upon recent discoveries using a variety
              of experimental and theoretical techniques to construct a comprehensive theory
              of animal flight. The techniques used in this investigation include
              three-dimensional high speed videography, with which it is possible to capture
              the complex wing motions of tiny insects such as fruit flies as they actively
              steer and maneuver. The research also employs a giant robotic model of flapping
              insect wings, immersed in a 3 ton tank of mineral oil. By 'replaying' the wing
              and body motion of real insects on the large robot, the researchers can
              directly measure the flows and forces created by flapping wings. Through such
              experiments it will be possible to determine not simply how insects manage to
              stay in the air, but how they carefully manipulate aerodynamic forces to
              actively steer and maneuver. Whereas much previous work on insect flight has
              focused on a small number of species, this research will investigate how the
              aerodynamic mechanisms used by insects vary with body size, wing shape, and
              flight speed. Because the physics of air flow can change with scale, this broad
              comparative analysis is necessary to construct a comprehensive theory of insect
              flight.
Insects are among the most diverse groups of organisms on the planet,
              and their flight behavior plays a central role in their extraordinary success.
              Thus, by forging a clearer picture of how they fly, this research will greatly
              extend our understanding of this ecologically and agriculturally important
              group of animals. In addition, just as with complex weather systems, predicting
              the complex patterns of forces and flows created by flapping wings represents a
              challenging benchmark for computer simulations in the important and challenging
              field of Fluid Mechanics - the branch of Physics that determines such diverse
              phenomena as aerodynamics, heat flow, weather, and global warming. By providing
              experimental verification of the solutions to complicated flow problems, this
              research will help mathematicians around the world improve the accuracy of
              their computer models. Further, knowledge gathered in this study on the
              aerodynamics of flapping wings will provide new and creative design concepts
              for the aeronautics industry. Lessons from insect aerodynamics and sensory
              physiology are already being used in the design of small autonomous air
              vehicles, whose potential applications include search and rescue operations and
              planetary exploration. By moving towards a more comprehensive theory of
              flapping flight aerodynamics, this research will present engineers with a
              useful body of theory for the development of novel aircraft.

