Title       : Dissertation Research: Designing From Below: Embedding Knowledge and Values in
               Educational Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0217996

Award Number: 0217996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7990               (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Hess hessd@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this dissertation research project is to explore the design and use
              of educational computer technologies (EdSims), with the goal of generating
              findings that may both influence both the academic literatures of design,
              science and technology studies (STS), and education and also the practice of
              education. Study of the development of EdSims as a new educational tool should
              improve understanding of the design and use of educational technologies and
              technologies in general. Hopefully, EdSim designers and educators will be able
              to apply the findings of this study to improve educational pedagogy. This
              research project has three main objectives. The first objective is to
              understand and evaluate the design and use of EdSims in a broad context.
              Secondly, the study aims to train ethically aware and socially conscious
              designers who will work to level playing fields among individuals with
              different identities and social locations through conscious and conscientious
              decisions in the design process. Third, the project seeks to indirectly improve
              the design and use of EdSims by reaching out to and working with EdSim
              designers and educators. The central research questions in this study match
              closely with the study's objectives, as well as the background research and
              research design. First, how do EdSims compare to more traditional teaching
              methods? Next, how are social and cultural assumptions embedded in EdSims?
              Finally, how can EdSim design be improved? The literature review of this study
              focuses on three specific case studies of EdSim design and use and relates them
              to the project's objectives and research questions. The first case study on
              flight simulators demonstrates the importance of EdSims and how they are
              different from more traditional teaching methods. Second, animal dissection
              simulators are used to demonstrate the ethical implications of EdSim design and
              use. For third example, gross anatomy EdSims, specific design recommendations
              are made, in an effort to improve the design and use of EdSims. Data collection
              for this study will make use of a variety of qualitative and quantitative
              methodologies and will take place at a variety of sites, both geographical and
              virtual. Semi-structured interviews and participant observation will take place
              at EdSim conferences, EdSim design laboratories, and classrooms using EdSims.
              The Internet will be a site for collecting interview and survey data and
              contributing to the community of EdSim designers and users. Other forms of data
              collection will include analysis of EdSim advertising and a comparative usage
              study of EdSims. A total of 80 semi-structured interviews and 200 web-based
              surveys will be conducted. The intellectual merit of the proposed research
              project is based on its ontribution to the design, STS, and education
              literatures. The study seeks to contribute to the design literature by
              providing empirical data on how EdSims are designs, including the extent to
              which their design is participatory, culturally situated, and appropriate. In
              the field of STS, the research project contributes to understandings of the
              convergence of simulation and reality, whereby educational and training
              environments are becoming increasingly realistic, while activities such as
              aircraft flight and surgery are becoming more technologically mediated,
              automated, and simulated. Finally, the project will contribute to the field of
              education by exploring how EdSims can be used in combination with the
              pedagogies of situated learning and teaching for understanding. The broader
              impacts of this study all center around improving the practice of education.
              First, the study aims to determine how EdSims can be used in particular
              educational settings to meet specific educational goals. Secondly, the study
              will develop recommendations about how to use EdSims to make education more
              equitable, just, and participatory. The third impact should be to study how
              EdSims can be used to make education more economically efficient and
              environmentally sustainable.
