Title       : Stabilized Lasers as Sensors and Frequency Standards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0217882

Award Number: 0217882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Claude Diels jcdiels@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mode-locked lasers can produce a comb of regularly spaced modes in frequency. We
              propose to investigate new approaches to stabilize frequency combs provided by
              mode-locked ring and linear solid state lasers, as well as locking the comb to
              an atomic standard.  The stability is achieved by locking the frequency and
              repetition rates to a reference cavity.  We have recently demonstrated that
              femtosecond laser stabilization to reference cavities provides an exceptionally
              fast feedback control to ensure stable operation on short time scales. 
              Accuracy will be achieved by locking the reference cavity to atomic resonances
              provided by lambda (L) structures.  A first part of the work will be an
              extension of our previous work involving Ti:sapphire mode-locked lasers,
              improving the present performances, and developing the methods and tools for
              long term stabilization and accuracy.

In parallel, we will start the
              development of a compact system based on optical parametric oscillators, which
              has the advantages of orthogonal controls of wavelength and repetition rate, as
              well as offering access to a broad range of visible and infrared
              wavelengths.

We will evaluate applications for these stabilized mode-locked
              lasers.  In particular, the stabilized ring optical parametric oscillator will
              enable the measurement of phase shifts with a much better sensitivity than the
              value of 10-9 that we obtained with unstabilized ring lasers.  A specific
              application is as a laser gyroscope that could be used for geodesic
              applications. Having at the end of the program simultaneously stabilized at
              least two independent mode-locked lasers, we will be able to study the
              synchronization of these lasers through injection lock-in.  This will answer a
              question for ultrafast telecommunication:  how much (or how little) optical
              power is required to phase lock two independent sources, once their modes
              coincide to a few Hz?


