Title       : Incorporating Real-World Experience in Diverse Science Curricula through
               Community Building Partnerships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0217942

Award Number: 0217942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43640              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Binney Girdler girdler@kzoo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kalamazoo College
	      1200 Academy Street
	      Kalamazoo, MI  490063291    616/383-8400

NSF Program : 7174      POSTDOC FELLOW IN SCI, MATH EN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7174,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Incorporating real-world experience in diverse science curricula through
              community building partnerships.

The current proposal is a request for
              start-up funds to complement and extend my PFSMETE (1999) post-doctoral
              fellowship at Middlebury College (Middlebury, VT): "Teaching science through
              real-world experience: an introductory course in applied conservation biology."
              That project tested a model of introductory level science teaching in which
              students are motivated to learn how to do science by giving them the
              opportunity to work on real-world projects in their laboratories instead of
              cookbook labs with pre- determined results. Partnerships with natural resource
              agencies supplied research opportunities for students in the course, and these
              partnerships contributed to both student learning (by enhancing motivation and
              reward), and to the partner agencies (by providing useful data, ideas and
              public exposure). The logical next step for this model of teaching is to expand
              it. In my new capacity as Assistant Professor of Biology and Co-Director of the
              Environmental Studies Program at Kalamazoo College, I hope to do just that. I
              will build upon the curriculum I developed under the previous project in order
              to incorporate real-world experiences in large enrollment introductory and
              non-majors courses, as well as upper level courses with students who are more
              skilled but would still benefit from the real-world motivating factors. Since
              enrollment in many undergraduate courses ranges from fifty to several hundred,
              it will be useful to learn which aspects of the partnership pedagogical model
              will be transferable to larger courses. I have included letters of support from
              two potential agency partners, Convening for Action (CF A), a local project
              with ties to Kalamazoo College that seeks to coordinate county-wide land use
              planning through a geographic information system (GIS) and intenet- based
              database, and the Southwest Michigan Land Conservancy, which oversees many of
              our region's important natural areas. Most of the data my students will be
              collecting will  have a spatial component. That is, the data must be analyzed
              in the context of their location, or in the very least displayed spatially. A
              GIS is therefore essential to satisfy the goals of many of the partnerships I
              envision. By working under the CF A umbrella, and by using GIS I will ensure
              that the students' efforts are concentrated in those areas where data are
              
,needed most. 

At Kalamazoo College, I will eventually be responsible for
              five biology courses: a non-majors Environmental Science course with an
              enrollment cap of 30, an introductory biology course with a cap of 48, and
              iliree senior level courses, each with expected enrollment of 12 to 15. The
              proposed research will test the feasibility of scaling up the partnership model
              for use in these larger format courses. Using student assistants during two
              summers, I will lay the groundwork for incorporating experiential learning
              based on real-world partnerships into these courses, and other funds will
              support the GIS technology and added expenses of enabling students to conduct
              research in the classroom. The short-term success for this project will be
              measured by students' performance and attitude, and the utility of the
              partnerships for the agencies. To ascertain if real-world experience
              facilitates student learning, I will administer a questionnaire before and
              after each course to gauge students' attitudes toward science, and their
              comprehension of the underlying basics of how we do science. The longer term
              success of this project will be measured by whether or not partnerships mature
              into mutually beneficial collaborations that have continuity across the
              academic calendar. Meeting these short-term and long-term goals will provide
              the track record to seek additional funding from regional resources to ensure
              continuity of the partnerships after the proposed project is completed in
              August 2003. 

