Title       : North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation - Phase III
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0217571

Award Number: 0217571
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2997857            (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn W. Meyers cmeyers@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Monroe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation - Phase
              III

The North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
              (NC-LSAMP) requests
support for continuingits efforts during Phase III. The
              LS-NCAMP Alliance includes eight
partner institutions - North Carolina A&T
              State University (lead institution), Fayetteville
State University, North
              Carolina Central University, North Carolina State University,
University of
              North Carolina - Chapel Hill, University of North Carolina Charlotte,
              
University of North Carolina - Pembroke, and Winston Salem State University.
              The
Provost and Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs at North Carolina A&T
              State University
will lead the project with assistance from key administrators
              at all Alliance institutions. 
This will ensure the effective
              institutionalization of the strategies proposed here. The 
work proposed caps
              a decade long series of activities aimed primarily at increasing
              
undergraduate degree production in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and
              Technology 
(SMET). 

Underrepresented minorities comprise 30 percent of the
              college-age population 
but they represent only 11 percent of the
              baccalaureate engineering graduates resulting 
in a "parity gap" of 19
              percent. The parity gap is even more pronounced at the master's
and doctoral
              level. Clearly, more needs to be done to reduce this parity gap, more out
              of
economic necessity and to meet global competitive pressures than any other
              reason. 
The efforts outlined in this proposal are aimed at meeting this
              challenge. 

The activities proposed in this proposal are driven by the need
              to increase substantially 
the number of underrepresented minorities who will
              contribute significantly in science,
mathematics, engineering and technology
              areas. While the baccalaureate degree programs 
will receive continued
              attention, special emphasis will be placed on amplifying the flow 
of minority
              students in the graduate and research pipeline. The primary goals of
              the
proposal are (i) to increase the pool of competent underrepresented SMET
              graduates 
with bachelor's degrees (specific objectives include increasing the
              number of SMET 
graduates from bachelor's degree programs by 10% from
              allAlliance partner schools by
2007 and increasing the quality of SMET
              bachelors degree graduates from all alliance
partner schools based on their
              performance in college courses and national examinations
by 50% by 2007) and
              (ii) to increase the number of students who matriculate into SMET 
graduate
              schools (specific objectives include increasing the number of SMET
              students
who express an interest in graduate studies by 100% by 2007,
              increasing by 100%, the
number of SMET graduates who are academically
              qualified for admission to graduate 
programs by 2007, increasing the number
              of SMET graduates from alliance partner
institutions who are enrolled in
              graduate SMET programs by 100% by 2007, and increasing 
the retention rate by
              10% of underrepresented students in graduate SMET programs). 
An additional
              goal of the project is to identify significant factors that promote
              
baccalaureatedegree attainment, retention in academic programs and entry into
              graduate 
school in SMET areas (specific objectives are to identify
              significant factors that promote 
and hinder retention of minority students
              enrolled in SMETbaccalaureate degree programs, 
and to identify significant
              factors that promote and hinder entry of minority
undergraduate students into
              graduate SMET degree programs).

Strategies for accomplishing project goals
              are based on published techniques that have 
proven successful in smaller
              samples. Specifically, the approaches to be employed include
focused
              recruitment from school; bridge programs to manage the school-college
              transition;
supplemental instruction, cohort scheduling and workshops for
              undergraduate students 
during the first year to enhance retention and
              preparation for upper-class coursework; 
undergraduate research and
              professional development workshops aimed at motivating and
preparing students
              for graduate study; and the development of networking and mentoring 
systems
              to improve retention in the first year in graduate school. A key emphasis
              during
Phase III will be Alliance-wide institutionalization of proven
              strategies that have been
known to improve the success rates of students in
              SMET.

The Alliance partners together awarded over a thousand degrees and
              currently enroll over 
six thousand undergraduate minority students in SMET
              programs. In addition to students 
in the Alliance, dissemination activities
              under this proposal have the potential to impact
 several thousand students
              each year.

