Title       : A Study on Minimization of Torque Ripple of Disk Brushless Permanent Magnet
               Motors Applied as Gearless Drive for Light Electric Vehicles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0217308

Award Number: 0217308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leszek S. Czarnecki czarneck@ece.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest Mendrela  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim of the project is to study how to minimize the torque ripple of disc
              brushless DC permanent magnet motors, keeping, at the same time, a high level
              specific torque (torque to motor mass ratio). Some preliminary results indicate
              that it can be achieved by modifying the shape of permanent magnets and the
              structure of the stator core, and by modifying the current waveform. The
              research on this subject will concentrate on analysis of magnetic field in 3-D
              space for two versions of disc motors: torus-type and disc motor with axial
              magnetic flux in a stator core, and on evaluation of motor performance using
              dynamic model of electronic converter - permanent magnet motor set in order to
              select the optimum solution. To verify the computer simulation a laboratory
              motor model, together with the appropriate converter will be built and
              tested.

The results and experience obtained from the project will allow the
              design and manufacture of smoothly running motors that are required not only
              for light, low speed electric vehicles (in particular - wheelchairs), but also
              in a vast area of drives, where high torque ripple cannot be tolerated. The
              high efficiency motors with high specific torque, which will result from the
              project will contribute to the extension of the driving distance of electric
              vehicle and to save energy, if the motor is applied as a variable speed drive
              in industry, as well as to low the cost of the final product. 
This project
              will provide the subject for one M.Sc. and one for Ph.D. theses. The results of
              this project will be disseminated through reviewed publications. 

