Title       : Population Science and the Making of China's One-Child-Per-Couple Policy,
               1975-2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0217508

Award Number: 0217508
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Greenhalgh smgreenh@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Abstract
SES 0217508
Population Science and the Making of China's
              One-Child-Per-Couple Policy, 1975-2000
Susan Greenhalgh, University of
              California-Irvine


The development of modern science and technology has
              played a crucial part in China's post-Mao economic and global ascent. 
              Important political dimensions of Chinese science have been studied, but key
              issues in science studies--in particular, how scientific knowledge is created,
              and how science shapes public policy and society--remain largely unexplored in
              the Chinese context.   China's controversial one-child-per-couple policy,
              introduced in 1979-80, provides a striking case of the impact of science on
              policy and society. In the U.S., both scholarly and popular thinking associates
              the policy with China's (repressive) politics, not its (weak) science. Yet
              interviews with Chinese insiders suggest that, behind the scenes, Chinese
              population scientists, borrowing heavily from western science (especially the
              limits- to- growth models of the 1970s), played a critical role in the making
              (and later unmaking) of the one-child policy. Today that role remains shrouded
              in mystery. This project seeks to open the black box, "Chinese population
              science" to see how its central notions of "population crisis" and the
              one-child policy as "the only solution" were constructed, how they evolved over
              25 years, and how they produced their extraordinary political and social
              effects.  

Taking seriously the "science" in the social sciences, the
              project draws on science studies, histories of numbers, and governmentality
              studies to develop a science studies approach to population science (or
              demography) and its role in population governance. The approach seeks to
              problematize the term "population" by showing how "population" is actively
              constituted as a domain of science and governance, and how "population
              problems" such as "crises" and their "optimal policy solutions" are humanly
              constructed by historically situated actors operating in highly consequential
              political and cultural contexts. This project is the first to theorize the
              science of population and its connections to population governance in a
              non-Western context. The China work should underscore the unappreciated power
              of population science and make clear the stakes involved in how we view the
              human sciences.

The project involves interviewing influential Chinese
              scientists and policymakers (as well as selected foreign scholars and
              practitioners); visiting policy pilot projects; and conducting archival
              research on the history of population science- and policy-making.   During ten
              years as anthropologist and policy analyst at the Population Council , a
              nonprofit research organization, the PI built up a large personal network in
              Chinese demographic and policymaking circles, acquired an extensive specialist
              vocabulary, and gained a reputation as a "friend of China." This familiarity
              with China's population field helps ease problems of access to interviewees and
              material.   


