Title       : 4 Schools for WIE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2002  
File        : a0217110

Award Number: 0217110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula G. Leventman leventma@coe.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              4 Schools for WIE is a consortium of four engineering colleges in Massachusetts
              (MA) united in
commitment to gender equity in STEM (science, technology,
              engineering and mathematics). Each
partner institution Northeastern University
              (NU), Boston University (BU), Tufts University (Tufts) and
Worcester
              Polytechnic Institute (WPI) has a strong record of K-12 outreach and program
              delivery, K-12
teacher training and programming for girls and women in STEM
              related areas. Each partner institutions
brings varied strengths and successes
              to the collaboration. By joining forces will be developed model
to demonstrate
              how engineering concepts become part of the middle school curriculum in ways
              that
encourage girls as well as boys to continue along the engineering
              pathway.

As an important step toward achieving this mission,  a unique
              intervention system centered around highly-trained STEM Teams consisting of
              all-female engineering faculty, students, teachers and practitioners will be
              developed and implementated. STEM Teams including middle school teachers will
              be trained together and then utilize their unique strengths to best implement
              the curriculum in eight different public school districts in the greater-Boston
              area. The STEM Teams will educate middle school teachers about engineering and
              gender-inclusive practices in addition to serving as role models in the middle
              school classrooms.

The present situation in MA is opportune for developing
              this beneficial intervention system since the MA
Department of Education
              recently adopted the Science and Technology/Engineering Curriculum
Frameworks.
               Beginning in September 2001, MA became the first state in the nation to
              introduce
engineering as part of mandated PreK-12 education frameworks. These
              frameworks reflect achievable
and age appropriate learning standards that will
              provide strong background knowledge for students. In the
middle schools,
              questions testing the engineering frameworks will be incorporated into the
              compulsory
Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS) in
              2002.

STEM Teams will help middle schools implement the new engineering
              strand of the Massachusetts
Frameworks. STEM Teams will help middle school
              teachers prepare students for the engineering strand
MCAS exams.
              Simultaneously, STEM Teams will serve to build the conviction among the middle
              school
students that engineering is an appropriate career choice for
              females.

An important feature of the STEM Team concept is that each team
              will be composed of women only, yet
this attribute will not be announced to
              the students prior the team's arrival. The participation of STEM
Teams of
              engineering savvy women at participating middle schools, where team members
              will serve as
coaches, mentors, and role models for middle school teachers and
              their students, will have a profound
impact on gender attitudes toward
              engineering as a career. Simply put, STEM Teams composed solely of
females
              will demonstrate to girls and boys that women do engineering.

Some
              anticipated project outcomes are: * Girls and boys in implementation classrooms
              will think
differently about engineering and will understand that engineering
              is not just for boys.
* They will score higher on the engineering strand items
              in the MCAS, than children in the same school
before the implementation of
              STEM Team support. * Participating teachers will feel comfortable with
these
              materials and will look forward to working with them.

Over the three-year
              program, the intervention systems will be finely tuned for national
              dissemination. The
STEM Teams approach is highly replicable at low cost.
              However, members need to be educated about
national science standards,
              age-appropriate and gender-inclusive curriculum activities, serving as
              positive
role models, and other issues pertaining to encouraging middle school
              girls in the STEM fields. This
training will be available through a hard copy
              manual, the web, and because so many middle schools do
not have convenient
              access to the Internet, on videotape. STEM Teams nationwide has the potential
              for
significantly increasing the number of girls who continue interest in STEM
              areas during the middle
school period as well as into STEM careers.
