Title       : SGER: Pathways to Change in Environmental Organizations: Linking Population and
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0217856

Award Number: 0217856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clare Ginger Clare.Ginger@uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The linkages between population and environment have become an increasing focus
              of attention at a range of scales from global networks of organizations to
              community-based projects and in a range of settings, including academic,
              government, and non-government organizations. The purpose of this project is to
              explore the efforts of two conservation non-government organizations (NGOs),
              The Nature Conservancy and Conservation International, to build
              population-environment (PE) issues into their portfolios of projects to protect
              biodiversity in less developed countries. These organizations have
              traditionally focused on the protection of biodiversity and their activities
              reflect a dominant concern with ecological aspects of environmental issues. In
              contrast, addressing PE issues requires attention to social aspects of
              environmental issues. This, in turn, generates a need to incorporate new
              frameworks of analysis and methods from the social sciences into conservation
              projects. Thus, the efforts of these NGOs raise questions about organizational
              capacity and change. The work of these two organizations to consider PE
              linkages is one example of a more general trend to incorporate social
              dimensions into, and develop integrated approaches for, environmental
              management. Some authors have argued that this shift requires a significant
              change in the dynamics of organizations in government, corporate, and
              non-profit sectors. It is not clear, however, the degree to which such change
              is episodic or continuous. 

This project investigates internal and external
              organizational dynamics of developing PE activities in field programs in less
              developed countries. It examines dynamics for projects that span six countries
              (Ecuador, Guatemala, Madagascar, Mexico, the Philippines, and the United
              States) with respect to how PE linkages are defined, what frameworks of
              analysis and methods are used in to address these linkages, factors internal
              and external to the organization that have helped and hindered in incorporating
              population issues into field projects, the connections between PE activities
              and other activities, frameworks of analysis and methods used in the
              organizations, the role of partnership arrangements, and how PE activities are
              adapted to local social conditions and priorities at project sites. Data about
              the field activities, and the NGOs more generally, are generated from
              documents, field visits, interviews, and observations, in collaboration with
              members of the organizations. This exploratory project provides lessons for
              future work on PE issues, generates insights into the organizational dynamics
              of linking ideas across disciplinary fields in environmental management, and
              contributes to the development of a larger research agenda. This research
              agenda addresses a broader range of organizations in the PE arena to develop
              understandings of how interactions in this arena affect the capacity of
              conservation NGOs to incorporate innovations related to PE (i.e., ideas,
              frameworks of analysis, methods to address conservation issues in new ways)
              into their programs. In addition, findings from the project will inform
              teaching materials and curriculum development related to the integration of
              social and ecological dimensions of environmental issues.

