Title       : Development of Continuous-Wave Terahertz Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0217782

Award Number: 0217782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Qing Hu qhu@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research seeks to develop continuous-wave (CW) solid-state THz
              lasers based on intersubband transition in multiple quantum-well (MQW)
              structures. If carried out successfully, this project will have a major impact
              on the science and technology of the THz (1-10 THz) or far-infrared spectrum,
              where currently no coherent and intense solid-sate sources operating in the CW
              mode are available. Towards this goal, extensive studies have already been
              performed on the radiation properties of intersubband transition, scattering,
              and magneto-tunneling spectroscopy; the simulation-aided design of suitable
              MQWs; and spectrally resolved measurements of THz spontaneous emissions from
              MQWs. Detailed analysis indicates that electrically pumped lasing can be
              achieved at a reasonable population inversion density of 2'109/cm2. A
              three-year project is proposed to start on August 1, 2002. The first year will
              focus on two parallel tasks: improvement of the yield rate in fabrication of a
              novel metal waveguide structure for THz mode confinement, and investigation of
              several promising MQW structures. The metal waveguide structure will be very
              useful in achieving CW laser operation in two important ways, reducing the
              lasing threshold and thus the power dissipation and improving heat removal. The
              fabrication process involves wafer bonding and selective etching, and it has
              already been developed in the principal investigator's group. The promising MQW
              structures include a structure using electron-LO-phonon scattering for
              depopulation of the lower lasing level, a structure using electron-electron
              scattering for depopulation, and a chirped superlattice structure in which the
              radiative transition is to take place between two minibands. The design of
              these MQW structures will be aided by sophisticated computer simulations,
              including Monte Carlo simulation for transport analysis. Based on the results
              from this investigation, the second and third years will focus on the most
              promising structure and on the improvement of robustness of population
              inversion, in order to achieve CW lasing operations. Efforts will also be made
              to develop single-mode and frequency-stabilized THz lasers for local-oscillator
              applications in THz heterodyne receivers.
