Title       : Permanently Instrumented Field Sites for Study of Soil-Foundation-Structure
               Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a0217421

Award Number: 0217421
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joy Pauschke                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1944423            (Estimated)
Investigator: T.Leslie Youd tyoud@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Nigbor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jamison H. Steidl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1644      NETWK FOR ERTHQUKE ENG SIMULAT
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
0217421
Youd

The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake
              Engineering Simulation (NEES) is a project funded under the NSF Major Research
              Equipment and Facilities Construction appropriation. This cooperative
              agreement, under NEES, establishes two permanently instrumented field sites for
              monitoring soil-foundation-structure interaction (SFSI), ground motion, ground
              deformation, and pore-water pressure responses. The field sites will be used to
              monitor responses generated by local and regional earthquakes and for active
              experiments with excitation by shakers such as those being constructed by other
              NEES projects at the University of California, Los Angeles (NSF NEES award
              CMS-0086596 and the University of Texas, Austin (NSF NEES award CMS-0086605). 
              These two field sites are being developed by a team of investigators led by
              Brigham Young University (BYU), in partnership with the University of
              California at Santa Barbara (UCSB) and the University of Southern California
              (USC).  The sites will be connected to the NEES network system through a high
              performance network. This equipment will be operational by September 30, 2004,
              and will be managed as a national shared-use NEES equipment site, with
              teleobservation and teleoperation capabilities, to provide new earthquake
              engineering research testing capabilities for geotechnical and SFSI testing
              through 2014.  Shared-use access and training will be coordinated through the
              NEES Consortium.  This award is an outcome of the peer review of proposals
              submitted to program solicitation NSF 01-164, "NEES Earthquake Engineering
              Research Equipment, Phase 2."   The NEES equipment will be located as
              permanently instrumented field arrays at two sites in Southern California:  the
              Garner Valley Downhole Array (GVDA) in Riverside County, east of Hemet,
              California, and the Salton Sea Wildlife Refuge Liquefaction Array (WLA) in
              Imperial County near Calipatria, California.  Both sites are located adjacent
              to major faults and have previous histories of recording ground motions and
              pore-water pressures. The two sites are underlain by soft, liquefiable ground. 
              The instrumentation at GVDA will be upgraded and enhanced for real-time data
              transmission.  A reconfigurable, one-story structure will be constructed at
              that site and instrumented with sensors installed in the structure, foundation,
              and underlying soil.  A small shaker will be permanently mounted on the roof of
              the building; larger shakers may be brought to the site and placed on the
              building or on a nearby pad to artificially excite the structure and underlying
              ground.  Instrumentation at WLA will be upgraded and greatly expanded to allow
              monitoring of three-dimensional ground motion and pore-water pressure
              responses.  Communications equipment capable of concurrent data transmission
              and teleobservation will allow rapid delivery of data to the NEES network and
              remote participation in experiments conducted at the sites.  There is need to
              further study SFSI in real structures under seismic input, but there are always
              complexities in real structures that can mask understanding of SFSI phenomena. 
              Study of ground failure is also complicated in urban or geologically complex
              settings.  Simple, well-characterized test sites like these two are needed to
              increase understanding of the physics behind SFSI, ground response, and ground
              failure during earthquakes.  This pair of NEES field sites will also provide an
              excellent test bed for new in-situ site characterization techniques and new
              sensor technologies.  The field sites will have an impact on undergraduate and
              graduate teaching programs in earthquake engineering, geotechnical engineering,
              and engineering seismology by allowing students to participate in the active
              experiments through teleparticipation as well as on-site workshops. Data from
              both sites will be contributed to the NEES Data Repository and the Advanced
              National Seismic System (ANSS).  The collected information will aid development
              and verification of simulation models for ground response, pore-water pressure
              generation, and dynamic SFSI.  Improved simulation of these fundamental
              earthquake engineering phenomena will lead to better, safer and more economical
              engineering design.  BYU, UCSB, and USC will integrate experimentation at these
              sites into their research program and curricula, provide training opportunities
              for outside researchers through on-site courses and web-based materials, and
              host visiting scholars.
