Title       : Structure-Property Relations for Nonlinear Optical Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0217932

Award Number: 0217932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric W. Van Stryland ewvs@creol.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Hagan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin D. Belfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An aggressive investigation is planned on the structure/nonlinear optical
              property relations of materials with special emphasis on several classes of
              organic compounds. An excellent collaborative team of experts has been
              assembled in this area along with the best experimental facilities for
              nonlinear optical (NLO) materials characterization. Along with the PI's at
              CREOL including a chemist, collaborators include Seth Marder, Joseph Perry and
              Jean-Luc Bredas with Chemistry at the University of Arizona, Francois Diederich
              in Chemistry at ETH, Zurich, Olga Przhonska, Alex Kachkovski and co-workers at
              the Institute of Physics, National Academy of Sciences, Kiev, Ukraine, and
              Anthony Brennan at the University of Florida. State-of-the-art laboratory
              facilities have been specifically designed and developed for the program
              outlined in this proposal.  Five laboratories are devoted to this
              investigation. The latest addition is a femtosecond pump/continuum probe,
              nonlinear "spectrophotometer".  This mimics the operation of a standard linear
              spectrophotometer and is the closest one can come to a facility that could be
              made into a commercial instrument for spectral analysis of NLO material
              properties.  Data are consistent with the two-photon fluorescence (2PF)
              spectroscopy method, which takes considerably longer and requires fluorescent
              samples. Thus, a broader range of materials can be studied. These techniques,
              combined with the PIs' previously-developed experimental Z-scan technique,
              along with complementary methods of single frequency pump-probe methods with
              femtosecond, picosecond, and nanosecond tunable optical parametric sources,
              provide a unique facility to carry out the goals of this proposed effort.  The
              ultimate goal of this study is to develop a predictive capability for the NLO
              properties in terms of the linear optical properties and/or molecular structure
              similar to what the PIs have accomplished for semiconductors.  The femtosecond
              continuum can range in wavelength from 300 nm to >1.7 mm and can thus probe the
              NLA over this broad spectral range. Thus, in a single experiment the changes in
              absorption at all frequencies from the IR to the UV are measured.  By
              temporally delaying the probe, the dynamics of this nondegenerate NLA are also
              obtained.  This allows easy separation of the ultrafast NLA process of
              two-photon absorption from cumulative nonlinearities such as excited state
              absorption.  With this instrument one can determine where are the strong
              two-photon absorption bands, and what is the excited-state absorption spectrum.
              The answers to these and similar questions will give theoreticians the
              information necessary to test theories and practitioners to find and exploit
              new NLO materials.  
