Title       : Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TLSAMP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0217629

Award Number: 0217629
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3475706            (Estimated)
Investigator: James Hefner givy@tnstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee State University
	      3500 John A. Merritt Blvd.
	      Nashville, TN  372091500    615/320-3131

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TLSAMP)

If
              America is to prosper in the new millennium, we must build a domestic
              science,
mathematics, engineering, and technology (SMET) workforce that uses
              the talent of all
segments of our population. America's prosperity is fueled
              by the nation's technical
enterprise. As evidenced by the tragic episode of
              September 11, our country must build
on the diversity within this country so
              that an increasingly large share of the work force
will consist of women and
              underrepresented minorities.

Many national programs have been identified to
              enhance the quantity and quality of
underrepresented minorities in science and
              engineering. This proposal describes a
program designed to improve the
              quantity and quality of underrepresented scientists and
engineers graduating
              each year with a bachelor's degree. The partners in the proposed
alliance are
              all from the state of Tennessee. The existing knowledge base relative
              to
minority participation in science and engineering will be the foundation of
              our efforts.
The goal is to build on this foundation and to expand the
              available options to enrich
programs at partner institutions and
              beyond.

Tennessee State University, LeMoyne-Owen College, Middle Tennessee
              State
University, University of Memphis, University of Tennessee at Knoxville,
              and Vanderbilt
University will partner to form the Tennessee Louis Stokes
              Alliance for Minority
Participation (TLSAMP). The ultimate success of this
              collaboration rests in the fact that
if there is any student's need, there is
              an institution within the alliance with the
characteristics, experience,
              and/or resources to meet the needs of the student. The
alliance can draw on
              the strengths and experiences of each of the individual members.
The goal of
              the TLSAMP is to increase the number of the underrepresented SMET
students by
              at least 75% at the end of the five-year period. The objectives to support
              the
goal of the alliance are: 1) to recruit underrepresented students to
              pursue science or
engineering as a career, 2) to improve the quality of the
              learning environment for
underrepresented science and engineering students at
              all schools, and 3) to ensure that a
larger number of undergraduate students
              are prepared to enter graduate programs.

The Alliance will emphasize
              collaborative learning approaches, mentoring activities via
faculty, staff,
              and upper level students, and hands-on research and internship
              experiences.
Using this approach, three project areas have been chosen as
              critical focal points for
achieving the qualitative and quantitative goals of
              the project. These project areas utilize
strategies with demonstrable
              effectiveness in the retention of underrepresented students in
science and
              engineering. All project areas will involve faculty, staff, or students
              during
the design phase as well as the continuous quality improvement
              phase.

In this project, assessment will be built into each project area as a
              result of the
formulation of specific, measurable quantitative and qualitative
              objectives. These
objectives will be reviewed and revised on an ongoing basis.
              An Advisory Committee
composed of the Vice Presidents and Deans from the six
              schools will oversee all aspects
of the grant project.

