Title       : IGERT: Cross-Disciplinary Research Training in Mathematical Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2002  
File        : a0217424

Award Number: 0217424
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2909952            (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Keener keener@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Sperry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron L. Fogelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Bressloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick R. Adler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This IGERT project will develop a graduate program of cross-disciplinary
              research and training in Mathematical Biology.  The goal of the program is to
              give students a solid training in core mathematics and genuine expertise in an
              area of contemporary biology.  Such training will bring to bear the power of
              mathematics on the exciting and challenging problems of modern biology. 
              Students will be recruited from a broad spectrum of mathematical, scientific
              and cultural backgrounds.  It is expected that the graduates of this program
              will receive Ph.D.'s in mathematics, but by virtue of their broad-based
              training will be able to contribute to collaborative research efforts in
              numerous academic and industrial settings.  In the process, the program seeks
              to build many new bridges between mathematics and biology potentially reshaping
              research for a new generation of mathematical biologists.  The research and
              training program will be organized around the four research themes of
              biofluids, ecology and evolutionary biology, neuroscience, and physiology.  A
              unique feature of this research and training program will be the establishment
              of Special Interest Groups (SIG's).  Each SIG will be led by one or more
              faculty members with activities that include discussion of research problems,
              discussion of recent seminars, formal and informal talks about recent papers,
              student presented talks on background literature, etc.  The training of
              students will also include formal coursework in both Mathematics and Biology,
              laboratory rotations or field work in an area of the life sciences, mentoring
              by both mathematics and life science faculty, and journal clubs, laboratory
              group meetings, and workshops.  In these ways, the training of students will
              put great emphasis on collaboration and interaction across traditional academic
              disciplines. 

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges
              of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary
              backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the
              career demands of the future.  The program is intended to catalyze a cultural
              change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate
              education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
              transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.  In the fifth year of the
              program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that
              collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.


