Title       : Life-Cycle Cost Model Simulator for Decision Making in Bridge Network Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0217290

Award Number: 0217290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196510             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan M. Frangopol Dan.Frangopol@Colorado.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Future continued economic growth of the United States is linked to the
              reliability and sustainability of our civil infrastructure systems, such as
              highways and bridges. It is widely recognized that optimal resource use in
              bridge infrastructure management should be based on integrating structural
              reliability, evaluated from a probabilistic perspective, and life-cycle cost.
              In the United States, transportation officials consider life-cycle cost and
              reliability analysis for bridges to be the most advanced techniques for
              assisting with investment decisions. In so doing, they attempt to determine and
              implement the best possible strategy for maintaining an adequate level of
              bridge reliability at the lowest possible life-cycle cost. The research delves
              into to rationally distribute limited available resources.

The main
              objective of the research is to develop a model-based simulator to optimize
              management decisions for bridge networks based on simulated time-dependent
              performance and life-cycle cost. This innovative model will integrate
              computational sciences, bridge network modeling, and reliability technologies
              for simulating and visualizing optimal network-level bridge maintenance
              planning and management processes based on lifetime reliability and life-cycle
              cost. The solution is based on characterizing abrupt discontinuities, including
              phenomena such as failure of a bridge in the network and large-scale
              performance simulations of bridge networks. The approach will also entail
              representation of uncertainties propagating through the network during the
              service life of each bridge. By simulating the time-dependent performance of
              the bridge network, new data will be exploited to update the network
              performance as well as to auto-adapt. Finally, to facilitate real-time
              cost-effective decision-making in the bridge management process performance
              visualization techniques will be developed for each individual bridge in the
              network, the overall performance of the network, and the cost-benefit of each
              maintenance strategy.  A database of about three dozen bridges located in
              highway networks in Colorado will be used to demonstrate the applicability and
              efficiency of the methodology. 

The research represents an important step in
              creating the basis of a new generation of bridge management systems where
              optimal maintenance decisions based on life-cycle cost are made at the
              network-level while explicitly taking into account the propagation of
              uncertainties during the entire service life of individual bridges in network.
              In this manner, the multi-billion dollar investment in the maintenance of
              bridge infrastructure in the US will be optimized. The impact of the
              optimization on improving the quality and functionality of the nation's highway
              bridges could be enormous. Finally, life-cycle cost modeling and simulation
              results will be integrated into engineering education at both undergraduate and
              graduate levels.

