Title       : TECH TEAM: A Project Based Technology Sequence for Middle School Girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0217199

Award Number: 0217199
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $755257             (Estimated)
Investigator: Betsy Newman bnewman@scetv.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Urica L. Pope  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ETV Endowmemnt of SC.,Inc.
	      401 E. Kennedy St., Suite B1
	      Spartanburg, SC  29302    864/585-0102

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Educational Television Endowment of South Carolina, in collaboration with
              the South
Carolina Educational Television Network (SCETV), will carry out a
              program to increase middle
school girls' enthusiasm for and understanding of
              technology and introduce them to women who
work in science and technology
              fields. The project is a three-year pilot program called TECH
TEAM that
              consists of afterschool technology clubs, workshops in computer applications
              at
SCETV and Summer Technology Day Camps. Partners include the Girl Scouts of
              the Congaree
Area, Inc., the Girl Scout Council of the Pee Dee Area, and the
              College of Education of the
University of South Carolina. In addition to the
              girls themselves, TECH TEAM will train the club
facilitators - teachers and
              Girl Scout leaders - in video and computer-based technologies, project
based
              curriculum development and techniques for gender equitable education in an
              annual series
of Saturday workshops.

The TECH TEAM project will take place
              in three South Carolina school districts - the School
District of Fairfield
              County, Richland District One and Marion District One - all of which
              are
considered critical needs districts. Fairfield is a rural county in which
              40.8% of the adults have
less than a high school education and unemployment is
              at the second highest level in the state.
Marion District One is in a poor,
              rural area in which 76% of the students qualify for free or
reduced lunch,
              over 50% come from single parent homes and 75% are minority. Richland
              District
One is an urban district. 80% of students are minority and 58%
              qualify for free or reduced lunch.

TECH TEAM is designed to increase girls'
              technological fluency through a progressive sequence
of technology
              applications in a hands-on, project based setting. In the first year,
              2002-2003, the
girls will videotape interviews with local women who work in
              the fields of science, math,
technology and engineering. To locate their
              interviewees, they will learn and use research skills,
including both informal
              and Internet-based techniques. The girls will edit their videos using
              a
computer-based editing program, and broadcast them to schools across South
              Carolina via
SCETV's Instructional Television Fixed Service (ITFS). They will
              host two-way call-in shows on
the ITFS, allowing students anywhere in the
              state to respond and ask the girls questions.
In the second year of the
              project, 2003-2004, the girls will create a Web site about TECH TEAM
that will
              be integrated into www.knowitall.org, SCETV's Web portal for teachers and
              students. The
girls will design the layout of their site and publish writing,
              post videos and contribute to a
threaded discussion that will be developed for
              the site. In TECH TEAM's third year, 2004-2005,
the girls will create a
              searchable database of their videos for inclusion on the site, adding
              dynamic
elements that require the use of computer codes, so that they extend
              their fluency in the use of
computer technology. They will learn about SQL
              (Structured Query Language), and they will
develop CFML (Cold Fusion Markup
              Language) to make their databases Web accessible. In
addition to the
              afterschool clubs, they will attend a series of Saturday workshops taught
              by
SCETV programmers.

During each summer of the project the TECH TEAM girls
              will attend a Summer Technology Day
Camps at SCETV's Telecommunications Center
              in Columbia. The camps will allow all the
participants to meet each other,
              work in SCETV's computer labs, and present their work to an
invited audience.
              Throughout each year a video crew will document the progress of TECH TEAM
on
              videotape and interview the participants. This material will form the basis of
              a CD-ROM to be
produced for teachers' professional development. The CD will be
              mailed free of charge to every
middle school in South Carolina and will be
              made available nationwide through SCETV's
marketing division. Evaluation and
              assessment of TECH TEAM will be conducted by Dr. Kenneth
Stevenson of the
              College of Education of the University of South Carolina.

The impact of TECH
              TEAM goes beyond gender equity considerations to universal issues
              of
technology education, teacher training, adolescent development, the design
              of afterschool
programs, and partnerships between schools and informal
              education providers; TECH TEAM will
advance understanding of these areas as
              they apply not only to girls but to all students and
teachers.
