Title       : Phase Behavior and Nanoscale Morphology of Multiblock Copolymers and Biological
               Gels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0217042

Award Number: 0217042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rama Bansil rb@buphy.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The overall focus of this research is to apply scattering techniques to examine
              the phase behavior and kinetics of order-disorder and order-order phase
              transitions in multiblock copolymers in selective solvents using small angle
              neutron scattering (SANS), small angle x-ray scattering (SAXS), atomic force
              microscopy (AFM), and computer simulation methods. A major focus of this
              research will be to use synchrotron based time-resolved SAXS to follow the time
              evolution of structural features, and relate them to theoretical models of
              nucleation and growth kinetics of disorder-order transitions and of transitions
              between different ordered states. We will also initiate preliminary studies
              using AFM imaging to characterize the surface morphology of films of these
              micro-phase separated materials. The proposed research will provide detailed
              insight into the kinetics of the phase separation mechanisms involved in these
              different transitions, as well as in the mechanisms involved in the growth of
              micelles themselves. 

An understanding of the phase behavior of multiblock
              copolymer solutions and gels is important to their numerous applications in
              materials science and technology. An exciting potential application is to use
              them as templates for nanolithography of solid state devices. The proposed AFM
              and SAXS studies of block copolymer films have direct relevance to the
              potential application of these films in nanolithography. The research will also
              lead to advances in designing and building specialized components for use at
              beam line facilities and data analysis programs with a wide range of
              applicability. The proposed studies will lead to the Ph. D dissertations of two
              graduate students (including one female American student) and provide research
              opportunities for undergraduates. The project also involves international
              collaboration with scientists in Czech Republic.   

