Title       : Collaborative Research: Worker Cross-Training and Assignment Considering
               Learning/Forgetting Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0217666

Award Number: 0217666
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179100             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Nembhard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This proposal models the effects of job rotation, in terms of learning and
              forgetting, on the overall productivity of a group of workers. This reveals the
              cross-training tradeoff between worker flexibility versus potentially reduced
              efficiency. The research combines experimental psychology (leaning and
              forgetting curves) with robust mathematical programming and optimization
              methods to develop tools that could be of significant use to managers. The
              three research questions will be answered with the aid of computer simulation
              and validated in the field. The broad impact is the potential for enhancing
              productivity and improvements in the work environment that will benefit the
              economy. 

Modern manufacturing practices, which often use cellular designs
              and just-in-time operations, may disrupt the continuous learning process. While
              in the past managers relied on specialization over long production runs to
              improve productivity, today they often make use of cross training in an attempt
              to manage rapidly changing technology and uncertain demand. However, at
              present, no concrete guidelines exist to aid managers in deciding levels of
              cross training, task rotation, and the sequencing of jobs. The objective of
              this research is to improve productivity in organizations with job rotation
              through assignment and scheduling of workers to tasks and to examine preferred
              assignment and cross training levels in this environment. Based on individual
              learning and forgetting characteristics, workers are assigned and scheduled to
              tasks in ways designed to maximize productivity. An important contribution of
              the project is understanding the tradeoffs between lost productivity due to
              reduced specialization and the flexibility benefits due to cross training.
              

The study will address the following research questions: 1. Within a work
              group, to which of m tasks should each of n workers be assigned for three
              objectives a.) Maximize throughput given n workers, b.) Minimize the number of
              workers needed for a given production requirement, c.) Minimize the time
              required for n workers to meet a given production requirement. 2. What degree
              of cross training should be allowed or required, including: a.) How many tasks
              in addition to the initial assignment should the n workers be responsible for?
              b.) How often and in what pattern should workers shift between these cross
              trained tasks (i.e., what is the schedule)? 3. What are the effects of
              environmental factors including, Workplace design implications (i.e., pattern
              of work and/or information flow), Adjacent vs. non-adjacent worker-task
              assignments (i.e., tour travel time costs), Single vs. multiple products, and
              Batch size. 

First, the investigators will develop math programming based
              decision models for assigning and scheduling workers to tasks. The models will
              incorporate the effects of individual worker learning and forgetting. Second,
              the investigators will develop a measurement model for quantifying worker
              learning and forgetting for use in the math programming models. Third, the
              investigators will examine the research questions described above based on
              empirical distributions of individual workers' learning and forgetting
              patterns, through simulation first and then subsequently applying the results
              in real work settings. 

The impact of this research is potentially broad,
              affecting directly the many service and manufacturing organizations that make
              use of cross training. Further, the proposed research will quantify the costs
              from learning and forgetting effects that are associated with cross training
              programs. While there are good reasons for cross training workers, many related
              to increased flexibility, when these workers are learning new tasks they are
              subject to forgetting others and productivity may suffer significantly. Thus,
              the research will provide both descriptive and prescriptive capabilities for
              organizations to quantify and plan cross training programs in manufacturing and
              service settings.

