Title       : A New Decomposition Approach for a Class of NP-hard Graph Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0217265

Award Number: 0217265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilbert E. Wilhelm wilhelm@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Illya V. Hicks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The research undertakes a preliminary investigation of a new decomposition
              approach that offers the potential for solving large-scale instances of an
              important class of graph problems effectively.  This class, comprising such
              difficult problems as maximum weight independent subset, maximum clique,
              maximal planar sub-graph, and graph coloring, has significant economic impact
              in numerous applications, including plant layout, automatic graph drawing,
              computational geometry and circuit design.  The purpose of the research is to
              demonstrate the possibilities for this technology, focusing on a typical
              problem from the class with the goal of optimizing large-scale instances within
              reasonable average-case run times.  Research objectives are: (1) theoretical
              basis for the decomposition, (2) effective implementation techniques, and (3)
              computational evaluation of efficacy.  Graphs in this class may be decomposed
              into disjoint sub-graphs and a problem of the same type as the original problem
              may be solved on each sub-graph.  The method of approach applies existing
              algorithms to solve small sub-problems within reasonable average-case times,
              generating solutions that will be used in both branch-and-price and
              branch-and-cut methods.  A master problem coordinates sub-problem solutions to
              optimize the original, large-scale problem.  

Intellectual merit is based on
              six research questions.  Answers will achieve all three objectives and entail
              both basic research and engineering contributions.  Basic research includes
              extending the Co-PI's recent research on branch decompositions and the facet
              generation procedure.  Engineering contributions include designing effective
              implementation techniques and computational evaluation.  The research will have
              broad impact.  It will advance discovery and understanding through basic
              research, contributing to the knowledge base.  It will seek to recruit students
              from under-represented groups and promote teaching and training by engaging
              them in the field of optimization, contributing to the infrastructure for
              research and education. The plan for dissemination will contribute to training
              analysts, engineers, and managers.  Research results will be incorporated in
              courses taught by the Co-PIs and by their colleagues at other universities. 
              Benefits to society at large will accrue from laying the foundation for this
              new approach.  Future research can extend this foundation, specializing the
              decomposition to other problems in this class and generalizing it to other
              classes of problems.

