Title       : The University of Texas System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0217691

Award Number: 0217691
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2426319            (Estimated)
Investigator: Pablo Arenaz parenaz@utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Texas System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
              Participation

The University of Texas System Alliance for Minority
              Participation (UT-System
AMP) brings together all nine academic components of
              The University of Texas System
and ten regional community college partners in
              an effort to increase the number of under-
represented minority students and
              students from other under-served populations enrolling 
in and graduating from
              baccalaureate programs in science, mathematics, engineering, and 
technology
              and entering graduate programs in SMET fields at UT-System universities.
The
              activities of the UT-System AMP are supported by partnerships with industry
              and
government agencies, particularly national laboratories. The educational
              institutions in 
the Alliance serve a rapidly growing region, where by the
              decade's end minorities will 
comprise a majority of the population. Prominent
              among the institutions are those in the
U.S.-Mexico Border regions serving
              large numbers of Hispanic students and those in 
metropolitan areas serving
              mainly commuter students,including many minorities. The
UT-System places a
              high degree of importance, system-wide, on improving retention
among
              undergraduates and providing enhanced opportunities for these undergraduates
              
to enter graduate programs in SMET. This proposal also emphasizes the
              system-wide
sharing of resources to attain these goals.

In Phase III, the
              University of Texas System Alliance for Minority Participation is 
committed
              to achieving the following objectives: 1) The UT-System LSAMP universities
              
will enroll a minimum of 200 under-represented minority and other
              under-served student 
in their STEM doctoral programs by the fall of 2008, an
              increase of about 100% over the 
fall 2000 baseline and 2) The UT-System AMP
              universities will continue to work towards
the Phase II goal of graduating a
              minimum of 1,374 under-represented minority and other 
under-served students
              with B.S. degrees in SMET. It is estimated that we will achieve this
goal by
              2006. When achieved, this will represent a 244% increase over 1991-1992
              baseline.
LSAMP program activities will focus on three major areas: (1)
              retention of students who
are STEM majors through the development of
              strategies at all partner institutions to 
address retention of second year
              students in SMET; (2) mentoring and career development
opportunities for STEM
              majors interested in pursuing an advanced degree. Activities will
include the
              development of GRE workshops and career development/mentoring activities
              at
each partner institution; and (3) a summer research academy where rising
              junior and senior 
students will have the opportunity to work in a research
              laboratory at one of the five
doctoral-granting institutions in the alliance.
              Students will receive stipend support, 
mentoring and training. The UT-System
              LSAMP has permanently changing the nature of
SMET higher education in
              Texas.

Through the UT-System LSAMP, the participating universities have
              raised the 
visibility and increased the awareness of the chancellor,
              presidents and chief academic 
officers about SMET program outcomes and the
              status of under-represented minority
students. Providing leadership to the
              UT-System Alliance for Minority Participation will 
be a Governing Board,
              chaired by Ed Sharpe, Executive Vice Chancellor of The University 
of Texas
              System, which includes presidents, vice-presidents, or provostsof UT-System
              
member institutions and participating community colleges as well as a
              selected number 
of experts from industry and the national R&D community.
              Meeting annually, the Governing
Board will continue to provide general
              oversight of the UT-System AMP. The Academic
Leadership Council (ALC),
              composed of deans, chairs and distinguished faculty are involved
in the
              implementation of AMP activities at their institution. The ALC meets twice 

