Title       : LTER: Comparative Study of a Suite of Lakes in Wisconsin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2002   
File        : a0217533

Award Number: 0217533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6720000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Carpenter srcarpen@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Monica G. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy K. Kratz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Lillesand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Provencher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT (NTL Renewal)

Lakes are conspicuous, ecologically important, and
              socially valued components of landscapes. Lakes collect water, energy, solutes
              and pollutants from the land and atmosphere, provide habitats and resources for
              organisms, and interact with diverse human activities. The North Temperate
              Lakes (NTL) Long-Term Ecological Research program aims to understand the
              ecology of lakes in relation to relevant atmospheric, geochemical, landscape
              and human processes. The overarching research question is how do biophysical
              setting, climate, and changing land use and cover interact to shape lake
              characteristics and dynamics over time (past, present, future)? NTL will
              address this question through five inter-related goals: (1) perceive long-term
              changes in the physical, chemical, and biological properties, of lake
              districts, (2) understand the drivers of temporal variability in lakes and lake
              districts, (3) understand the interaction of spatial processes with long-term
              change, (4) understand the causes and predictability of rapid extensive change
              in ecosystems, and (5) build a capacity to forecast the future ecology of lake
              districts.

Patterns, processes, and interactions of lakes, landscapes and
              people will be examined at four spatial scales: individual lakes, small
              drainage systems with several lakes, entire lake districts, and the western
              Great Lakes region of North America. Temporally, scales from a fraction of a
              day to decades will be considered. NTL will use multiple approaches of
              long-term observation, comparison across ecosystems, experimental
              manipulations, and process modeling. In this proposal, decadal forecasts of
              ecosystem change are specifically addressed, which become the hypotheses for
              future long-term research. The interdisciplinary research group includes
              ecologists, hydrologists, climatologists, chemists, demographers, an economist,
              rural sociologists, and specialists in remote sensing and information
              management. The research should produce new conceptualizations of lake district
              dynamics, including new insights on the dynamics and impacts of invasive
              species, understanding of the role of spatial location of lakes in landscape
              dynamics, the reflexive interactions of human and ecological processes, and the
              interactive effects of geomorphic setting, climate and human activity on
              long-term change in lake districts. The understanding of integrated
              landscape-lake-social systems developed through the NTL program will be useful
              for decision making by individuals and institutions concerned with the future
              of the western Great Lakes region and the welfare of its residents. 

