Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Preparation of Nanoscale Magnetite Dispersed
               Polymer Particles for Environmental Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0217830

Award Number: 0217830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arup K. Sengupta akso@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0313040   Water Pollution                         
Program Ref : 5940,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0217830
Sengupta

Description:  This award is for support of a joint research
              project by Dr. Arun Sengupta, Department of Civil and Environmental
              Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, and Dr. Ulker Beker,
              Department of Chemical Engineering, Yildiz Technical University, Istanbul,
              Turkey.  The primary area of collaboration will encompass the preparation and
              characterization of Magnetically Active Polymeric Particles (MAPPs) for passive
              environmental monitoring.  Partially sulfonated polymer beads will be prepared
              and magnetized in Lehigh University using the three-step procedure.  Magnetic
              susceptibility of the particles will be determined at Lehigh University.  One
              portion of the MAPPs will be sent to Dr. Beker in Turkey where she will carry
              out a series of sorption equilibrium studies with MAPPs, using both simulated
              and industrial wastewaters containing chlorinated hydrocarbons and other
              volatile organic compounds.  Sorption studies will be carried out for multiple
              cycles with different batches of MAPPs.  Propanol will be used as the
              regenerant for desorption.  Subsequently, these MAPPs will be brought to Lehigh
              University by Dr. Beker.  Magnetic susceptibilities of MAPPs after various
              cycles will be determined at Lehigh University and compared with the magnetic
              susceptibility of the parent MAPPs.  The resulting information on sorption
              isotherms along with magnetic susceptibility data will help evaluate the
              effectiveness of MAPPs as recyclable passive monitoring agents.

Scope:  This
              project will allow a US scientist to collaborate with a Turkish scientist in
              the area of nanoparticle development for environmental applications. The
              research could lead to the development of technologically important materials,
              and to products for environmental cleanups, especially of environmental hazards
              such as organics and metal ions from waste.  The project will involve the
              training of a U.S. graduate student.   The Office of International Science and
              Engineering and the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems provide funding
              for this project.

