Title       : GOALI: A Strickly Thermal Route to Thin Film Nanotemplates Via Functionalized
               Block-Random Copolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0217816

Award Number: 0217816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323762             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Russell russell@mail.pse.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig J. Hawker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Block copolymers, comprised of two chemically distinct polymer chains linked
              together at one end, microphase separate into arrays of ordered nanoscopic
              features that, in thin films, can be used as scaffolds and templates for the
              fabrication of sub-micron devices and structures.  By developing novel
              chemistries to synthesize block copolymers, where one of the blocks can be
              thermally crosslinked and the second block can be decomposed at higher
              temperatures, the fabrication of templates and scaffolds can be dramatically
              simplified, opening up new avenues in the manufacture and utilization of
              nanostructures.  It is the intent of this work to develop new block copolymers
              and fabrication strategies, which will meet the demands of this "one-step"
              processing goal.  In addition, routes will be investigated for the
              fuctionalization of these nanostructures and to enhance the lateral ordering of
              thin films of the block copolymers so that each element can be quantitatively
              described in terms of its lateral position.

The integrated collaboration
              between academic and industrial institutions described in this proposal has the
              potential to provide a unique opportunity for enhancing the career development
              of students and postdoctoral fellows.   Close interaction with industry will
              also help guide the academic research towards real-world goals, while at the
              same time facilitating technology transfer to industry.  By performing
              cross-disciplinary research at both institutions, the students in this program
              will also develop fundamental skills in the synthesis, characterization and
              physics of polymeric materials and in the generation of well-defined nanoscopic
              structures.  As a consequence, they will be better prepared for a
              multi-disciplinary industrial or academic career in materials science.  The
              total educational experience gained by performing research at these two premier
              institutions will therefore far exceed that possible in a single academic
              environment.  The utilization of x-ray and neutron facilities at national
              laboratories will further enhance the development of the researchers, exposing
              them to a third different research setting while at the same time integrating
              the program into a much larger national and international endeavor.  The
              research environments of each of these institutions have strong,
              well-recognized efforts in the development of a diverse workforce and this
              program will draw on both efforts to promote the education and training of
              female and under-represented minority students.   


