Title       : Louis Stokes South Carolina Alliance for Minority Participantion (LS-SCAMP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0217602

Award Number: 0217602
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Arrington   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Carolina St Univ
	      300 College Street NE
	      Orangeburg, SC  29117    803/536-7000

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Louis Stokes South Carolina Alliance for Minority Participantion
              (LS-SCAMP)

The Louis Stokes-South Carolina Alliance for Minority
              Participation (LS-SCAMP) has 
become a keystone for undergraduate science,
              mathematics, engineering and technology 
(SMET) retention and a catalyst for
              degree completion within the state. Committed 
leadership from top- level
              administrators is paramount to the successful 
implementation of the goals
              proposed herein.The new LS-SCAMP Phase I will be lead
by South Carolina State
              University (SCSU),nationally ranked for African American/Minority
SMET degree
              completion and the largest producer of underrepresented minority SMET 
degrees
              in the state. Currently all of SCSU's SMET baccalaureate degree programs are
              
ranked nationally as a result of African- American/Minority degree
              completion. Biology
, Mathematics and Engineering Technology are ranked 4 th
              in the nation while Computer 
Science is ranked 13 th and Physics is ranked 21
              st . LS-SCAMP includes all seven of the
HBCUs in the state of South Carolina
              and represents a new beginning and a new era of 
support for the success of
              underrepresented minorities in SMET. To meet the strong
demand for higher
              education and to combat the persistent barriers toaccess, the new
LS-SCAMP
              will build on the foundation established during the prior SCAMP
              phases.
Specifically the following Phase I goals will be achieved:

1.
              Increase underrepresented SMET baccalaureate degree production at a rate that
              is
40% higher than the national SMET degree rate.
2. Strengthen and expand
              undergraduate research opportunities for SMET students.
3. Provide
              opportunities for SMET students to develop knowledge and skills that
will
              improve their qualifications and enhance their preparation for
              graduate
studies in SMET fields.
4. Build a transfer bridge to increase by
              100% SMET majors from 2-year
institutions.

The outstanding track record for
              the production of minority graduates at many of 
the Alliance institutions,
              the unprecedented level of support for the AMP program in 
South Carolina and
              the new statewide infrastructure, will allow the goals of Phase I to
 be
              met.

