Title       : DEM: Girls Under the Hood
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0217146

Award Number: 0217146
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Parks meparks@mail.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen S. Harpp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

Girls Under the Hood is a demonstration project designed to encourage
              teenage girls in rural
Madison County, New York, to achieve excellence in
              Science, Mathematics, Engineering and
Technology (SMET) fields.  Central to
              the success of this project is the hands-on experience
that will demonstrate
              the relationship of SMET to the participants everyday lives. Using
              the
automobile as a vehicle for inquiry-based scientific learning, 24 girls
              ages 14-17 will
explore topics such as the science of internal combustion, the
              mathematics of fuel economy,
the engineering of the power train, the
              technology of computerized diagnostic equipment, and
the integration of all
              these fields.  In addition to exploring and learning many
              scientific
principles behind the various systems of the automobile,
              participants will acquire practical
skills that they can share with their
              families.
During a seven-day residential summer camp, participants will
              experience two different
college campus settings a mere five miles apart: 
              Colgate University, in Hamilton, New York,
a nationally-ranked liberal arts
              institution; and in America's Most-Wired; two-year school, the
State
              University of New York College of Agriculture and Technology, in Morrisville,
              New
York.  Morning sessions will be held in the new automotive technology
              building at the SUNY
Morrisville campus, where participants will engage in
              hands-on exploration of the
automobile.  Meals, lodging, and most of the
              afternoon and evening sessions will take place at
Colgate University, where
              the girls will further explore the basic scientific principles behind
the
              operation of automobiles and how those same principles can be transferred to a
              variety of
other applications.
Girls Under the Hood will capitalize on the
              natural curiosity of females in a non-threatening
(cooperative, welcoming, and
              predominantly female) environment at a critical time in their
lives when they
              are focused on getting their driver's license.  Through exposure to female
              role
models (teachers, undergraduate teaching assistants and successful
              industry practitioners) and
solicitation of parent, school, industry and
              government support, this project will seize
opportunities to relate course
              content to SMET careers, and to challenge students' ideas about
gender
              appropriate careers.  The confidence that girls gain in their ability to
              understand the
science and technology of automobiles will carry over into
              confidence that they can succeed
in other areas of SMET, and the applications
              they will see of SMET courses will encourage
them to take more courses in
              those areas.
The intellectual benefit of this project is that it will serve as
              an educational model for the
application of contextualized science education,
              as well as provide a better understanding of
gender-fair learning
              opportunities in SMET education utilizing a unique combination of rural
public
              high schools, public and private universities, community, industry, and
              government.
Broader impacts of the project include positive changes in
              participants' interest in SMET,
confidence in their ability to do math and
              science, and election of upper level math and
science courses.  An added
              benefit will be the establishment of an educational collaboration
between a
              four year and a two year college.
