Title       : Protein Kinase Resource
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0217951

Award Number: 0217951
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1184087            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Gribskov gribskov@sdsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan S. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The majority of biological databases today are broad, but shallow, covering
              large amounts of material but in a relatively cursory way.  These are essential
              resources as scientists use molecular biological techniques to develop a
              catalog of the molecules founds in living cell.  Now, it is time to move beyond
              simply cataloguing the molecules of  a cell toward the time for understanding
              the dynamic interactions between molecules within a cell.  This level of
              understanding requires a different kind of database, one that links together
              sequence, genetics, structure and function to create a deeper resource.  The
              existing Protein Kinase Resource (PKR, http://pkr.sdsc.edu) will be extended to
              create a resource from which both novices and experts can learn about protein
              kinases, an important family of enzymes that play roles in processes as diverse
              as human disease and crop production.  From a technical standpoint, the
              resource will integrate data from a variety of existing resources in ways not
              previously achieved.  The integration at UCSD provides a location for
              developing detailed and well defined application program interfaces (APIs) that
              will allow these resources to interoperate.  It will deliver both content and
              technological advances in the field of biological databases.  All data,
              software and specifications will be publicly available.  Beyond students
              involved in the research, workshops will provide instruction in community
              annotation of kinases using the PKR and ways to adapt the database for other
              uses.  Modules of the database and APIs will enable the utilization of this
              work by other groups interested in other enzyme families.
