Title       : Integrated Supply Chain Design and Management for Remnant Inventory Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a0217190

Award Number: 0217190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328307             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Schaefer schaefer@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jayant Rajgopal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1686,1786,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              At the heart of the grant is a cutting stock problem - this is a classical
              problem familiar to most researchers in operations research and has
              applications in a number of continuous production applications including metals
              such as steel or aluminum, paper, textiles, fiber-optic and electrical cable,
              and glass, to name a few.  However, the version around which the proposed
              research is built is fundamentally different.  The grant address the case where
              a company has geographically distributed distribution points that it can stock
              with standard sizes from its plants, and the customer demand for smaller sizes
              comes from other geographically distributed points on a continuing basis. 
              Second, this demand is stochastic in nature.  Third, it addresses a sustainable
              manufacturing environment where the trim is not considered waste, but rather
              gets recycled and has an inherent value associated with it.  Fourth, the
              problem is not a static one where a one-time decision has to be made.  Rather,
              decisions need to be made on an ongoing basis, and decisions made at one point
              in time have a significant impact on decisions at later points in time.  The
              overall objective is to find long-run rates of replenishment for the standard
              sizes as well as long-run policies for cutting these into smaller pieces so as
              to satisfy customer demand. The grant will extend this basic model to consider
              supply chain design problems and the analogous case for two-dimensional
              products.

Supply chain problems are critical for most industries. While
              there has been much research into optimizing supply chains, most research
              considers only a small part of the supply chain. This grant is unique in that
              it provides optimal policies for the design and operations of a supply chain
              under uncertainty. Since it addresses one-dimensional and two-dimensional
              products it will have applications to many industrial problems.
