Title       : Transmission Expansion in an Open Access Environment: Reliability and Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0217701

Award Number: 0217701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chen-Ching Liu liu@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacques Lawarree  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Transmission expansion is a nationally important area for reliable supply of
              electric energy and yet it is seriously under-invested in the U.S. According to
              North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC), '"very few bulk
              transmission line additions are planned; new regional planning entities,
              adequate pricing incentives, and improved, streamlined approval processes also
              must be developed to deal with the need for new transmission lines for an open
              market."

In a competitive environment, the Independent System Operator (ISO)
              (or Regional Transmission Organization (RTO)) is charged with the
              responsibility to maintain the system reliability of an interconnected power
              grid. The ISO also operates the power grid and implements the transactions of
              electric energy. However, the ISO does not invest in the transmission
              expansion; the investors such as transmission owners do.

We propose a
              stochastic model for the revenues of the transmission owners. We will develop
              analytical methods that determine the point of decision where a transmission
              own would be willing to invest in a transmission expansion project based on the
              costs and revenues. The proposed method requires power system optimization
              incorporating system security and congestion constraints.

This proposed
              research is expected to make an impact on how the market rules concerning
              transmission expansion should be designed. The resulting rules would provide
              the necessary economic signals in the market in order to ensure an adequate
              level of transmission capacity in the U.S.

