Title       : The History and Philosophy of Science -- Advancing U.S. Interests in
               International Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0217113

Award Number: 0217113
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17869              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine Lawson elawson@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura Sheahan  (Principal Investigator former)
              Wendy D. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
SES 02-17113
The History and Philosophy of Science -- Advancing U.S.
              Interests in International Activities
Laura Sheahan, National Academy of
              Sciences


This proposal supports the operation of the U.S. National
              Committee for the International Union of the History and Philosophy of Science
              (USNC/IUHPS).  The USNC represents the United States in the International
              Council for Science (ICSU) -- an international union.   This support is
              designed support effective U.S. participation and strong leadership in the
              international union in response to expanding needs in international science and
              technology through the efforts of volunteer members. 

The goals of this USNC
              are to:  1)  Assure that membership privileges and obligations to the
              international union are fulfilled and that the U.S. community is appropriately
              and fully represented in international congresses;  2)  Serve as neutral fora
              where representatives of multiple U.S. societies and government agencies can
              meet to discuss trends in their disciplines;  3)  Work with other USNCs in the
              network to foster interdisciplinary projects;  4)  Serve as conduits of
              communication between the ICSU family and the professional societies and
              between ICSU and individual scientists; and 5)  Serve as incubators of ideas
              that are then brought to the attention of professional societies, NRC
              disciplinary boards or commissions, and others.

This specific proposal
              provides funds for two years for the support staff from the National Academy of
              Sciences, primarily to allow for the regular meetings of the volunteer members
              of the USNC , and in support of USNC activities related to the international
              activities of the IUHPS and ICSU.  

