Title       : Collaborative Research on Landslide Generated Tsunamis and Tsunami-Structure
               Interactions Using NEES Tsunami Basin Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0217744

Award Number: 0217744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip L. Liu pll3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Solomon C. Yim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0217744, Philip Liu, Cornell University
"Collaborative Research on
              Tsunami-Structure Interaction Using the NEES Tsunami Facility"

This project
              addresses the forces generated by, and the destructive effects of, tsunamis. 
              At some coastal locations, the tsunami runup occurs with a bore-like wave front
              with destructive energy - the steep wave front exerts high impact forces on
              coastal structures.  In other locations, the greatest damage occurs during the
              rundown phase, where masses of water sweep already weakened structures back
              toward the ocean.  As tsunamis move up and down a coast, they can transport
              large quantities of debris, such as cars, boats, boulders, and poles.  These
              objects can impact and damage structures along the paths of the tsunami. 
              Therefore, a means of estimating the forces on a structure resulting from the
              impact from a tsunami-borne moving object is needed.

The objectives of this
              research program are. (1) To understand the dynamic interactions between a
              tsunami, rigid and flexible structures, and moving objects; (2) To improve the
              modeling capability of the complex runup flows within the context of their
              interactions with flexible structures and moving objects; and (3). To develop
              benchmark problems with high quality experimental data for validating numerical
              simulation models.  These objectives are achieved via an integrated
              experimental and theoretical (numerical) research program.  The analysis is
              based on the Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations and the
              turbulence closure model, yielding simulation models describing the
              interactions between a tsunami, moving objects and flexible structures.  To
              validate the simulation models, a series of experiments is conducted at the new
              Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) tsunami facility at Oregon
              State University.  The research team at Cornell University also participates in
              the experiments at OSU, both in person and remotely using the facilities of the
              NEESgrid.

This research operates at the interface between traditional fields
              of science and engineering - fluid dynamics, structural mechanics, soil
              mechanics and applied mathematics - and thereby serves as a bridge among these
              fields.  The numerical simulation model being developed can be used as a
              research or design tool.  For instance, engineers can use it to perform
              preliminary designs for offshore and coastal structures, and to study the
              impact of coastal structures on the environment.  It can also be employed as a
              research tool to investigate ship slamming, submarine hydrodynamics, and mine
              detection methodology.

