Title       : A Game Theoretic Approach to the Design of Multi-Agent Process Planning Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0217974

Award Number: 0217974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326786             (Estimated)
Investigator: Beth E. Allen assist@econ.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research project is to suggest how manufacturing process
              planning systems should be designed. In automated manufacturing, process
              planning is the intermediate step that transforms a design into an ordered list
              of instructions for fabrication. For instance, in machining, a block of
              homogeneous metal (the stock or initial workpiece) must be transformed by
              removing material appropriately. For each step, the position of the workpiece,
              how it is held in place (fixturing), the specific tool to be used, the tool
              access direction, and the precise tool path must be specified. A computer aided
              process planning system takes a computer file defining the design in a standard
              format---the output of a computer aided design system---and finds computerized
              instructions for computer assisted manufacturing equipment to make the desired
              artifact. Increasingly, such process planning systems contain multiple
              artificially intelligent agents (or distributed decision makers). Process
              planners (and multi-agent systems in general) define particular games. The
              examination of such games helps one to understand how process planners and
              multi-agent systems work, why they can fail, and how they can be improved.
              Game-theoretic mechanism design analyzes how games can be designed so that the
              desired outcomes arise as equilibria in the games. The proposed research will
              first use existing results in game theory and mechanism design to study process
              planners and multi-agent systems. Then new results will be derived for network
              and distributed games and the potential disaggregation of agents will be
              analyzed. The goal is to establish rigorous theoretical principles, based on
              strategic optimization behavior, to guide the design of multi-agent process
              planning systems and multi-agent systems in general.

If successful, this
              research project will provide principles to improve the design of process
              planning systems. Process planning can be time-consuming and expensive; when it
              fails, it can lead to further costs and delays due to redesign. Moreover,
              process planning is a crucial step in a manufacturing industry (machining) that
              typically represents about five percent of gross domestic product in developed
              economies. Hence, it is important to design process planning systems well, so
              that they successfully find feasible---and, ideally, good, where "good'' means
              relatively inexpensive to manufacture to tolerance specifications---process
              plans quickly on average when the design is manufacturable (and don't waste
              excessive amounts of time and resources if the design is not manufacturable). 
              Broader impacts include involvement of students (including those from
              underrepresented groups) in this research and the initiation of a new course at
              the University of Minnesota on game theory for engineers.  Moreover, the
              project is inherently interdisciplinary and involves novel applications of game
              theory in manufacturing.

