Title       : Multi-Axial Full-scale Sub-Structuring Testing & Simulation Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a0217325

Award Number: 0217325
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joy Pauschke                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2958011            (Estimated)
Investigator: Amr Elnashai aelnash@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              B. F. Spencer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel A. Kuchma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew G. Alleyne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jamshid Ghaboussi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1644      NETWK FOR ERTHQUKE ENG SIMULAT
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS-0217325 
Elnashai
The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake
              Engineering Simulation (NEES) is a project funded under the NSF Major Research
              Equipment and Facilities Construction account. This cooperative agreement
              establishes a NEES Multi-Axial Full-Scale Sub-Structured Testing and Simulation
              (MUST-SIM) Facility at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC).
              UIUC will design, purchase, construct, install, commission, and operate new
              equipment and additions to the Newmark Laboratories to enable the testing of
              full-scale structures or part of structures, including their foundations and
              soil mass, while simulating the remaining parts. The MUST-SIM facility will be
              operational by September 2004 and will be managed as a national shared-use NEES
              equipment site, with teleobservation and teleoperation capabilities, to provide
              new earthquake engineering research testing capabilities through 2014. This
              NEES equipment site will be connected to the NEES network system through a high
              performance network. Shared-use access and training will be coordinated through
              the NEES Consortium. This award is the outcome of peer review of this proposal
              submitted to program solicitation NSF-01-164, "NEES Earthquake Engineering
              Research Equipment, Phase 2." The primary objective of the proposed effort will
              be to create a facility in which a full-scale subassembly can be subjected to
              complex loading and imposed deformation states at multiple connection points on
              the subassembly, including the connection between the structure and its
              foundation.  The proposed MUST-SIM facility has the following components: (i)
              6-DOF load and position control at three connection points, (ii) system
              modularity to allow for easy expansion and low-cost maintenance/operation,
              (iii) multiple dense arrays of non-contact measurement devices, (iv) T-section
              strong wall creating two testing compartments each providing support in three
              loading planes and (v) advanced visualization and data mining capabilities for
              integrated teleoperation and teleobservation. The proposed MUST-SIM facility
              realizes the first two features through the development of modular six-DOF
              "Loading and Boundary Condition Boxes" (LBCB) that allow for precise
              application of complex load and boundary conditions.  The LBCBs, which are 3.5
              m x 1.5 m x 1.5 m and house six actuators each, will be able to impose motions
              on the test structures that are determined from the results of concurrently
              running numerical models of the test specimen and the surrounding
              structure/foundation/soil system employing pseudo-dynamic testing methods. 
              Dense arrays of state-of-the-art, non-contact instrumentation, will allow near
              real-time model updating for the model-based simulation. The three systems
              envisaged are (a) the Krypton Rodyum coordinate measuring system, (b) Stress
              Photonics digital photo-elasticity and (c) close range digital photogrammetry. 
              Additionally, this facility and its telepresence/teleoperation capabilities
              will be enhanced by development of multi-function data visualization and
              knowledge interpretation tools in cooperation with the Automated Learning Group
              of NCSA. This is likely to be based on the D2K (data-to-knowledge) framework
              developed at NCSA, with state-of-the-art visualization and control facilities.
              The proposed reaction wall is a T-section structure of length 25 meters and
              height 9 meters. The T-section web is at mid-length and is 15 meters wide. The
              MUST-SIM facility will be deployed in testing complete
              soil-foundation-structure systems to meet the new and major earthquake
              engineering challenges, not only in research and development towards seismic
              risk reduction, but also towards education and training of engineers through
              integration into curricula at the University and through the NSF-funded
              Mid-America Earthquake Center's Education and Outreach program.

