Title       : Network Processors: Architecture and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0217334

Award Number: 0217334
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Franklin jbf@ccrc.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan S. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1659,1686,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Two forces have exacerbated problems associated with packet processing. First,
              demands for higher bandwidth and line rates challenge our abilities to perform
              real-time packet processing. Second, more complex functional requirements and
              services are being defined that significantly increase packet computational
              demand. 

In response, modern routers are being equipped with Network
              Processors (NPs) that include both general-purpose multiprocessing and special
              hardware capabilities. NPs push the envelope of our design capabilities. This
              research aims at quantifying NP design and at developing a performance driven
              methodology that is cognizant of both physical constraints (e.g., area, power)
              and the computational requirements of packet applications.

Principal
              architectural approaches (parallelism, pipelining, instruction specialization)
              are investigated and design procedures for exploiting these architectural
              paradigms are developed. The NP architecture models along with associated
              benchmarking lead to a coherent NP design methodology and extend our
              understanding of real-time computer design.

The research directly benefits
              the rapidly expanding area of NP and router design, and network performance.
              The techniques utilized are those of classical computer architecture, including
              the formalization of the design constraints, development of design models, and
              the use of benchmarks for quantitative model parameterization. 


