Title       : The Stock Market and Innovative Capability in the Optical Networking Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0217633

Award Number: 0217633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Lazonick William_Lazonick@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project analyzes the impact of the stock market on the innovative
              capabilities of high-technology companies that have been central to the "new
              economy."  Through in-depth comparative analyses of the accumulation of
              innovative capabilities at various major optical networking companies, the
              impacts of the changing roles of the stock market as well as the impact of
              volatility in stock prices will be evaluated.

	In the speculative boom of
              the late '90s, many highly touted start-ups with little revenue were able to do
              IPOs with only a small portion of their stock being issued to the public while
              raising unprecedented amounts of cash that could fund future growth.   A high
              stock price became important in the competitive bidding among these companies
              for high-technology acquisitions, and hence played an important role in
              determining which companies would exercise strategic control over new
              technologies that they did not develop in-house.  Then, to develop and utilize
              the acquired technologies, the acquirer had to integrate the capabilities of
              the acquired companies with its own capabilities.  This meant using a
              stock-based compensation for recruiting and retaining key personnel, mostly in
              non-executive positions, who might otherwise have gone to work for competitors.
               In established companies, stock option packages were used to keep personnel
              from leaving to join start ups.  Corporate stock thus came to play an important
              ole in the accumulation of innovative capabilities by both new ventures and
              going concerns.

	This project analyzes the impact of the use of corporate
              stock as an acquisition and compensation currency on the accumulation of
              innovative capabilities by major optical networking firms.  How did such use of
              stock, entailing as it did pressure on corporate executives to maintain high
              stock prices, affect the strategic decisions of these executives to invest in
              innovative capabilities?  Did the existence of start-ups and high stock
              valuations bias top managers toward acquiring innovative capabilities
              externally when their companies may have accumulated these capabilities more
              effectively through internal development of the technologies?  Did the use of
              stock options as a key component of compensation packages for large numbers of
              managerial and technical personnel motivate these employees to engage in
              organizational learning for the companies that employed them?  Or did it
              encourage highly individualistic behavior, with concern for mobility within the
              labor market?

	Has the use of corporate stock as an acquisition and
              compensation currency in the boom made these companies more vulnerable than
              otherwise to the slump?  Has the role of stock changed in the downturn?  This
              project promises to provide useful answers to guide corporate growth strategies
              in the future.



