Title       : Semiconductor Devices for Control of Laser Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0217358

Award Number: 0217358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Franz Kaertner kaertner@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For over a decade semiconductor saturable absorbers have been used very
              successfully in laboratories to modelock a variety of solid-state and fiber
              lasers.  In this project, two new semiconductor devices for control of laser
              dynamics shall be investigated.  The first device is an extension of the
              conventional semiconductor saturable absorber mirror used for modelocking of
              lasers by integrating it with an additional optically controllable modulator,
              for example by free carrier absorption. Even if the laser does not Q-switch,
              the absorber has to be saturated strongly, i.e. depending on the laser design
              by even more than ten times the saturation energy, to suppress this undesired
              Q-switching.  However, such operation puts a heavy thermal load on the
              absorber, which reduces its lifetime.  Therefore, the first goal of this
              proposal is to demonstrate absorbers that do not only control the mode locking
              but in addition the Q-switching of the laser.  Such a device is able to
              suppress the undesired Q-switching, which often occurs in saturable absorber
              modelocked lasers and greatly reduces the life time of the absorber. With these
              absorbers a laser system can be operated in the continuous or Q-switched
              mode-locked regime independent of its other laser parameters such as pump
              power, repetition rate, output power, mode volume, upper-state lifetime, etc.
              In this project, the device will be applied to modelocking of high-repetition
              rate lasers. 
The second goal of this research project is to search for
              entirely novel control elements, i.e. semiconductor devices, that are able to
              detect the absolute optical phase of the pulses directly from the laser output.
               Such devices allow for phase control of few-cycle laser pulses and related
              quantities to which the absolute optical phase is ultra-sensitive, such as the
              intracavity pulse energy. Specifically, we want to investigate whether the
              recently discovered carrier-wave rabi-flopping in GaAs, which should also occur
              in other material systems, can be used to construct an optical phase detector.
              
The improvement in control of solid-state laser dynamics by the envisioned
              devices will enable a new generation of more compact, stable and reliable laser
              sources with extended parameter ranges such as higher repetition rates and
              higher power handling capabilities.  In addition, these devices will lead to a
              completely new generation of few-cycle laser sources, in which the absolute
              optical phase of the laser pulse directly emitted from the oscillator can be
              controlled.  This has a broad range of applications in frequency metrology and
              strong-field ultrafast laser physics.  The project is only possible because of
              the close cooperation between groups, which provide the know-how in material
              science necessary for device fabrication and groups that are able to
              characterize and test the devices in advanced laser systems.


