Title       : ITR: Computational Prototyping of Micro-Electro-Fluidic-Mechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0217986

Award Number: 0217986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: N R. Aluru aluru@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Miniaturized sensors and actuators, also referred to as Microelectromechanical
              Systems (MEMS), play a critical role in information technology revolution. For
              example, the development of wireless internet, complex systems on a chip for
              aerospace, medical, health and various other industries is enabled by the MEMS
              technology. Over the past decade, advances in microfabrication technologies
              have enabled breakthrough developments in miniaturized sensors, actuators,
              devices and systems (collectively called MEMS). Some of the most recent
              innovative applications include accelerometers in navigational-grade guidance
              systems, rate gyroscopes in
antilock-braking systems, and chemical sensors in
              complex biomedical instrumentation. MEMS based sensors are more attractive as
              they are often less expensive and perform better than traditional devices and
              they can more easily be integrated with control electronics to enable the
              concept of systems-on-a-chip. The lack of efficient and accurate computational
              prototyping tools has thus far been a significant barrier to the development of
              MEMS, because most existing electronic and mechanical computational prototyping
              tools do not have the ability to analyze
microscopic phenomena adequately. As
              a result, MEMS manufacturers have been forced to develop and test prototypes,
              both of which have been time-consuming and very expensive.

In this proposal
              we focus on a particular class of MEMS - referred to as
              microelectrofluidicmechanical systems (MEFMS). MEFMS are miniaturized sensors,
              actuators, devices and systems, where mechanical, electrical and fluidic energy
              domains play a central role. Many electrofluidicmechanical devices have been
              designed and fabricated - e.g. pressure sensors, accelerometers, gyroscopes,
              digital micro mirrors, microphones and other devices. While fabrication
              approaches for these devices are mature enough, investigation of design
              alternatives
for many of these devices is currently limited because of the
              lack of computational design tools. While computational research primarily
              addresses engineering analysis, in this proposal we focus on computational
              research for design and analysis of microelectrofluidicmechanical
              systems.

We expect this work to break new grounds in the areas of software
              tools with advanced computational methods for MEMS. Graduate students will be
              trained on the MEMS technology, advanced computational methods and design
              methodologies for MEMS. We anticipate that the design of miniaturized systems
              based on MEMS will progress rapidly with the availability of efficient,
              accurate and robust computational prototyping tools. Aggressive designers, who
              are currently handicapped because of the limited computational analysis tools
              for MEMS, will be able to challenge their design skills when computational
              prototyping tools for MEMS are in place.



