Title       : RUI: The Interdependence of GaN Surface Chemistry and Surface Morphology and
               Reconstruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0217551

Award Number: 0217551
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260933             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcus T. McEllistrem mcellimt@uwec.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Eau Claire
	      Park & Garfield
	      Eau Claire, WI  54701    715/836-2637

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This RUI project addresses the chemistry of GaN surfaces and how these reactions
              are influenced by surface morphology (cluster-covered or smooth), and
              conversely how surface morphology is modified by reactions. Cluster formation
              on GaN appears to be especially facile, and is expected to result in Ga-rich
              surfaces compared to atomically smooth surfaces. Surface reactions that
              pres-age cluster formation as well as etching reactions will be the focus of
              the proposed research. Sur-face reactions will be monitored by changes in
              surface electronic structure using ultraviolet pho-toelectron spectroscopy and
              by determining the temperature at which molecules desorb from the surface.
              Surface morphology will be characterized using scanning tunneling microscopy
              and low-energy electron diffraction. Experiments will determine how surface
              morphology influences chemistry by preparing a surface with known morphology
              before surface reactions. How surface chemistry changes morphology will be
              characterized by re-examining the GaN surface after sur-face reactions to
              assess how local surface structure or composition has changed. Changes in
              composition and electron density will also be evaluated by ultraviolet and
              X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. By comparing surfaces with known changes in
              morphology, it may be possible to establish whether a surface is smooth or
              cluster-covered by photoelectron spectroscopy.
%%% 
The project addresses
              fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials science having
              technological relevance. Undergraduate students will play a primary role in the
              project, with op-portunities for research integrated directly into their
              academic program. A newly established collaboration between UW-Eau Claire
              chemistry and physics faculty enhances the project. In-strumentation recently
              acquired through NSF MRI awards has been combined into a common-use materials
              research facility in which faculty and students from several groups and
              departments work as a team on various research projects. This interdisciplinary
              approach to materials research provides an environment where undergraduate
              students work directly with their peers, and de-velop cooperative learning
              skills as well as mentoring less-experienced students. The research program
              enables forefront research and access to state-of-the-art surface science
              equipment to undergraduate students. 
***  

