Title       : Representing Genes: Testing Competing Philosophical Analyses of the Gene Concept
               in Contemporary Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0217567

Award Number: 0217567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95046              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Griffiths pauleg@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 0217567  
Representing Genes: Testing Competing Philosophical Analyses of
              the Gene Concept in Contemporary Molecular Biology
Paul Griffiths, University
              of Pittsburgh

There is widespread agreement amongst historians and
              philosophers of biology that the gene concept is not merely "vague" or
              "flexible," but rather that biologists in different fields conceive of the term
              "gene" in one or more specific ways that reflect their research practice. 
              Philosophers and historians of science have made various claims about precisely
              how and why the gene concept varies amongst biologists and have argued that the
              variation is either functional or dysfunctional with respect to the actual
              conduct of biological research.  Previous research by the PI has established
              that claims in this field can be operationalized and tested by statistical
              analysis of questionnaire data obtained from working biologists.  The objective
              of this study is to construct, in cooperation with leading researchers in the
              history and philosophy of biology and with the help of researchers in other
              fields with relevant methodological expertise, testable versions
              of
philosophical claims about how groups of contemporary biologists think
              about genes, and to test those claims.  The purpose of the study is not to
              arrive at one or more correct "definitions" of the gene, but rather to map out
              the variation in the gene concept and to explore its causes and its effects.
              

The project begins with a workshop of leading researchers in history and
              philosophy of biology and others with expertise in the relevant biological
              fields and in social scientific research.   The aim of the workshop is to agree
              on research questions and operationalizations. It is to be followed by subject
              recruitment, data collection, and data analysis. A second workshop at the end
              of the project is to discuss the results and to plan publications by several
              overlapping collaborations of workshop participants aimed at several different
              target audiences.

Among the many impacts of this project, one potential
              broader impact stands out. Although biologists are aware that the term "gene"
              means different things in different fields, the outside world is left with
              statements from different biologists that appear to be discussing the same
              thing, while the validity of those statements, in fact, depends on the specific
              gene concept held by the individual biologist.   Thus, crucial law and policy
              decisions may be made based on faulty public, lawmaker, and policymaker notions
              of what import they should attach to these statements.  The project can make a
              significant contribution by highlighting this circumstance. 

