Title       : Sevilleta LTER: Long Term Ecological Research in a Biome Transition Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2002   
File        : a0217774

Award Number: 0217774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2800000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford N. Dahm cdahm@sevilleta.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Blair O. Wolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Gosz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terry L. Yates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Pockman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Parmenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                      The Sevilleta LTER (SEV) research site is located on the Sevilleta
              National Wildlife Refuge in central New Mexico, where a junction of four biomes
              (Great Plains Grassland, Great Basin Shrub-steppe, Chihuahuan Desert and
              Montane Coniferous Forest) provides a rich assortment of Biome Transition Zones
              (BTZs). Interacting with a highly variable climate, elevational range, complex
              topography, geology, and soils, this provides a complex spatial and temporal
              template for this project. SEV combines long-term research and an increasing
              array of collaborative, short-term research efforts that range from genetics to
              remote sensing of the landscape and focus on the floral and faunal properties
              of transitions between grass and shrub life forms represented by two components
              of the Chihuahuan Desert biome and their junctions with the Great Plains
              shortgrass steppe biome. 
        The proposed new work will build upon and
              expand foundation studies ongoing since 1989 and initiate new long-term
              landscape experiments and measurements to develop and test a general theory of
              the dynamics of BTZs. A new conceptual framework will expand past studies to
              focus on patch-scale dynamics, biotic and abiotic drivers, and the consequences
              of different patch types, sizes, and their mosaics to landscape and regional
              scale dynamics. A series of experiments will be initiated that focus on the
              importance of plant-soil-animal-microbe interactions and feedbacks with
              ecosystem dynamics. An iterative approach combines a synthetic simulation model
              with data collected from short- and long-term interdisciplinary studies as a
              framework for extending our conceptual model to additional transitions in the
              future.
        Results will provide an important regional context for studies
              conducted within the shortgrass steppe biome at the SGS LTER and within the
              Chihuahuan Desert biome at the JRN LTER. Future studies will expand to other
              major biome representatives at SEV (e.g., shrubsteppe of the Colorado Plateau,
              Pinon -Juniper woodlands). These studies on other BTZs and ecotones present at
              SEV will further develop and test BTZ theory applicable to understanding and
              predicting ecosystem response to global change. Simulation modeling will be
              used to predict changes in the location and composition of BTZs through time
              under changes in climate and disturbance regime. Because the region is likely
              to experience a decade-long drought, directional changes in climate, and
              increases in atmospheric deposition, an understanding of the key processes
              driving patch and ecotone dynamics is critical to an ability to manage and
              preserve the biodiversity and natural resources of these systems. Common
              properties and patterns that can be used for many types of boundaries at many
              scales are expected. Extrapolating from patch mosaics, processes, and dynamics
              to the landscape and region will also be critical in determining the
              contribution of the Sevilleta to regional and global biodiversity and
              biogeochemical cycles.

