Title       : An Evaluation Approach for Flexibility in Manufacturing Enterprises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0217924

Award Number: 0217924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harriet Black Nembhard hbnem@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leyuan Shi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1786,5376,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Flexibility allows firms to compete more effectively in today's world of
              substantial price and demand uncertainty, product variety, short product life
              cycles, and rapid product development. In order to benefit from flexibility,
              managers and manufacturing systems must react to events as they unfold. The
              real options approach seeks to quantify just how valuable flexibility really
              is. It incorporates both the uncertainty that is inherent in business and the
              active intervention required for a strategy to succeed.  The purpose of this
              research is to develop an evaluation approach to quantify flexibility in
              manufacturing operations in order to improve operational decision making.
              Specifically, the objectives are to (1) capture and (2) value that flexibility
              using a real options framework. In order to accomplish these objectives, the
              first research task will be to develop a model for multi-period options because
              there is usually a lag between the time when a decision to exercise an
              alternative option is made and when that alternative option can be implemented.
               The second research task is to develop a Monte Carlo simulation approach for
              valuing multi-time period options that allows switches among several choices
              during a decision horizon. Thus the third research task is to develop an
              efficient heuristic for fast approximation of option values so that the
              approach will be practical for industry application.
     This research is
              expected to make several contributions. Foremost, it will bring
              state-of-the-art financial option research to the area of manufacturing
              enterprises and emphasize realism by collaborating with industry partners.
              Additionally, as the methodological approach for valuing flexibility in
              manufacturing enterprises is developed, software tools that can execute the
              valuation calculations will also be generated. These tools and their research
              contexts will be incorporated into the engineering curriculum. Finally, this
              work will promote the careers of underrepresented faculty and students.
