Title       : An EPR Spectrometer for Metallobiochemistry and Environmental Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0217922

Award Number: 0217922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302657             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn Millhauser glennm@chemistry.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore R. Holman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pradip K. Mascharak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to the University of California, Santa Cruz for the
              purchase of an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) spectrometer.  The goal of
              this research program is to develop a deeper understanding of how metals,
              especially those found in the environment, influence living systems.  Metals
              such as iron, copper, manganese and lead are found throughout our environment. 
              Some of these metals are found as natural components of living systems, such as
              plants and bacteria, while others are contaminants.  This research program
              centered on the new EPR spectrometer will provide critical new information at
              the molecular level as to how living systems store metals, utilize metals for
              natural biological processes and respond to metal imbalances. 
This research
              program brings together four interdisciplinary research groups from the
              Departments of Chemistry & Biochemistry and Environmental Toxicology.  Working
              together, these research groups will examine the roles metals play in the prion
              diseases which include mad cow disease and Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease in humans,
              how metals are used in microbial metabolism, how cellular structures are
              chemically modified by metals and how metals such as manganese distribute in
              living systems and contribute to environmental diseases.  This latter project
              is motivated, in part, by the Canadian Government's recent approval of
              manganese as a gasoline additive.  In all of these projects, the molecular
              centers containing the metals will be directly studied with unprecedented
              detail using the EPR spectrometer.
Our fundamental goal is to reveal important
              new molecular insights into how organisms use metals and respond to metal
              imbalances.  The specific research projects will significantly expand our
              understanding of the basic biochemistry of metals.  In addition, the findings
              will identify potential toxic metal species that could ultimately damage
              ecosystems.  By identifying such species before they are widely distributed in
              the environment, such as manganese as a gasoline additive, we may help prevent
              a repeat of previous environmental catastrophes such as those experienced from
              lead, PCBs and asbestos.  The instrument will be used primarily in research
              laboratories.  From an educational perspective, having a new EPR spectrometer
              will allow us to train our future undergraduate and graduate students with this
              modern technique.  We also plan to devote about 5% of the spectrometer time to
              class laboratories so as to enhance education and expose a new generation of
              chemists and environmental scientists to the fundamental technique of EPR.

