Title       : Dirac Centenary Conference (Baylor University)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0217730

Award Number: 0217730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Truell W. Hyde Truell_Hyde@baylor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce L. Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor University
	      Post Office Box 97088
	      Waco, TX  767987088    /   -

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Baylor University's Dirac Centenary Conference (http://www.baylor.edu/Dirac) is
              an interdisciplinary evaluation of the seminal contributions of Paul Dirac
              (1902-1984) to the methodology, progress, and future of twentieth and twenty
              first century physics. Drawing together scholars from theoretical physics,
              mathematics, the history of science and the philosophy of science, it provides
              a rare chance for students and researchers across different disciplines to
              benefit from interaction with each other. The discussion into the cutting-edge
              developments in canonical quantum gravity, supersymmetry, superstrings and
              geometric functional analysis made possible by Dirac's innovations in
              mathematics and physical theory will give physics and mathematics students
              exposure to active research in their fields, and also contribute to an
              understanding of the development of physical theory in a way that will aid
              historians and philosophers of science as they examine the methodological,
              epistemological and metaphysical implications of modern physics. The
              cross-fertilization of different disciplines will also contribute to advancing
              knowledge and understanding within and across fields in beneficial ways. The
              fruits of this scholarly interaction will be published in an edited volume of
              conference proceedings.

The conference also provides a unique opportunity
              for undergraduate and graduate students, as well as postdoctoral researchers in
              physics, mathematics, philosophy and history to present their work in a context
              where they can get feedback from senior scholars at the forefront of their
              respective fields. The conference opens with a poster session competition for
              students in the physical sciences and mathematics, and a short paper
              presentation competition for students in the history and/or philosophy of
              science. Conference scholarships are available for student participation and
              attendance with minority students strongly encouraged to apply. The impact of
              this effort on science education will be furthered by Baylor's coordination of
              a consortium of Texas schools co-sponsoring the conference, and by the
              recruitment of student involvement from many of the smaller colleges in the
              southwest, particularly those that are historically African-American or
              Hispanic. Publicity for the conference will draw public attention to issues in
              science and contribute to promoting science awareness and education in central
              Texas and beyond.

