Title       : SGER: Investigation of a Combinatorial Mechanical Alloying-Activated Sintering
               (MA-AS) Technique for the Synthesis of Age-Hardenable, Self-lubricating
               Bearings by Powder Metallurgy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0217267

Award Number: 0217267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deepak G. Bhat dgbhat@engr.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9150,9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This SGER award supports an investigation of combinatorial materials processing
              techniques for the synthesis of age-hardenable aluminum alloys by powder
              metallurgy, which can also be simultaneously strengthened by a dispersion of a
              finely divided oxide phase.  It is well known that the sintering of aluminum
              powder is hampered by the presence of a tenacious oxide film on the surface,
              which interferes with pressing and sintering of the powder compacts. 
              Beneficial effects of a dispersion of refractory oxide particles in an alloy
              matrix for enhanced hardness and strength are well known; however, the
              technical difficulties are not easily overcome without the use of complex
              methods.  Mechanical alloying techniques have been known to provide a
              significant benefit for inducing solid-state diffusion and alloying of
              materials.  Sintering processes, enhanced by methods of plasma activation and
              similar techniques, have been used in combination with mechanical alloying to
              synthesize refractory metals, intermetallics, metallic glasses and other
              difficult materials.
This proposal deals with the study of a novel combination
              of mechanical alloying and chemically activated sintering of Al-Cu
              age-hardenable alloys.  In this work, powders of aluminum will be mechanically
              alloyed with nanocrystalline powders of copper of platelet or flake morphology,
              and subjected to chemical activation by exposure to selected dilute organic
              acids, to provide suitable metal-organic surface films on the treated powders. 
              The decomposition of these films at low temperatures will provide a highly
              activated surface for rapid sintering and densification of the alloyed powders.
               The sintered compacts will be heat treated to provide the age-hardening
              effect.  At the same time, the dispersion of the aluminum oxide particles
              during mechanical alloying will provide the possibility of
              dispersion-strengthening of the sintered alloy.
This project will provide
              unique and excellent opportunities to enterprising young engineering students
              to pursue cutting edge research in advanced materials and manufacturing
              techniques, and to learn about the potential benefits of nanostructured and
              engineered materials.  The establishment of this research program will provide
              a unique opportunity for the PI to develop new and exciting classroom and
              laboratory instructional materials and courses to augment the research effort. 
              The PI is participating in the George Washington Carver Project administered by
              the University of Arkansas, which provides promising and talented young
              undergraduate students from the historically black colleges and universities
              (HBCU) in the State of Arkansas an opportunity to experience the excitement and
              benefits of a science or engineering career.  Under this program, selected
              youngsters will spend several weeks on campus, working with a faculty member
              and assisting in an on-going or specially developed research project.  The PI
              will be supporting one undergraduate student under the Carver Project during
              the upcoming summer session.  The student will work on this SGER project,
              assisting a graduate student in Mechanical Engineering, to set up and use the
              laboratory P/M processing equipment and conduct laboratory experiments.  The
              student will learn research methods, laboratory procedures and safety issues,
              research documentation and analysis of experimental data, and acquire hands-on
              experience in the application of scientific and engineering principles in the
              development of advanced materials and manufacturing techniques.
