Title       : Dissertation Research: The Origins and Development of Combat Information Centers
               During World War II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0217532

Award Number: 0217532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Mindell mindell@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project is an historical study of the United States
              Navy's efforts to develop sophisticated "command and control" technologies
              prior to and during the Second World War. Specifically, it explores the
              development of Combat Information Centers (CICs), focusing on efforts to
              integrate complex human-machine systems under the exigencies of war. As
              developed and utilized during the war, the CIC was primarily an information
              station, established to collect, evaluate, and disseminate tactical information
              to task force commanders and ships' commanding officers. How best to organize
              the equipment and specially-trained personnel that together made up a CIC was a
              problem of enormous complexity. By studying the Navy's efforts to solve this
              problem, the project seeks to explain how the evolving relationship between
              humans and machines altered warfare at sea. The principal research method for
              the project involves traveling to official archives in order to view official
              and unofficial documents (e.g., letters, memoranda, reports, etc.) produced
              during the time period under investigation and related to the topic under
              investigation. This process is time consuming and requires a physical presence
              at relevant archives, frequently for several weeks at a time. For this project,
              the majority of archival documents are located within the greater Washington DC
              area.
