Title       : Investigating the Effects on Firm Performance of Product Portfolio
               Innovativeness and Organizational Learning through Experimentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0217874

Award Number: 0217874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80661              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn Voss gvoss@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zannie Voss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mitzi M. Montoya-Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project studies the effects of organizational learning through
              experimentation on firm performance and on the success of the firm's product
              portfolio. The research methods take a much finer grained view of the
              relationship between portfolio structure and performance. Builds on two
              existing knowledge streams in a novel way, the central hypothesis is that
              portfolios that contain too much innovation may result in organizations that
              are less successful, i.e., that some organizations may be too innovative and
              thus suffer problems. By rigorously controlling for external contexts, which
              have never before been controlled for in portfolio analysis, this research has
              the potential to uncover significant relationships that have eluded previous
              researchers. 

Past research suggests that innovative firms outperform their
              competitors, measured in terms of market share, profitability, growth and/or
              market capitalization, but research has not examined how best to balance the
              product portfolio mix in terms of innovativeness. A portfolio approach to
              innovation creates both variety and redundancy, which in turn allow flexible
              responses in the face of uncertainty. While a portfolio approach to innovation
              sounds good in theory, making it happen in practice is reputedly not simple.
              This project proposes to study the effects on firm performance of product
              portfolio innovativeness and the moderating role of external market
              characteristics. Intelligent failure through experimentation is argued to be
              the foundation of learning that creates forward momentum in innovation.
              Experimentation in innovation is a key sense-making and feedback mechanism that
              drives organizational learning. Though past research has not examined how
              organizational learning through experimentation drives product portfolio
              innovativeness and firm performance, a successful product portfolio likely
              builds progressively (in steps or leaps) from an accumulation of learning
              resulting from experimentation and the development of new knowledge that
              transfers to all products in the portfolio. 

The proposed research program
              consists of three distinct phases. Phase 1 will involve qualitative research
              with six industry experts across a variety of industries to ensure the
              completeness, validity, and generalizability of the conceptual model and
              measures. Phase 2 will involve an empirical study in conjunction with Theatre
              Communications Group (TCG). The purpose of the empirical study will be to
              collect objective and subjective measures for the focal constructs and test the
              conceptual model. Based on prior research with TCG, participation of more than
              120 of the largest professional theatres in the United States is expected.
              Phase 3 will involve sharing the study results with the six industry experts to
              inform inferences and explore the generalizability of the results. 

