Title       : Ethics of Wildlife Fertility Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2002      
File        : a0217095

Award Number: 0217095
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Knuth bak3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Curtis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Tantillo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thornton Lauber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1094,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In many areas of the country, white-tailed deer populations "are large, growing,
              and  perceived to be causing many problems for f1uman comunities. In some of
              these areas, lethal measures have been used to cull the herds; in others,
              citizens have called for fertility control methods such as immunocontraception
              or surgical sterilization. In other locations, feral cats present a similar
              management problem. Because cats are kept as pets by many people, some states
              have laws offering "wild" cats a measure of protection from lethal control that
              other nuisance species lack. The examples of deer and cat overpopulation raise
              many interesting ethical questions about the appropriateness of managing
              animals by manipulating their reproductive systems. To address these questions,
              this study relies on two components: an empirical descriptive component and a
              normative philosophical component. In the descriptive component, the
              investigators ask: what do people believe about wildlife fertility control, and
              why do they believe what they believe? In the normative component, the central
              question is: how well do peoples' moral beliefs about wi1dlife fertility
              control match the content of philosophical literature? The objectives of this
              project are to: (1) characterize the ethical arguments people use to support
              their judgments about fertility control for deer and feral cats; (2) identify
              the characteristics of fertility control methods that influence these
              judgments; (3) synthesize works in the ethical literature that have relevance
              to people's arguments about wildlife fertility control; and (4) analyze
              people's arguments about wildlife fertility control based on this
              synthesis.

The classification of arguments will provide the basis for the
              subsequent ethical analysis, in which the beliefs and arguments described in
              the empirical component will be analyzed for their validity and cogency based
              on an analysis of the relevant ethical literature. This research will help to
              generate recommendations for improving the quality of deliberation about
              fertility control in wildlife management. In future research, the investigators
              will use the results of this study to guide the design and testing of
              educational strategies that will help stakeholders better consider the ethical
              ramifications of different decisions about wildlife fertility control.
              Improving how people are educated about the ethical ramifications of wildlife
              fertility control will help to ensure that management decisions are based on a
              thorough consideration of the ethical dimensions of these issues. 



