Title       : Modelling Structure and Function of Proteins Encoded by the Rice Genome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0217241

Award Number: 0217241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1896908            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ram Samudrala ram@compbio.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Rice is one of the most important crops in the world, and the main source of
              food for nearly half of the world's population.  Rice research can be applied
              the other major cereals, such as wheat and
maize, and many aspects of rice
              genomics can be transferred to the many minor economic grass species that have
              themselves not warranted extensive research and breeding.  Drafts of the rice
              genome have been recently published, and current estimates indicate that 60,000
              genes
are present in rice.

The plan is to construct a structural and
              functional model for every protein encoded by the rice genome using methods
              developed at the University of Washington. The project will further the
              understanding and elucidation of the function of characterized as well as novel
              proteins, identify those proteins that improve yield and confer disease and
              pest resistance, and enable genetic engineering of rice crops with beneficial
              traits not naturally found in rice.

The research, involving the
              collaborative efforts of scientists from all over the world, will provide
              opportunities for the training of undergraduate and graduate students, and
              post-doctoral fellows.  All the information generated by the research will be
              generated through a web server and database:
              http://bioverse.compbio.washington.edu, which will provide a synergistic portal
              to obtain a comprehensive picture of rice and cereal organismal biology. 
              Besides helping understand how other plant genomes work, this research will
              also set up a framework
for integrating single molecule and genomic data, and
              thus the science developed will help  with projects on analyzing other
              genomes.


