Title       : Laser Ultrasound-Interferometric System for Packaged Electronic Devices Quality
               Evaluations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0217311

Award Number: 0217311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302212             (Estimated)
Investigator: I. Charles Ume   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding to develop a novel quality inspection system that
              will evaluate the defects in packaged electronic devices. Such defects would
              include misaligned, short, missing, cracked, voided, delaminated, partially
              connected, open, excessive and starved solder bumps that occur in such packaged
              devices as flip chip (with no underfill), direct chip attach (DCA), chip scale
              packaging (CSP), and cracks in chip capacitors and resistors. The PI proposes
              to develop an automated laser ultrasonic-interferometric system that uses a
              single optical fiber for evaluating the quality of packaged electronic devices.
              This system can be used in a production line as a go/no-go inspection tool, or
              off-line during process development for process optimization. This will be a
              high resolution, non-contact, non-destructive, low cost, fast and accurate
              quality inspection system. The PI will also develop a signal processing
              procedure for determining the presence of one or more of these defects.  A
              finite element analysis model will be developed to explain the experimental
              results.  The final objective is to use the experiences gained in the conduct
              of this study to build an industrial grade prototype system for use as a Beta
              test in industry.  The PI and his students will swiftly transfer this
              technology to the industry.
 
This research will result in the development of
              a novel and automated non-contact, non-destructive, fast, sensitive, accurate
              and low cost solder bump quality inspection system. It is also expected to be
              applicable to many types of surface mount devices such as chip resistors and
              capacitors, and conventional lead frame packages, making it a versatile and
              cost-effective automated manufacturing tool. This tool could be used on-line as
              a go/no-go inspection tool, and off-line during process development for process
              optimization. Use of this new Laser Ultrasound-Interferometric inspection
              technology for automated manufacturing inspection will bring tremendous cost
              savings by catching defects early in the process.  With access to rapid,
              accurate inspection systems, cost savings will also be realized in process
              development by reducing the time to market new products, and allowing better
              process optimization before manufacturing ramp-up. If the research objectives
              are fully implemented, the proposed technique will help to increase the yield
              of DCAs, flip chips, CSPs, silicon chips, and chip resistors and capacitors.
              The research will impact the nation's human resources by training these
              students in the development and application of low cost and high performance
              sensors, for on-line and off-line quality evaluation of microelectronic
              packaging devices. The students who will be participating in this research will
              learn how to carry out applied and fundamental research in microelectronic
              packaging, on laser ultrasound, on optical techniques, on system integration,
              on signal processing and on finite element modeling. They will also learn about
              technology licensing and commercialization

