Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: A New High Resolution AFM Technique for
               Biological Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0217789

Award Number: 0217789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Hoffmann hoffmann@physics.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5940,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0217789
Hoffmann

Description:  This award is for support of a joint research
              project between Dr. Peter Hoffmann, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Wayne
              State University, Detroit, Michigan and Dr. Ahmet Oral, Physics Department,
              Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey.  They plan to study the development of a
              new high-resolution Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) technique for biological
              imaging.  Commonly used AFM techniques face fundamental limits to further
              improvement.  These limitations are due to fundamental operating principles of
              common AFM techniques, which cannot be changed by simple adjustments of
              parameters.  The PIs plan to design and build a prototype of an AFM technique
              that avoids these limitations and, in principle, should be able to provide
              non-contact atomic resolution imaging and direct quantitative point-by-point
              measurements of interactions in situ in liquids. This AFM technique relies on a
              sub-resonance, ultra-small (< 1A) oscillation of the AFM cantilever. This
              linearizes the measurement and makes data interpretation straightforward. 

              
Scope:  This award will allow a US scientist to collaborate with a Turkish
              scientist in a research project of high scientific potential.  The
              nanomechanics of biomolecules and the direct imaging of biological structures
              are of great interest in biochemistry, bioengineering and medicine.  The two
              scientists were directly involved in the development of an ultra-high vacuum
              (UHV) and a preliminary liquid-based version of the above described AFM
              technique which proved to be successful in UHV and in liquid.  However, the
              liquid based AFM was very difficult to use and had some fundamental design
              issues, which will be addressed in this collaboration. The ultimate goal would
              be the construction of a user-friendly new AFM technique based on a novel
              operational principle, and the imaging and measurement of actual biological
              structures. The development of this instrument would enhance current work by
              the PI, at his university's medical school, on the mechanical behavior of
              tissues and antibiotic action of native antibiotic agents on certain bacteria,
              since it would allow for much higher resolution imaging and quantitative
              measurements of nanomechanical properties.  Both investigators are junior
              scientists, and the project will also support two graduate students from each
              institution.

