Title       : Integrative Functional Genomic Resource Development in Vitis Vinifera: Abiotic
               Stress and Wine Quality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0217653

Award Number: 0217653
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3609951            (Estimated)
Investigator: Grant R. Cramer cramer@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Cushman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pedro J. Mendes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Schooley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abiotic stress in the form of drought, salinity, and cold has a major impact on
              grape production and quality. Several studies have shown that
              water-deficit-stressed grapevines produce superior quality wine. The molecular
              genetic and biochemical basis for this correlation remains poorly understood.
              An integrative and quantitative analysis of mRNA, protein, and metabolite
              changes following abiotic stress imposition is required to enhance production
              efficiency under stress conditions and to understand the plant-derived
              contribution to constituents of wine quality. It will also require the
              customization and application of comprehensive bioinformatics systems to track
              and analyze changes that arise in response to abiotic stress and potentially
              related aroma, flavor, and color characteristics of grape juice and wine. One
              long-term goal of our research is to develop comprehensive genomic tools to
              facilitate the genetic engineering of improved abiotic stress tolerance traits
              in V. vinifera. The specific objectives for accomplishing this goal include: 1)
              extensive gene discovery through large-scale expressed sequence tag (EST)
              sequencing and mRNA expression profiling using oligonucleotide microarray-based
              expression monitoring in roots, leaves, and fruits of grapevines exposed to
              multiple abiotic stresses; 2) global mRNA expression profile data will be
              complemented by protein expression analyses using state-of-the-art proteomics
              methodologies; and 3) identification of specific metabolites and metabolite
              profiles in grapevines and fruit following abiotic stress that confer desirable
              aroma, flavor and color quality characteristics and improved health benefits.
              Metabolite profiles from grape juice of well-watered and water-deficit-treated
              vines will be compared with quantitative data from mRNA and protein expression
              patterns using comprehensive bioinformatics systems to store and analyze data
              sets. Ultimately, these data sets will be integrated into a reliable prediction
              model for wine characteristics. The proposed research will greatly facilitate
              future gene discovery and enable improvements to be made in both production
              efficiency and wine quality under environmentally adverse growing conditions. 
