Title       : Synthesis and Analysis of Processes Containing Solids Processing Steps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 5,  1994    
File        : a9211673

Award Number: 9211673
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222642             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ka M. Ng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A large fraction of the products produced by the chemical                      
              industry involve solids processes (the term solids processes                   
              here refers to plants that involve operations such as                          
              crystallization, filtration, dissolution and drying in the                     
              main process train).  Little work has been done on the design                  
              of whole plants that include such processes, including how to                  
              identify economic tradeoffs and the integration of different                   
              units to minimize costs.  Work has been done on crushing and                   
              grinding, filtration, crystallization, drying, etc. as                         
              separate unit operations, but it is insufficient to view these                 
              operations in isolation, more integration of such subsystems                   
              is needed to improve the overall process.                                      
                                                                                             
              This research involves the study of the design of plants                       
              containing solids processing steps.  It deals with three                       
              aspects: conceptual design, mathematical modeling in terms of                  
              discretized population balance equations, and the development                  
              of design methodologies.  In conceptual design, hierarchical                   
              procedures will be expanded to include vapor-solids systems,                   
              and an attempt to cover a wide spectrum of plants including                    
              hydrometallurgical processes and the manufacture of catalysts.                 
              The procedure will include quantitative heuristics and methods                 
              of calculation, such as those for equipment and solvent                        
              selection.  A framework based on discretized population                        
              equations will be developed to account for changes in particle                 
              size distribution.  This will be accompanied by the                            
              formulation of compatible solids processing equipment models                   
              for use with the population equations.  Case studies will be                   
              used to help identify heuristics and to provide future users                   
              with concrete examples.  A computer code is planned to                         
              demonstrate the procedure.  Another major goal is the                          
              invention and/or systematization of building blocks which are                  
              not in the existing repertoire for the design of solids                        
              processes.  Design procedures for the complete separation of                   
              three-solute mixtures using extractive and fractional                          
              crystallization, and for the use of fractional crystallization                 
              to minimize the loss of products and byproducts to liquid                      
              purge streams will be developed.  The physics of processing                    
              solids is emphasized in all aspects of the program.  It is                     
              expected that the results could contribute to the design                       
              effort of people in industry, both in conceptual design and                    
              computer simulation, and provide a coherent body of knowledge                  
              and concrete examples for teaching the design of solids                        
              processes.*** //
