Title       : Democracy and the Mediation of International Conflict
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1992      
File        : a9211364

Award Number: 9211364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39718              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Dixon dixonw@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Democratic nations are involved in hostilities and wars about as               
              often as non-democratic nations.  However, hostilities and wars                
              between democracies are rare events.  A fundamental proposition has            
              emerged to explain why democracies rarely engage in hostile acts               
              with one another.  Namely, contending democratic nations avoid war             
              with one another by successfully employing mediation and other                 
              efforts of third parties to resolve or ameliorate conflicts between            
              them.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The goal of this research is to investigate the impact of                      
              democratic governance on the use of conflict management techniques             
              and peaceful settlement in approximately 250 postwar interstate                
              security disputes.  It represents the first attempt to subject this            
              fundamental proposition to direct empirical investigation.  The                
              researcher will begin by developing an integrated data base drawing            
              together diverse information on interstate disputes and their                  
              outcomes, attributes of contending parties in the disputes, any                
              third parties seeking amelioration, and specific actions taken by              
              both disputants and third parties.  Using these data, the                      
              researcher will construct and estimate a theoretical model                     
              incorporating democracy as a factor promoting the use of conflict              
              management techniques and then, focus on more complex models of how            
              democracy works in conjunction with conflict management techniques             
              in the peaceful settlement of disputes.  The final phase of the                
              project involves post-hoc examination of selected disputes in a                
              series of comparative case studies. These stages of inquiry assure             
              that the proposition about why democracies rarely engage in wars               
              with one another is rigorously tested.
