Title       : Structure of Similarity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1994     
File        : a9211277

Award Number: 9211277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dedre Gentner gentner@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas L. Medin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this research is to develop and test theories of human             
              similarity processing.  Similarity provides the basis for much of              
              concept learning, transfer of knowledge from one situation to                  
              another, and generalization.  Conversely, similarity can also be a             
              source of human error, for instance when confusions between                    
              similar-looking materials or devices occur.  This research will                
              develop a new approach to encompass a range of human similarity                
              processes, from causal and functional similarities to perceptual               
              similarities.  This approach departs from prior approaches in                  
              emphasizing the psychological processes that underlie similarity.              
                                                                                             
              The first set of studies will investigate interconnectivity, i.e.,             
              whether interactions between features can make some aspects of                 
              objects more salient in similarity judgments or even change the                
              psychological interpretation of their properties.  The second issue            
              is the effect of alignment in judgments of the similarity of two               
              figures.  These studies will investigate how the seeming similarity            
              between two figures changes as a function of how easy it is to                 
              place components of object representation in correspondence.  A                
              third set of studies will investigate the effect of similarity in              
              constructive induction.  These studies are based on the hypothesis             
              that when people judge similarity, they sometimes align non-                   
              identical features in a way which captures only their abstract                 
              commonalities.  For example, two engines, one missing a fan belt               
              and the other with a broken generator, may be judged similar                   
              because they have dysfunctional parts.  These research results will            
              inform us about the range and flexibility of similarity processing.            
                                                                                             
              The next set of studies will address the dynamic process of                    
              similarity computation.  In these studies, people will be asked to             
              perform rapid similarity matches or will view similarity pairs for             
              varying periods; this will allow comparison of fast and slow                   
              similarity judgments.  If fast judgments have dynamics different               
              from slow, interfaces and devices to which humans must respond                 
              quickly will have to be designed accordingly.                                  
                                                                                             
              The final set of studies will investigate the role of similarity in            
              other cognitive processes.  Some experiments will examine the role             
              of similarity in category-based induction.  For example, when                  
              people are told a new fact about some entity, (e.g., a tiger) they             
              typically assume that the fact applies to other similar entities,              
              (e.g., a lion).  This research will investigate whether the                    
              similarity is symmetrical or directional and what aspects of the               
              similarity affect further inferences that can be made.  Other                  
              experiments will investigate whether the process of retrieval from             
              memory can change the subsequent representation of the items.  If              
              items stored in memory are changed by the process that retrieves               
              them, it suggests how gradual learning can occur and how certain               
              similarity-based distortions can come about.
