Title       : Plant Biochemistry Course, '92 to be held in San Diego, CA, June 28-July 19,
               1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1992 
File        : a9211449

Award Number: 9211449
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71124              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Varner   (Principal Investigator current)
              William Ogren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Soc of Plant Physio
	      
	      Rockville, MD  20850    /   -

NSF Program : 1113      PLANT SCIENCE INITIATIVE
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1113,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports a three-week summer course on plant                        
              biochemistry to be held on June 28 - July 19, 1992 on the campus of            
              U.C. San Diego.  Biochemical reactions create form and function                
              according to the instructions found in the cells.  In the last two             
              decades, there have been exciting developments in our knowledge of             
              how genetic instructions are read in plants.  However, the                     
              information about metabolic pathways and the regulation of these               
              pathways has increased only marginally.  In addition, younger                  
              generations of plant biologists have fewer and fewer opportunities             
              to learn about what is known about plant biochemistry due to the               
              decreasing number of investigators interested in the subject.  This            
              summer course is designed to focus attention of the plant biology              
              community on the biochemical problems of form and function of plant            
              cells that could profitably be addressed using the tools developed             
              during recent years.  Twenty lecturers, all experts on specific                
              aspects of plant biochemistry, are selected to give lectures and               
              lead discussion sessions on key topics in plant biochemistry.  The             
              target audience is advanced graduate students, postdoctoral                    
              function according tot he instructions found in the cells.  In the             
              last two decades, there have been exciting developments in our                 
              knowledge of how genetic instructions are read in plants.  However,            
              the information about metabolic pathways and the regulation of                 
              these pathways has increased only marginally.  In addition, younger            
              generations of plant biologists have fewer and fewer opportunities             
              to learn about what is known about plant biochemistry due to the               
              decreasing number of investigators interested in the subject.  This            
              summer course is designed to focus attention of the plant biology              
              community on the biochemical problems of form and function of plant            
              cells that could profitably be addressed using the tools developed             
              during recent years.  Twenty lecturers, all experts on specific                
              aspects of plant biochemistry, are selected to give lectures and               
              lead discussion sessions on key topics in plant biochemistry.  The             
              target audience is advanced graduate students, postdoctoral fellows            
              and college/university professors who teach plant biochemistry at              
              their institutions.  After the course is completed, the lecture                
              notes will be made available widely to the general scientific                  
              community as an aide to teach plant biochemistry.  The course is               
              supported jointly with the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the              
              Department of Energy.
