Title       : A Novel Approach to the Optimal Design of Hybrid Waste-Recovery Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1992       
File        : a9211039

Award Number: 9211039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89739              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mahmoud M. El-Halwagi mahmoud@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Hazardous-waste minimization means the reduction of hazardous                  
              waste that is generated prior to its treatment, storage or                     
              disposal.  It represents an efficient method for preventing                    
              the release of hazardous substances to the environment.  An                    
              effective way of tackling waste-minimization problems is                       
              through the use of on-site recycle/reuse separation networks.                  
                                                                                             
              In addition to its favorable environmental impact, the                         
              adoption of this waste-recovery approach can provide an                        
              economically attractive waste-management alternative.  It can                  
              lead to significant energy and raw-materials savings and                       
              possibly provide income from the salable wastes.  With more                    
              than 250 million tons of hazardous wastes disposed of at the                   
              generating sites throughout the United States annually, the                    
              proposition of waste recycle/reuse is becoming a desirable                     
              industrial practice.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The objective of this project is to devise a new methodology                   
              for the optimal design of hybrid waste-recovery networks.                      
              This task involves the development of practical tools for the                  
              systematic integration and screening of the numerous potential                 
                                                                                             
              waste-separation systems as well as more classical ones such                   
              as distillation and mass exchange.  The problem will be                        
              formulated as an optimal-network synthesis task with the                       
              objective of minimizing the total annualized cost of the                       
              system while achieving all the assigned waste-reduction                        
              duties.  This formulation embeds all the potential process                     
              alternatives of interest and provides a tool for posing this                   
              design task as an optimization problem.  The solution of this                  
              problem identifies the optimal combination, arrangement,                       
              types, sizes and operating conditions of the separation                        
              processes to be employed for a given waste-recovery task.                      
              This approach will be elucidated via three representative                      
              cases:  the synthesis of pervaporation networks, reverse-                      
              osmosis systems, and reverse-osmosis-mass-exchange hybrid                      
              processes.
