Title       : Parallel Computing Algorithms for Three-Dimensional Image Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9211084

Award Number: 9211084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert G. Voigt                         
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : October 1,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: H. K. Huang Huang@Endeavor.RADSCI.UCLA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 4083      POST DOC RESRCH ASSOC COMP S&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9218,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Modern imaging technologies are capable of producing three-                    
              dimensional scenes for use in scientific, industrial and medical               
              applications, thus presenting the need for image processing and                
              image analysis algorithms designed for manipulating 3-D volume                 
              data sets.  Three-dimensional images in general, and biomedical                
              images in particular, present large scale computationally-                     
              intensive image analysis problems especially amenable to parallel              
              processing solutions.  In order to fully exploit high                          
              performance/supercomputing technologies and move biological image              
              processing to a parallel environment, two key research areas must              
              be investigated.  The first is intelligent algorithm design for                
              the most efficient means of programming parallel processors.                   
              Parallel computing versus sequential computing algorithms for 3-D              
              biomedical image processing will be studied utilizing a                        
              Connection Machine 2 (CM-2) 16k fine-grain single-instruction                  
              multiple-data stream (SIMD) supercomputing node, a Stardent GS-                
              2025 four-processor vector computer and a conventional serial SUN              
              Microsystems reduced instruction set computer (RISC).  The                     
              second topic to be studied is the interprocessor communication                 
              bottleneck in large scale image processing.  The use of data                   
              structures and programming methods appropriate for efficient                   
              manipulation of large data sets will be investigated.  The                     
              algorithm design will be generic, modular and flexible so that                 
              the software can be easily modified as needed with hardware                    
              technology improvements.  This can reduce the cost of high                     
              performance processing and assist in bringing massively parallel               
              computing into the general scientific community for use as a                   
              research and teaching tool with broader applicability.  Results                
              of this investigation will be applied to biomedical images.
