Title       : Behavioral Adaptations to Resource Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1993       
File        : a9211599

Award Number: 9211599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21213              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn D. Devenport ldeven@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Like structural or physiological traits, the components of                     
              cognition can be thought of as solutions or adaptations to                     
              problems posed by natural environments.  Therefore, a complete                 
              understanding of a cognitive function requires an understanding                
              of the problem it was designed to solve.  Of these problems, one               
              of the most vexing is the variability found in nature.  Such                   
              unpredictability would seem to diminish or defeat the value of                 
              learning and memory.  Of what use is a memory for a good foraging              
              site if that site is as likely to be poor as to be good on later               
              visits?                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Drs. Lynn Devenport and Jill Devenport have begun their research               
              by establishing the optimal or ideal solution to the variability               
              problem and expressing it in a quantitative model.  Put in words,              
              the model says that as time passes and information ages,                       
              decisions should be based less and less on recent outcomes (say,               
              a good harvest at a foraging site) and more and more on long-term              
              regularities (the average harvest at that site).                               
                                                                                             
              The researchers will conduct field experiments to find how                     
              closely animals approach this ideal.  To do this, they will                    
              provision wild populations of ground-dwelling squirrels (least                 
              chipmunks) at two or more artificial "patches" of food (unhulled               
              sunflower seeds) whose variability and abundance the researchers               
              control.  Some patches are occasionally very productive, but in                
              the long run poor, others are sometimes poor but in the long run               
              quite good, and yet others fluctuate both in the short and long                
              term.  Having provided this experience, the researchers impose                 
              delays of minutes or days before the animals can resume foraging               
              at the patches.  The model specifies how animals should choose                 
              among patches if they were to make the best use of their                       
              information.  Beyond the aim of determining how closely (if at                 
              all) animals approach this ideal, the researchers will make the                
              problem complex enough to ensure a plausible correspondence to                 
              natural foraging conditions.  The project should help identify                 
              cognitive mechanisms that minimize uncertainty, and point to                   
              their evolutionary origins.
