Title       : The Arctic LTER Project: Terrestrial and Freshwater Researchon Ecological
               Controls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9211775

Award Number: 9211775
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4230405            (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Hobbie jhobbie@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce J. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gaius R. Shaver  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0208000   Water Resources                         
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1129,9169,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              During the first five years of the Arctic LTER at Toolik Lake,                 
              Alaska, systematic measurements of climate, of tundra plant                    
              distribution and productivity, and of lake and stream physics,                 
              chemistry and biology were begun.  Whole system experiments were               
              set up on the tundra, in streams, and in lakes to examine the                  
              ecological effects of changes in environmental and biological                  
              factors such as air temperature, added nutrients, and changes in               
              the density of the top predators and grazers.  These measurements              
              and long-term experiments are designed to help reach the overall               
              goal: to understand how tundra, streams and lakes function in the              
              Arctic and to predict how they respond to human-induced changes                
              including climate                                                              
              change.  Under this broad goal there are three specific goals:                 
                                                                                             
              (1)   Determine year-to-year ecological variability in these                   
                    systems and measure long-term changes.                                   
                                                                                             
              (2)   Understand the extent of control by resources (bottom-up                 
                    control) or by grazing and predation (top-down control).                 
                                                                                             
              (3)   Measure rates and understand the controls of the exchange of             
                    nutrients and organic matter between land and water.                     
                                                                                             
              Long-term experiments are the heart of the Arctic LTER program.                
              It has been found that arctic systems often do not respond for                 
              many years, and that long-term responses are often not predictable             
              from short-term responses.  Changes in the responses of both                   
              streams and terrestrial vegetation to nutrient amendments are                  
              still being documented after 9 years.  Lake trout manipulations                
              take many years to show effects as these long-lived fish may                   
              change their diet from invertebrates to fish when they reach a                 
              certain size.  As a result, most long-term experiments and                     
              measurements for determining ecological variability will be                    
              continued.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The results of the long-term experiments will continue to be                   
              measured as more is discovered about long-term ecosystem controls              
              by resources and predation.  New research on the controls of the               
              exchange of nutrients between land and water will be started.  A               
              major watershed experiment will be carried out to measure the                  
              movements of water and dissolved gases through the groundwater and             
              into the streams.
