Title       : Human Interaction with North American Pleistocene Proboscideans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9211984

Award Number: 9211984
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105567             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Fisher dcfisher@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Fisher will study                 
              tusk dentin laminations in a series of mammoths and mastodonts                 
              which lived between ca. 12,000 and 10,000 years ago in North                   
              America. Prior work by Dr. Fisher has shown that the tusks and                 
              cheek teeth of these species exhibit dentinal laminations that                 
              record details of individual life history. Successive orders of                
              lamination represent annual, fortnightly and daily cycles in                   
              accreted dentin. Analyses of these patterns yield data on                      
              seasonal mortality, age, sex, growth rates, age at sexual                      
              maturity and calving. These factors are sensitive to the nature                
              and degree of ecological stress to which the animal had been                   
              subjected and demonstrate predictable patterns of response to                  
              altered nutritional status and/or predation pressure. With such                
              data Dr. Fisher will quantify these life history trails for the                
              two species just before their time of extinction. He will compare              
              the results with data from extant elephants from a range of                    
              environments. On this basis he will determine the factors which                
              led to the extinction of mammoths and mastodonts at the end of                 
              the Pleistocene.                                                               
                                                                                             
              It has long been known that the end of the last Ice Age saw the                
              extinction of many species of animals in North America. While                  
              this fact is undisputed the cause has yet to be determined. While              
              some scientists argue that environmental change alone is                       
              responsible, others note that these major extinctions seem to                  
              coincide with the appearance of human hunter gathers in North                  
              America and believe that overhunting led to their demise. The                  
              data Dr. Fisher will collect allows, he believes, for a                        
              distinction between these possible causes.                                     
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              paleoanthropologists with insight into prehistoric human behavior              
              and subsistence patterns. It will also shed light on the                       
              relationships between human predation, environmental exchange and              
              species extinction, a problem of major significance today.
