Title       : RUI: Roughened Manifolds in Ill-Condensed Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1993     
File        : a9211240

Award Number: 9211240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Halpin-Healy healy@phys.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              This is a Research at Undergraduate Institution grant to conduct               
              theoretical research concerning the static and dynamic scaling                 
              properties of a variety of surfaces which exhibit entropic                     
              roughening due to thermal fluctuations, but in the presence of                 
              quenched disorder (in the form of randomly distributed pinning                 
              impurities) can lead to wandering that is enhanced many-fold.                  
              There are a number of fundamental theoretical issues of great                  
              practical importance which arise from the delicate interplay                   
              between thermal and disorder-induced roughening.  This follows                 
              naturally from the fact that most experimental systems are to some             
              degree forms of ill-condensed matter; the smallest modicum of                  
              randomness having potentially drastic effects upon not merely the              
              critical properties, but the entire global structure of the phase              
              diagram.  Among the various manifolds to be discussed are                      
              individual vortex lines in ceramic superconductors, directed                   
              polymers in random media, and domain walls in impurity-stricken                
              magnets.  A mapping via Burgers equation permits us to connect the             
              directed polymer problem to stochastic growth models such as                   
              ballistic deposition and Eden clusters.  Also considered are                   
              interfacial delocalization due to quenched disorder and impurity               
              controlled distortions of Abrikosov flux line lattices.                        
              %%%                                                                            
              Analytical and computational research will be conducted at Barnard             
              College on the effects of disorder on the general properties of                
              surfaces and their manifestations in particular physical systems               
              such as polymers, superconductors and magnets.  The work will                  
              utilize undergraduates.
