Title       : Constrained Minimization for Interactive Modeling Using Parallel and Vector
               Supercomputers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9211908

Award Number: 9211908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert G. Voigt                         
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37718              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan S. Taylor staylor@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn F. Ten Eyck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4083      POST DOC RESRCH ASSOC COMP S&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9218,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research examines parallel algorithms for finding a local                 
              minimum of a nonlinear energy function that satisfies a set of                 
              nonlinear equality constraints.  A constrained minimizer is the                
              bottleneck in a system that lets a user interactively move atoms               
              in a protein model while the system automatically minimizes                    
              protein energy and maintains constraints denoting rigid bond                   
              lengths.  This research examines Lagrange multiplier methods that              
              can find a local constrained minimum using parallel processing.                
              Particular implementations to study include multiple-instruction,              
              multiple-data (MIMD) computers that use shared memory (in                      
              particular, a Cray Y-MPI) and MIMD computers with hypercube                    
              memory connections (iPSC/860).  The research compares the                      
              performance of different MIMD computers on different steps in the              
              constrained minimization algorithm.  Using the comparison                      
              results, the goal will be to reduce the total solution-time two                
              orders-of magnitude by concurrently running steps on separate                  
              supercomputers.                                                                
                                                                                             
              The research also examines methods that compute long-distance                  
              electrostatic interactions without destroying interactive                      
              performance.  One method includes computing a neighbor list for                
              each atom on one processor while the other processors evaluate                 
              electrostatic interactions using the list from previous                        
              iteration.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Understanding effects from thousands of non-bonded interactions                
              is quite difficult.  The research also addresses visualization                 
              methods for determining which interaction to display and how to                
              display them.  The visualization avoids cluttering the screen                  
              while indicating the interacting atoms, strength and type                      
              (attraction or repulsion) of interaction, and ideal separation.                
              A goal with this visualization is to help a user tightly pack                  
              interior sidechains.
