Title       : LTER: Organisms in the Agricultural Landscape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9211771

Award Number: 9211771
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3679914            (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Philip Robertson robertson@kbs.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eldor A. Paul  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart H. Gage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine Gross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard R. Harwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1129,9169,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In 1987 a Long-Term Ecological Research Project in Agricultural                
              Ecology was initiated to examine basic ecological relationships                
              in row crop ecosystems typical of the U.S. Midwest.  The project's             
              original goal was to test the basic, long-term hypothesis that                 
              agronomic management based on knowledge of ecological interactions             
              in cropping systems can effectively replace management based on                
              chemical subsidies.  The same overall goal guides the project                  
              today.  In order to test this hypothesis an experimental site                  
              was established in which different cropping systems, corresponding             
              to different levels of agronomic/ecological disturbance, are used              
              to test a series of working hypotheses.  Working hypotheses are                
              built around the general topic areas of nutrient availability/                 
              retention, plant competition, and consumer (insect, pathogen)                  
              dynamics.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Over the initial award period substantial progress has been                    
              made towards meeting the short-term goals of establishing a                    
              secure agricultural research site with long-term potential, of                 
              putting in place an integrated sampling program to address                     
              important long-term questions in both ecology and agronomy, and                
              most importantly, of testing and refining the initial hypotheses.              
              In this new project period the aim is to extend plot-based                     
              research to the regional landscape and to address seven basic                  
              ecological hypotheses that are critical for understanding the                  
              ecological underpinnings of modern agriculture and for providing               
              the knowledge needed to sustain future agricultural production.
