Title       : The Institutionalization of Zoology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1994  
File        : a9211818

Award Number: 9211818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49959              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marsha L. Richmond   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Science education in the United States was largely based on models             
              drawn from Germany.  Young Americans interested in pursuing a                  
              career in science went to Germany for advanced education.  This                
              practice continued well into the 20th century--for example, Robert             
              Oppenheimer, "father of the atomic bomb," studied quantum physics              
              in Germany.  Thus, if one wants to understand science education in             
              America, one must understand its origins in Germany.                           
                                                                                             
              A central focus in studies of the development of science in Germany            
              are the scientific institutes of the universities.  Their creation             
              in the last third of the 19th century sparked an "institutional                
              revolution" that Thomas Kuhn has called the "Second Scientific                 
              Revolution" owing to its importance for providing the                          
              organizational structure that made possible the remarkable                     
              intellectual advances of the modern era.  To date, most studies                
              have investigated the institutes of physics, chemistry, or                     
              physiology.  Dr. Richmond is presenting a detailed archival study              
              of the institutionalization of zoology in Munich University.  One              
              of the largest and most important centers of zoology in Germany,               
              Munich harbored all of the major research programs of this period:             
              Naturphilosophie, "scientific" zoology, and experimental zoology.              
              By examining the cognitive, institutional, and socioeconomic                   
              factors that influenced the development of zoology in Munich over              
              the course of the 19th and early 20th centuries, the study provides            
              new information about the fine structure of the operation of one               
              institute, and its findings can be applied more generally to                   
              broaden our understanding of the development of zoology during this            
              critical period in its history.
