Title       : Sensory Modulation of Motor Patterns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1993       
File        : a9211310

Award Number: 9211310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Walter Wilczynski                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231669             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kiisa C. Nishikawa kiisa.nishikawa@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Motor responses can be modified by incoming sensory information.               
              In this award, Dr. Kiisa Nishikawa will study the way in which the             
              brain uses incoming sensory input to modify motor output so that               
              it becomes appropriate to its current context. The approach for                
              solving this fundamental problem will use anuran feeding responses             
              as a model system. Much is already known about the neural circuits             
              associated with these responses, and about sensory processing of               
              stimuli associated with the prey object.  However, the processes               
              by which motor output is matched to sensory input remain to be                 
              elucidated. The motor responses require accurate sensory                       
              recognition and precise localization of the objects as they move               
              through the visual field. Once these processes of recognition and              
              localization have been carried out, the brain must produce an                  
              appropriate motor response oriented in the correct direction at the            
              correct distance, and the response must occur within a time period             
              short enough to insure prey capture. In these experiments, the                 
              sensory feedback systems associated with prey capture will be                  
              characterized by (1) describing the anatomy of sensory receptors               
              and their central projections using neuronal tracing and                       
              immunohistochemical staining; (2) determining the pattern of                   
              sensory activity during normal feeding using extracellular                     
              recording from dorsal roots and peripheral nerves; (3) elucidating             
              how sensory input modulates motor output using deafferentation and             
              afferent stimulation experiments. Feeding motor patterns will be               
              studied using high-speed videography, electromyography and                     
              extracellular recording from peripheral nerves.  This study will               
              contribute to an understanding of the neural basis of adaptive                 
              responses and sensory-motor integration.
