Title       : Building A Concept Space for an Electronic Community System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1992       
File        : a9211418

Award Number: 9211418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Su-Shing Chen                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63804              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hsinchun Chen hchen@bpa.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
                Researchers in a scientific community or organizational members              
              in a company are often overwhelmed by the amount of current                    
              information, the subject and computer knowledge required to access             
              this information, and the constant influx of even larger amounts               
              of new information.  Using an electronic community system as a                 
              testbed the aim of the research is to address specifically the                 
              information sharing, retrieval, and filtering problems through the             
              use of a variety of AI and statistical techniques, including                   
              knowledge acquisition, automatic thesaurus generation, and neural              
              network computing.  A Concept Space is designed to represent high-             
              level community knowledge such as topics, subjects, techniques, and            
              people in terms of nodes and their weighted relationships in a                 
              structure that is akin to a semantic network.  This Concept Space              
              can be perceived as a high-level conceptual description of the                 
              basic information items that reside in an Information Space.  It               
              is created mainly from a knowledge acquisition process involving               
              subject experts and from an automatic cluster analysis of documents            
              stored in the community's online, textual databases.  Two kinds of             
              system interface are considered both making extensive use of the               
              Concept Space.  A browsing interface permits users to traverse this            
              weighted concept network themselves, select concepts of interests,             
              and access its underlying information.  An activation interface                
              based on a Hopfield network spreading activation algorithm                     
              traverses the network automatically and identify concepts most                 
              relevant to searchers' needs, with very little searcher                        
              intervention.  Both types of interface are designed to provide                 
              user-friendly access, to facilitate learning, and to avoid the need            
              for extensive user computing knowledge.  This research is designed             
              to provide insights for the development of more timely,                        
              comprehensive, and accessible electronic community systems and                 
              computer-based organizational memory.
