Title       : Resource Allocation Problems in Wireless Communication Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1992    
File        : a9211417

Award Number: 9211417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96944              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leandros Tassiulas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4097,
Abstract    :
                   The expected service demands in wireless information                      
              networks in the near future  exceed the current capabilities of                
              these systems. Efficient allocation of the limited spectrum will               
              be a critical factor in the design of the next generation of                   
              wireless networks in  order to meet the future demands. We study               
              two issues related to the  resource allocation problem in                      
              wireless communication networks. These are the sharing of  the                 
              locally common, spatially reusable radio channel and the effect                
              of the rapidly changing  topology. Regarding the first issue, we               
              propose a queuing model that captures the channel  allocation                  
              problem in radio networks. The major research goal is to                       
              characterize the system performance and to develop scheduling                  
              algorithms for sharing the resource efficiently.  The throughput               
              of the system and the average packet delay are the two                         
              performance measures of interest. In our previous research we                  
              characterized the throughput properties of  the above model and                
              we gave maximum throughput scheduling algorithms. Regarding                    
              delay, we obtained the optimal scheduling policy in a network                  
              with tandem topology. We  wish to extend the above results with                
              special emphasis on scheduling policies that are  implementable                
              in the distributed environment of a radio network.  A stochastic               
              model  of time-varying topology is also proposed here. The                     
              understanding of the effect of the  time-variability on the                    
              stability and throughput of the system as well as the development              
              of transmission control algorithms that effectively take into                  
              account the topology information are the major research goals                  
              regarding changing connectivity.  Preliminary results  have                    
              already been obtained for a single-hop network.
