Title       : Dissertation Research: Maya Economic Integration: Perspectives from the Lithic
               Production System at El Pedernal, Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1992     
File        : a9211601

Award Number: 9211601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Leventhal rml@anthro.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brandon S. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Richard Leventhal, Mr. Brandon Lewis                
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. Building on                   
              previous fieldwork he carried out in the region, he will conduct               
              archaeological excavations at the site of El Pedernal which is                 
              located in the northeastern Peten region of Guatemala. The site                
              and its surrounding environs formed part of the Tikal Mayan                    
              empire and was occupied during Early and Late Classic periods.                 
              Thus it documents the height of Mayan achievement. Work to date                
              has demonstrated the presence of a number of plaza groups and                  
              habitation sites. Mr. Brandon will conduct limited excavations at              
              several of these to collect lithic remains. He will relate the                 
              distribution of such materials to the chert sources from which                 
              they are derived. Through analysis of the production sequence,                 
              which can be reconstructed from the byproducts recovered, he will              
              gain insight into the organization of stone working at the site.               
                                                                                             
              While archaeologists have traced the rise and subsequent decline               
              of the Mayan empire, it is still uncertain how it functioned and               
              how large numbers of individuals were integrated into this large               
              entity. In recent years attention has been focussed on the                     
              economic system and attempts made to understand the degree of                  
              economic specialization. Because metal tools were not available,               
              stone played an important role in Mayan subsistence and Mr. Lewis              
              will attempt to understand the degree to which stone tool                      
              production was either centralized or dispersed in the hands of                 
              local users.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light                
              on how complex societies developed and were maintained and will                
              assist in the training of a promising young scientist.
