Title       : Dissertation Research: Spatial Archaeology of MSA/LSA Cultures in the Eyasi
               Basin, Tanzania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1992       
File        : a9211877

Award Number: 9211877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Brandt sbrabdt@anthro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Audax Mabulla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Steven Brandt, Mr Audax Mabulla, a                  
              graduate student at the Univeristy of Florida, will collect data               
              for his doctoral dissertation. His archaeological research is                  
              focussed on the Lake Eyasi Basin located in northern Tanzania.                 
              Mr. Mabulla and his collaborators will conduct a surface survey                
              of this 2,500 square km region.  Within each of the four major                 
              ecological zones which are present he will employ a stratified                 
              random sampling technique.  Selected areas will be located with                
              aerial photographs and topographic maps.  All archaeological                   
              remains within them will be noted and described.  Supplemental                 
              auger and shovel testing will be conducted to locate buried                    
              remains and to detect patterns of soil modification.  If time                  
              allows two or three Middle Stone Age -Late Stone Age (MSA-LSA)                 
              archaeological occurrences will be test excavated to recover                   
              datable material, and subsistence data.  With this information                 
              Mr. Mabulla will attempt to reconstruct subsistence and land use               
              strategies during these two periods of time.                                   
                                                                                             
              While archaeological, genetic and paleontological data strongly                
              suggest that "modern" humans first appear in Africa, the timing                
              and details of this process are little understood.                             
              Archaeologists have only limited knowledge of how these cultures               
              adapted to the landscape or the subsistence practices they                     
              followed.  The social organization of these groups are also not                
              well understood. Prior work at rock shelters in this area have                 
              revealed the presence of Middle Stone Age peoples who may be                   
              members of this first "modern" group.  Succeeding Late Stone Age               
              peoples with a quite different lithic technology are also                      
              present.  While rock shelters can provide useful information                   
              about adaptation to a very limited area, they cannot be used to                
              understand broader regional strategies.  The information                       
              collected by Mr. Mabulla, because it covers a larger area can                  
              fill this gap.  Through use of both ethnographic comparison and                
              LSA analysis, a "modern" pattern can be established and the                    
              earlier MSA one compared to it.                                                
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will shed                  
              light on the processes which lead to the emergence of modern                   
              humans.  It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists               
              and assist in the training of an extremely promising young                     
              scientist.
