Title       : Neuranatomical Organization of the Central Visual Pathways in Rana Pipiens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9211577

Award Number: 9211577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter Wilczynski                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316321             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine V. Fite kfite@psych.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil M. Montgomery  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1132,1136,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
               A major objective of the research proposed is to further advance              
              our basic knowledge of the organization of central visual pathways,            
              including the optic nerve, the relationship of cell groups in the              
              optic chiasm to the divergence of the optic tracts, and the                    
              innervation of multiple central targets.  A major focus is upon two            
              major extratectal nuclei, the accessory optic nucleus and pretectal            
              nucleus lentiformis mesencephali and their interrelationship.                  
              These studies are relevant to understanding how the retina                     
              innervates multiple targets in more complex species, as well.  The             
              proposal addresses the following questions:  1, to what degree are             
              retinal axons within the optic nerve organized by morphological                
              type; 2, what is the nature of the spatial transformations of                  
              retinal axons within the optic nerve and chiasma; 3, at what point             
              do retinal axons separate into fascicles bound for specific target             
              destinations; 4, what is the relationship of these optic fascicles             
              to cell groups of the hypothalamus in the immediate vicinity of the            
              optic chiasm; 5, how are axons arranged within each of the optic-              
              tract fascicles; and 6, how are the different arrangements of                  
              axons, i.e., retinal topography, morphological type of axon and                
              central target destination interrelated?  A second major objective             
              is to further clarify the dual organization of the accessory optic             
              system and its interrelationship with the pretectal nucleus                    
              lentiformis mesencephali.  Ultrastructural techniques will be used             
              to examine central-retinal vs. peripheral-retinal innervation of               
              the basal optic nucleus via medial and lateral fascicles of the                
              basal optic root, respectively.  An ultrastructural analysis of the            
              efferent projection from the accessory optic nucleus to the                    
              pretectal nucleus lentiformis mesencephali is also proposed.                   
              %%%                                                                            
              For more than 50 years, the amphibian visual system has been the               
              focus of a broad range of investigations that have provided a major            
              source of knowledge about the basic organization of the vertebrate             
              visual system, particularly the retina and subcortical visual                  
              pathways.  Evolutionarily, amphibians are among the oldest                     
              vertebrates which possess the major retinal projections which                  
              occur, generally, in vertebrates.
