Title       : Dissertation Research: Effects of Ecological Factors on Facultative Mutualisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1993     
File        : a9211965

Award Number: 9211965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3771               (Estimated)
Investigator: Leeanne E. Tennant  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1128,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to determine how ecological                    
              factors shape facultative mutualisms, focussing on ant-plant                   
              system.  The proposed studies of the relationship between the                  
              plants and their ant occupants, of the life history characters of              
                                                                                             
              the ant species that occupy the plants, and of ecological                      
              interactions between ant species will contribute to our                        
              understanding of how facultative ant-plant mutualisms are                      
              established and maintained.  Ecological investigations such as                 
              those outlined in this proposal can identify likely selective                  
              environments in which future evolutionary specialization may take              
                                                                                             
              place.  Comparative research of the interaction between the                    
              ant-plant Conostegia setosa (Melastomataceae) and its ant                      
              occupants at two rainforest sites, one in Costa Rica and one in                
              Panama is being conducted.  Since each species of ant occupant                 
              potentially has a different effect on plant fitness, the identity              
                                                                                             
              and frequency of each species of ant occupant and how the                      
              identity of the occupants is determined are important in                       
              predicting the likelihood of the evolution of more specialized                 
              mutualisms.  Experiments are designed to address several                       
              ecological factors that may determine the occupants of C. setosa:              
                                                                                             
              by: 1) observing interactions between the species of ant                       
              occupants and other area ant species at baits, 2) comparing life               
                                                                                             
              history variables such as colony structure, foraging strategies,               
                                                                                             
              and competitive behaviors that may affect establishment in C.                  
              setosa plants by the different species of ant occupants, and 3)                
              measuring the benefits of the interaction to the plants and the                
              ants.  A long-term transplant experiment has been set up to                    
              investigate modes of colonization by each ant species, priority                
              effects, and the influence of the ant community on the identity                
              of the ant occupants.
