Title       : The Virginia Coast Reserve LTER Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1994       
File        : a9211772

Award Number: 9211772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1241406            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce P. Hayden bph@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herman H. Shugart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Virginia Coast Reserve (VCR) is an extremely dynamic,                      
              frequently disturbed landscape which is comprised of elements                  
              (e.g. grasslands, marshes) that differ in degrees normally                     
              associated with biome-level differences.  Because the frequency of             
              disturbance at the VCR is so great the types of ecosystem changes              
              that would normally occur across large distances (continents,                  
              biomes) and over long periods of time (e.g. glacial and                        
              interglacial periods) happen on decadal time-scales.   Ecosystem               
              state changes are frequent.  The central research theme of the VCR             
              LTER project is the understanding of the dynamics of ecosystem                 
              state change, both the transitions among ecosystem states and                  
              succession within these states.  The basic elements of this LTER's             
              theoretical concept of landscape dynamics are that 1) there are                
              "attractors" in the ecosystem state space within which                         
              successional dynamics operate and 2) there are events that produce             
              transitions from one of these attractors to another.  The VCR LTER             
              will continue to study succession within several of the more                   
              prominent states (Myrica thickets and salt marshes) and the                    
              response of these states to disturbance.  This will be                         
              accomplished by research in the NSF-defined LTER network core                  
              areas as well as additional VCR-established areas as well as                   
              additional VCR-established areas examining states and state                    
              changes that have occurred at the VCR in geologic, historic, and               
              present-day context.  The VCR LTER will address the following                  
              working hypotheses: 1) The controls on succession within states                
              are the availability of water, the salinity of that water, the                 
              frequency of tidal inundation, and sediment deposition; and 2)                 
              Gradients in salinity and tidal inundation frequency and thus                  
              organic matter accumulation, primary productivity, and nutrients,              
              are a function of the slope, sea level, and astronomical and storm             
              tides.  3) Many ecological state changes are triggered by                      
              infrequent, short-duration, intense disturbances such as coastal               
              storms.  The products of the proposed work will be the development             
              of a new theoretical base for maintenance and structuring of                   
              landscape, further elucidation of controls on ecosystem processes,             
              and new ecosystem and landscape modeling approaches.
