Title       : Successional Processes in Taiga Forests of Interior Alaska: A Long Term
               Ecological Research (LTER) Program for Study of Controls of Subarctic Forest
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9211769

Award Number: 9211769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4182506            (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Stuart Chapin terry.chapin@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith Van Cleve  (Principal Investigator former)
              John A. Yarie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger W. Ruess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tricia L. Wurtz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie A. Viereck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark W. Oswood  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0208000   Water Resources                         
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This program focuses on population and ecosystem level questions               
              within the framework of succession.  It capitalizes on a                       
              substantial existing base of information and preliminary results               
              from past research to address hypothesized controls of structure               
              and function of successional forest communities.  These processes              
              previously have not been examined in a comprehensive manner in the             
              North American taiga.  Results of this research will greatly                   
              improve understanding of the links between resource (moisture,                 
              light, nutrients) supply and plant growth as influenced by                     
              herbivores and soil microbial activity.                                        
                                                                                             
              Researchers in interior Alaska have demonstrated their commitment              
              to long-term studies of ecological processes.  Several studies                 
              have been pursued, essentially by the same scientists for 20 to 25             
              years.  For example a series of plots in various successional                  
              stages on the floodplain of the Chena and Tanana rivers                        
              established in 1964, are still being monitored for growth and                  
              changes in species composition.  The USDA Forest Service also is               
              committed to long-term experimentation and encourages these                    
              activities through their management of Bonanza Creek Experimental              
              Forest, the principal site of this research.                                   
                                                                                             
              The hypotheses put forth in this proposal address important long-              
              term aspects of forest ecosystem structure and function only                   
              initially evaluated in earlier research efforts.  During this new              
              phase initial experiments will be continued and new hypotheses                 
              will be addressed based on some initial results.  Considering                  
              questions dealing with taiga forest ecology from a successional                
              standpoint establishes a strong organizational structure for the               
              research and promotes linkage among research projects and feedback             
              of ideas and information among personnel.  The structure and                   
              objectives of this project take advantage of existing knowledge,               
              current research activities, and an experienced group of                       
              investigators, melding them in a combination which will promote                
              the type of interaction necessary for advancing scientific                     
              understanding of the ecology of taiga forest ecosystems, and                   
              insuring success of a long-term ecological research program.
