Title       : Aerodynamics and Kinetics Effects on the Dynamics of Steady/Unsteady Laminar,
               Stretched Flames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9211844

Award Number: 9211844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George P. Peterson                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fokion N. Egolfopoulos egolfopo@alnitak.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0304040   Fire                                    
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Flame behavior in realistic situations is governed by the                      
              detailed kinetics of chemical reactions, the diffusion of heat                 
              and mass, and the aerodynamic processes of stretching,                         
              turbulence, and large-scale flow nonuniformity.  In this                       
              program, the response of laminar premixed flames to stretching                 
              and unsteadiness will be experimentally determined in a                        
              counterflow burner configuration in both reduced and elevated                  
              pressure environments and numerically simulated using detailed                 
              flame and kinetics codes.  Emphasis will be placed on                          
              processes governing extinction of steady stretched flames, the                 
              effects of unsteadiness on flame extinction, location, and                     
              detailed structure, the implementation of non-intrusive laser-                 
              based diagnostics to map velocity profiles, and the                            
              determination of complex kinetic mechanisms.  The effects of                   
              aerodynamic stretching on laminar diffusion flame extinction                   
              will also be studied for both steady and unsteady flowfields;                  
              in this case, the experimental configuration will consist of                   
              an air laminar jet impinging on a laminar fuel jet coming from                 
              the opposite direction.  From comparisons between experimental                 
              and numerical results the validity of existing proposed                        
              kinetic mechanisms will be assessed, and, at the extinction                    
              point, previously developed kinetic criteria of extinction                     
              will be tested.  The influence of unsteadiness on diffusion                    
              flame extinction will be quantified and insight obtained on                    
              the relative significance of various time scales associated                    
              with the problem.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Practically all realistic flames are subjected to aerodynamic                  
              stretching, manifested through flow nonuniformity, flame                       
              curvature, or flame/flow unsteadiness.  In premixed flames,                    
              this influence is strong due to the inherent interdependence                   
              between the transport and reaction processes.  Thus,                           
              understanding the properties of stretched premixed flames is                   
              of substantial practical importance as well as of fundamental                  
              interest.  Examples include flame stabilization and the                        
              modeling of turbulent flames via the concept of stretched                      
              laminar flamelets.  Diffusion flames can also be affected by                   
              the presence of stretch.  The response of a diffusion flame to                 
              flowfield nonuniformities depends critically on reactant                       
              leakage which can lead to incomplete reaction and extinction.                  
              Furthermore, diffusion flames are more susceptible to                          
              extinction in that they are "losing" heat on both sides in a                   
              counterflow configuration whereas premixed flames are                          
              adiabatic on one side.
