Title       : Bivalent Evaluative Processes Underlying Attitudes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1992       
File        : a9211483

Award Number: 9211483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196077             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Cacioppo   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary G. Berntson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Petty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                            
              Attitude theory and opinion polls have become an important part                
              of the social fabric.  They affect the campaign strategy and                   
              tactics adopted by political candidates, the marketing strategy                
              and advertising campaigns of Fortunate 500 companies, the                      
              programming development and strategy in mass media, and strategic              
              planning and program development in public education.  In theory,              
              opinion polls provide a means for the public to feedback and                   
              shape institutions that govern their lives.  This research is                  
              based on the premise that this theory is incomplete and,                       
              consequently, decisions based on current attitude theory and                   
              surveys can be grossly (although nonobviously) misleading.                     
              Specifically, contemporary attitude theory and opinion polls are               
              based on the premise that people know and will report their                    
              evaluative dispositions toward attitude objects (e.g.,                         
              candidates, products, educational options).  However, there is                 
              now evidence from various disciplines that evaluative                          
              dispositions are represented and activated in more complex ways                
              than accommodated by current theory and measures, and that                     
              contemporary bipolar (e.g., favor/oppose, like/dislike)                        
              self-report scales can potentially mask important differences in               
              people's evaluative dispositions.  A quantitative theory is                    
              proposed that subsumes existing attitude theory and research                   
              while calling attention to specific areas in which prior work can              
              be quite misleading.  A systematic program of research will                    
              contrast the predictions made by contemporary theory of attitudes              
              and the proposed theory of "evaluative space."  For instance,                  
              individuals who have no attitude toward or feel neutrally about a              
              topic are indistinguishable using traditional opinion questions                
              from individuals who are strongly conflicted about (e.i., who                  
              possess ambivalent attitudes toward) the topic.  Attitudinal                   
              ambivalence results when both positive and negative evaluative                 
              processes are coactivated and, as such, reflects a special case                
              of behavioral conflict.  Research will investigate the                         
              determinants, mediation, and behavioral consequences of attitude               
              ambivalence and conflict, and will integrate this and traditional              
              attitude theory and research within the more general theoretical               
              framework of evaluative space.  In view of the ubiguity of                     
              evaluative processes in behavior, illumination of their dynamics               
              and the underlying evaluative mechanisms should have important                 
              ramifications for attitude theory and research, and broad                      
              significance for basic theory in psychology generally.
