Title       : Mammalian Faunas Across the Middle-Late Paleocene Boundary in Western North
               America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1993      
File        : a9211243

Award Number: 9211243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Jane Harrington                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Krause dkrause@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Paleocene Epoch represents the time during which mammals,             
              particularly placentals, underwent a major adaptive radiation and              
              became dominant land animals.  Almost one-half of the known ordinal            
              diversity of Genozoic mammals is thought to have arisen in the                 
              Paleocene, and many of these first appearances are in North                    
              America.  This geologic interval is therefore of great importance              
              in the history of mammals, yet less is known about mammalian                   
              diversity and composition during the Paleocene than during any                 
              of the later epochs of the Genozoic.  Particularly weak is our                 
              knowledge of mammalian history during the transition from the                  
              middle to late Paleocene (i.e., from the Torrejonian ?To! to the               
              Tiffanian ?Ti! North American Land-Mammal Ages), when there was a              
              significant change in the fauna.  This faunal turnover was                     
              previously ascribed to climatic change and intercontinental                    
              migrations; however, our recent work indicates that no major                   
              immigrations into the Western Interior occurred near the boundary,             
              and that the scenario of faunal change was more complex than                   
              previously hypothesized.  By substantially increasing the number of            
              large samples near the To/Ti boundary, this project will have                  
              provided the most detailed information with which to study faunal              
              turnover during this important interval.  Preliminary collections              
              from one locality n particularly.  Bingo Quarry,indicate that it is            
              crucial to our understanding of the To/Ti transition.  Study of                
              these samples, including those from Bingo Quarry, will                         
              significantly augment knowledge of the phylogeny, functional                   
              morphology, paleoecology, and biostratigraphy of To/Ti mammals and             
              provide the foundation for analyses of faunal turnover.
