Title       : RUI: Lexical and Conceptual Memory in the Bilingual
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1994      
File        : a9211863

Award Number: 9211863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230010             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith F. Kroll   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              By what process do individuals acquire a second language?  During              
              early stages of learning second language words, people often report            
              being aware of their first language.  However, as they become more             
              proficient in the second language, they begin to report that they              
              can think directly in the second language without reference to the             
              first language.   Although there is empirical evidence to support              
              these common observations, we do not fully understand how memory               
              changes to accommodate the acquisition of words in a new language,             
              or how skilled bilinguals develop cognitive mechanisms that allow              
              them rapid access to each language and also to the interconnections            
              between their languages.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The general goal of this research is to explore the changes in                 
              memory that occur as adults acquire a second language, and to                  
              compare the performance of beginning second language learners to               
              skilled bilinguals.  A specific goal of the research is to test and            
              evaluate a new model of cross-language interconnection in which the            
              connections between the two languages are thought to be asymmetric.            
              The model proposes that there are asymmetries in the strength of               
              the connections between lexical (word-to-word) representations in              
              different languages.  The model also proposes asymmetries between              
              lexical representations and concepts.                                          
                                                                                             
              Two lines of research will test the predictions of the new model.              
              The first concerns predictions for cross-language performance in               
              naming, translation, priming, and memory tasks.  A central claim in            
              this work is that there are two different routes to translation:               
              translation from the first language to the second language requires            
              understanding the meaning of the second language word, whereas                 
              translation from the second language to the first can be                       
              accomplished on the basis of associations between words in the two             
              languages.  One set of experiments will evaluate the evidence for              
              this claim and also test implications for later memory performance.            
              A second line of research will explore the development of the                  
              hypothesized cross-language asymmetries over the course of second              
              language learning in adults by determining the factors that                    
              influence how quickly an individual becomes fluent in the second               
              language.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The results of the proposed experiments will have important                    
              implications for theories of memory and for understanding levels of            
              language processing and their interaction.  In addition, by                    
              identifying the way in which a new memory system is established for            
              second language words during second language acquisition, the                  
              research will suggest ways in which basic cognitive research can be            
              applied to second language instruction and bilingual education.                
              Given the changing demographic characteristics of our society, this            
              is an issue of increasing importance.
