Title       : Morphological Tailoring and Properties of Perfluorinated Ionomer/Inorganic Oxide
               Nanocomposites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1995      
File        : a9211963

Award Number: 9211963
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Mauritz kmauritz@whale.st.usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1773,9146,9163,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Unique perfluoro-organic/inorganic oxide hybrid materials will be              
              formulated by merging processes recently developed for the solution            
              and melt processing of perfluorosulfonate ionomers (PFSI's) and the            
              production of nanocomposites by the in situ sol-gel reaction for               
              silicon and metal alkoxides within the polar clusters of PFSI's.               
              The working hypothesis is that the resultant morphology of the                 
              inorganic phase is ordered by the nanophase-separated morphology of            
              the PFSI matrix.  In this research, the three-dimensional                      
              morphological template presented by the PFSI will be tailored by               
              manipulating the primary polymer structure, polymer solution                   
              conditions, film casting procedure, and post-processing (e.g.                  
              drying, annealing, melt-quenching, mechanical orientation).  The               
              nanocomposites will be extensively characterized for microstructure            
              broadly ranging from light microscopic resolution down to the level            
              of Angstroms using various microscopic, scattering, diffraction,               
              and spectroscopic methods.  Structure-property relationships will              
              result from the investigation of the mechanical, thermal,                      
              dielectric/electrical conductance and gas permeation                           
              characteristics of these materials.  The percolative nature of the             
              inorganic phase is anticipated to generate "smart" materials in the            
              sense of acting as temperature and pressure sensors.  Oriented                 
              nanocomposites should possess directional mechanical, thermal, and             
              electrical properties.  The scope of the microstructural                       
              investigation will be greatly broadened through strong interactions            
              with governmental (Sandia, Oak Ridge) and industrial (Dow Chemical             
              Co.) laboratories.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This research aims to produce new materials that should be act as              
              gas-permselective membranes under rather demanding conditions, and             
              this be useful in a variety of separations.  This research is in               
              cooperation with the Electric Power Research Institute.
