Title       : Limited Contracting in General Equlibrium Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1995 
File        : a9211618

Award Number: 9211618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189289             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward C. Prescott prescott@atlas.socsci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Kehoe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Why in market economies is it the owners of capital that almost                
              always hire labor?  Classical general equilibrium theory is                    
              silent on this question: whoever controls a firm whether it be                 
              the owners of capital or the owners of labor, or someone else,                 
              simply picks the value maximizing point in that firm's production              
              possibility set.  In market economies we typically see limited                 
              liability of the owners of firms.  We also see bankruptcies and                
              often firms are reorganized and control is transferred to new                  
              owners and sometimes firms are liquidated.  This project develops              
              a model in which bankruptcy, reorganization, and liquidation                   
              occur in equilibrium and in which it is optimal for capitalists                
              to own and control the firm.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Currently quantitative general equilibrium models of the business              
              cycle abstract from financial intermediation.  One widely held                 
              view of the business cycle is that shocks to the economy which do              
              not directly have a large effect on aggregate production                       
              possibilities may end up having large aggregate consequences due               
              to interactions with the financial intermediation system.  For                 
              example, the financial crises of the late 19th and early 20th                  
              centuries were followed by severe declines in output and                       
              employment which seem far too large to be accounted for by                     
              technology shocks.  The contribution of this project comes from                
              the development of the first quantitative general equilibrium                  
              model of the business cycle in which financial intermediation                  
              plays a central role.  These models are used to reassess the                   
              effects of monetary and fiscal policy, including various                       
              regulations and policies with regard to financial intermediation.              
              An extended version of the model explores financial crises over                
              the cycle.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The third part of this project evaluates monetary and fiscal                   
              policy with limited contracting among agents.  A quantitative                  
              model with nominal wage contracts is developed and its policy                  
              implications are explored.  A model is also developed in which                 
              income distribution interacts with the tax system.  These models               
              are used to quantitatively study the interact ion between equity               
              and efficiency goals in the design of tax policies.
