Title       : Software for Visualization and Analysis of Ecological Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1992      
File        : a9211127

Award Number: 9211127
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert G. Voigt                         
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Rasure   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 4083      POST DOC RESRCH ASSOC COMP S&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9218,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Sevilleta Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) will have                   
              archived over a terabyte of heterogeneous image data by the end                
              of this year.  Other LTER sites are similarly amassing large,                  
              complicated data sets.  Ecologists want to transform this raw                  
              data into useful information to provide new insight into long -                
              term ecological phenomena.  Unfortunately, the procedures,                     
              software tools, and user friendly interfaces necessary to                      
              facilitate access to these data sets over high-speed networks are              
              currently lacking.  This precludes analysis on supercomputers at               
              national centers and subsequent visualization by ecologists                    
              located at remote sites.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The specific objective of the research will be to develop                      
              software that not only enables but encourages LTER ecologists to               
              more fully utilize multi-resolution, multi-spectral, time-                     
              varying, multi-dimensional data from Sevilleta.  The solutions                 
              developed will be driven by the particular needs of the Sevilleta              
              ecologists and will be applicable to other LTER sites.  This does              
              not preclude the design of more generic components, with a                     
              broader scope of application.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The goal of the collaboration among the Khoros Project at the                  
              University of New Mexico, the Sevilleta LTER site, and San Diego               
              Supercomputer Center is implementation of a prototype system                   
              whereby researchers can access, analyze, and visualize Sevilleta               
              data from remote locations.
