Title       : An Attributional Analysis of Childhood Aggression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1996     
File        : a9211982

Award Number: 9211982
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295936             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra Graham shgraham@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard Weiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                  It is known that aggressive children tend to perceive                     
              ambiguous negative events as intentionally caused by others.                   
              Such judgments then provoke hostile retaliation.  This robust                  
              empirical finding is elaborated in the current research, using                 
              attribution theory to illuminate the dynamics of aggression and                
              to guide the creation of an attributional intervention with                    
              African American school-aged boys labeled as aggressive.  In                   
              seven studies, sociometric procedures will be used to identify                 
              aggressive males and matched groups of nonaggressive subjects.                 
              Laboratory paradigms taken from social psychology will then be                 
              used to investigate the antecedents of judgments of intent and                 
              responsibility.  Among the topics to be examined are: a) whether               
              aggressive children over-attribute hostile intent to others in                 
              both aggressive and nonaggressive contexts; b) the likelihood                  
              that race (i.e., perceived prejudice) is used by black subjects                
              as an attributional cue in judgments of self-responsibility; and               
              c) whether aggressive children understand the communication                    
              strategies and excuses that are used to mitigate anger from                    
              others.  These findings will then be used to create an                         
              intervention designed to reduce hostile behavior among African                 
              American boys labeled as aggressive.  The intervention will be                 
              tested in an actual school setting and its development is guided               
              by the belief that a change in cognition (i.e., attribution to                 
              intent) should lead to changes in the feelings and behavior that               
              logically follow this causal inference.
