Title       : The Effect of Fee-Shifting Laws on Litigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9211693

Award Number: 9211693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Olson smolson@poli-sci.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              Traditionally, the American legal system has operated on the                   
              presumption that both sides in a lawsuit will pay their own                    
              litigation costs, the bulk of which is likely to be attorney fees.             
              This "pay your own way" procedure is known as the "American rule"              
              because the so-called "English rule," in which the losing party in             
              a lawsuit pays the expenses of the winner, is much more common in              
              other Westernized countries.  Underneath the issue of who pays the             
              cost of litigation lie profound questions about the role of the                
              legal system in American society.  On one side are those who                   
              perceive that Americans are excessively litigious and support a                
              loser-pays rule assuming it would deter frivolous claims and                   
              defenses.  On the other side, however, are those who focus on                  
              Americans who are hardly litigious but in fact are excluded from               
              using the legal system because of inability to pay the costs                   
              required.  These persons' support or opposition to laws that shift             
              legal fees from one party to another would depend on their                     
              likelihood of increasing "access to justice" for legitimate claims.            
                                                                                             
              The empirical research question underlying this controversy is                 
              whether fee-shifting laws do in fact affect people's decisions to              
              litigate.  The purpose of this planning grant is to develop a                  
              research design for examining the effects of statutes that shift               
              the costs of litigation, especially attorney fees, to losing                   
              parties.  The investigator will adopt a sociolegal perspective on              
              outcomes which would require a combination of aggregate and case-              
              level analysis, including disputant surveys.  Fee-shifting statutes            
              will be reviewed and interviews will be conducted about the                    
              implementation of such statutes.  This work will provide the basis             
              for the ultimate selection of jurisdictions for a comparative study            
              of outcomes in jurisdictions with and without fee-shifting.  The               
              research design in the full proposal will test the economic and the            
              socio-cultural models of litigation against the behavior of                    
              disputants with an opportunity to shift their legal fees to the                
              other party.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research will be of considerable policy relevance as well as              
              add to scientific knowledge about how the change of the fee                    
              structure in the legal system can affect the quantity and quality              
              of litigation.  The findings will contribute to sociolegal research            
              on claiming and law and economics research on settlement decisions.            
              The opportunity to compare economic with socio/cultural models of              
              litigation behavior will be unique.
