Title       : Combined Coding and Modulation for Spread Spectrum Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1992    
File        : a9211344

Award Number: 9211344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Aubrey M. Bush                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian D. Woerner woerner@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4096,
Abstract    :
                   A study of direct-sequence spread-spectrum (DS/SS)                        
              techniques for high capacity mobile communications systems is                  
              proposed. This research aims to develop an understanding of how                
              coding  and modulation affect the multiple access capability of                
              these systems. In particular, this research will focus on the                  
              development of combined coding and modulation techniques for                   
              DS/SS systems. Although coded modulation techniques have                       
              yielded dramatic performance improvements  when applied to                     
              communications over narrowband channels, attempts to apply these               
              techniques to  spread-spectrum systems have thus far produced                  
              modest results  Rather than attempt to develop entire new classes              
              of codes, this investigation will examine  existing classes of                 
              convolutional codes. When the choice of convolutional code is                  
              combined with the  choice of spreading sequence, a combined                    
              coding and modulation technique results. It is conjectured  that               
              the resulting codes will perform as well as any possible coded                 
              modulation technique for a DS/SS  system.  The objectives of this              
              research are to understand the fundamental performance limits of               
              coded modulation techniques for DS/SS systems, to identify                     
              promising coded modulation techniques,  and to analyze the                     
              performance of these techniques using a channel model which                    
              incorporates the  effects of multiple access interference and                  
              frequency selective fading. The research proposed here  will have              
              a twofold impact. While understanding the relationship between                 
              coding and modulation  in a DS/SS system is of long term                       
              theoretical interest, the development of practical error                       
              correction techniques for DS/SS is of immediate practical value                
              to the mobile communications community.
