Title       : ROW: Laboratory Studies of Facultative Anaerobic Benthic Foraminifera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9211166

Award Number: 9211166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16567              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Bernhard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NY State Dept of Health
	      66 Hackett Blvd 3rd Floor
	      Albany, NY  122091718    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Foraminifera are protozoans which are generally thought to be                  
              obligate aerobes although a wide variety of evidence suggests that             
              certain benthic forms are facultative anaerobes. This research                 
              planning projects objectives are to (1) develop a rapid, non                   
              terminal screening procedure to distinguish living from dead                   
              individuals, (2) characterize formainiferal ultrastructure after               
              exposure to extended periods of anoxia or low oxygen conditions,               
              and (3) establish the postmortem ultrastructural degradation                   
              sequence of foraminifers. The screening procedure will employ                  
              flourogenic substrates which will fluoresce within living specimens            
              but which are undetectable by fluorescence microscopy in dead                  
              specimens. The ultrastructure of specimens exposed to anoxic or low            
              oxygen condition for time periods of weeks to months will be                   
              examined with high voltage electron microscopy (HVEM). The use of              
              HVEM permits rapid examination of a significant sample size since              
              observed section are about 10 times thicker than those for                     
              conventional electron microscopy. In order to investigate                      
              postmortem ultrastructural changes, foraminifera will be irradiated            
              with ultraviolet light in a dose sufficient to induce necrosis.                
              These specimens will be examined with HVEM to assess changes over              
              time. The results of this project will provide the foundation for              
              future investigations concerning the physiological ecology of                  
              foraminifera inhabiting anoxic environments.
