Title       : Employment Changes and Their Impact on Local Government
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9211679

Award Number: 9211679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17839              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn A. Staeheli lynner@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                   Political action by ordinary people is typically locally                  
              based, and it focuses on local issues or on local responses to                 
              higher level trends.  Changes in political activism can have                   
              important consequences for issues such as public service delivery              
              and the form and role of government.  Flexible employment such as              
              part-time work, off-shift work, temporary contracts, self-                     
              employment, and homeworking may change patterns of political                   
              activism by making it more difficult for unions and political                  
              parties to identify the common basis for political action and by               
              differentiating increasingly divergent wage and compensation                   
              structures.  Any evaluation of political activism depends                      
              critically on citizen perception of the openness of local                      
              political institutions; if these institutions are perceived as                 
              inaccessible, political activism would be less likely.  Thus, the              
              nature and perception of local political institutions intervenes               
              in the restructuring of citizenship.  This project will examine                
              how political activism by citizens is affected by the increase in              
              flexible employment forms that have accompanied economic                       
              restructuring.  It hypothesizes that flexible employment and                   
              changes in wage levels, job security, and time availability lead               
              to re-evaluations of the potential of political activism.  In                  
              this process, perception of the local political structure acts as              
              an intervening variable.  Trends in activism are examined through              
              interviews with a sample of household members to reconstruct                   
              their employment and political histories.  Three interviewing                  
              strategies and alternative methodological techniques will be                   
              employed in order to determine how the relationship between                    
              economic restructuring and political activism can best be                      
              assessed.                                                                      
                   This Research Planning Grant for Women will help fill a void              
              in empirical knowledge about changes in the work experiences of                
              households, changes in the perceptions of local political                      
              institutions, and political activism on the part of citizens.                  
              This study will inform research related to restructuring, the                  
              state, and citizenship, and it will advance our understanding of               
              the fabric of local democracy under conditions of restructuring.
