Title       : REU: The Nature of Nutrient Limitation in Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1991   
File        : a9196130

Award Number: 9196130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 31,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154000             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Stuart Chapin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will examine the nature of nutrient limitation at                 
              the level of ecosystem function.  The hypothesis that the degree               
              of nutrient limitation in an ecosystem depends not only upon the               
              fertility of the site but also upon the responsiveness of the                  
              vegetation that occupies the site and upon the potential of soil               
              microorganisms to immobilize nutrients will be tested.  The                    
              response to nitrogen addition in two nitrogen-limited ecosystems               
              (tundra and boreal forest) will be examined.  Field experiments                
              will determine the growth response of vegetation to large and                  
              small levels of nitrogen addition and the degree to which added                
              nitrogen is immobilized by micro-organisms or absorbed by plants.              
              Laboratory experiments will determine the potential of plants and              
              soil microorganisms adapted to differing soil fertility to absorb              
              nutrients.  The extent to which soil microorganisms are energy-                
              vs. nutrient-limited in ecosystems of different fertilities and                
              the way in which changing energy/nutrient limitation affects                   
              nutrient immobilization or release will also be determined.  The               
              research should improve basic understanding of the nature of                   
              nutrient limitation in ecosystems and may provide insight into                 
              the question of why some ecosystems are so much more responsive                
              to fertilization than are others.  The latter question has                     
              considerable economic importance.                                              
                                                                                             
              The University of ALaska Taiga research group is excellent and                 
              highly productive.  Facilities for the work are quite well                     
              developed as is the science administration environment provided                
              by the Institute of Arctic Biology.                                            
                                                                                             
              The Ecosystem Studies Program enthusiastically recommends that                 
              this now three-year continuing award be made.
