Title       : Collaborative Research: Long-Term Fire Regimes in Eastern North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1990 
File        : a9196031

Award Number: 9196031
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Althea Ball                             
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 30,  1990 
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Clark   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Among the most dramatic effects of global climate change of               
              the next two centuries may be the increased frequency and/or                   
              intensity of fires in temperate forests.  Natural fire regimes                 
              are largely unknown, making it difficult to speculate on the                   
              response of fire regimes to rapid climate change.  The influence               
              of fire on forest composition and structure might have important               
              feedback effects on climate through its effects on the cycling of              
              greenhouse gases.  The last 1000 years provides an example of                  
              rapid climate change in eastern North America that can serve as a              
              basis for understanding the role of fire when climate changes.                 
              Forest transitions may have occurred as a consequence of changes               
              in the fire regime or changes in the climate.  The null                        
              hypothesis that the fire regime has not changed across the                     
              ecotone of deciduous and mixed conifer forest in eastern North                 
              America during the last 2500 years will be tested.                             
                   A new method of obtaining long-term fire histories will be                
              used in this research.  Individual fires in the stratigraphic                  
              record will be determined using petrographic thin sections of                  
              annually laminated (varved) lake sediments to produce long-term                
              fire frequencies.  The method will be applied to a network of                  
              small lakes with varved sediments across our study area.  The                  
              individual sites will provide a means for assessing the role of                
              fire for influencing forest changes in different climatic and                  
              vegetation settings.  The combined data set will establish the                 
              broad spatial and temporal patterns of fire regimes and forest                 
              composition that attend climate change at a subcontinental scale.              
              Results will facilitate evaluation of future climate change on                 
              natural ecosystems.
