Title       : Semiparametric and Nonparametric Estimation off Structural Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1991       
File        : a9196185

Award Number: 9196185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44600              (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Powell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The project will develop new methods for estimating the                        
              parameters of nonlinear econometric models using semiparametric                
              or nonparametric approaches. Work on three broad lines of                      
              research will be undertaken.                                                   
              First, estimation of parameters of linear models subject to                    
              sample selection will be considered under a weak nonparametric                 
              restriction on the form of the selection correction.                           
              Specifically, the selection effect will be assumed to depend only              
              on the conditional mean of some observable selection variable,                 
              which is to be estimated using a nonparametric regression method;              
              this estimate will appear in  the second-step estimator for the                
              parameters of interest.                                                        
              Second, nonparametric estimation of structural equations using                 
              instrumental variables will be investigated. This will involve                 
              nonparametric estimation of solutions of integral equations, as                
              well as nonparametric estimation of additive regression models                 
              with preliminary nonparametric estimates of regressors.                        
              Third, a bound for the attainable efficiency of estimators for                 
              monotonic regression models will be derived when the error                     
              distribution satisfies a single conditional quantile restriction.              
              Also, a feasible estimation procedure which attains this bound                 
              will be developed.                                                             
              This line of research will continue to push the frontier of                    
              semiparametric and nonparametric estimation in econometrics.                   
              These methods will be extremely beneficial in the development of               
              economic modelling, as more flexible assumptions are allowed and               
              provide benchmarks for traditional estimation techniques.
