Title       : Developing Linear Algebra Libraries for Supercomputers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1991     
File        : a9196224

Award Number: 9196224
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert G. Voigt                         
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28600              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Demmel demmel@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4082      EXPERI ADVANC SCIEN COMP SYSTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                     The Principal Investigator proposes to design and implement            
              linear algebra library for a wide range of currently used                      
              supercomputers.  The library is intended to provide a uniform set              
              of subroutines to solve the most common linear algebra problems                
              and to run efficiently on a range of architectures.  This                      
              library, which will be freely accessible via computer network,                 
              not only will ease code development, make codes more portable                  
              among machines of different architectures, and increase                        
              efficiency, but also will provide tools for evaluating                         
              supercomputer performance.  The library will be based on the                   
              well-known and widely used LINPACK and EISPACK packages for                    
              linear equation solving, eigenvalue problems, and linear least                 
              squares.  LINPACK and EISPACK have provided an important                       
              infrastructure for scientific computing on serial machines, but                
              they are not designed to exploit the profusion of parallel and                 
              vector architectures now becoming available.  We propose to                    
              rewrite the algorithms in terms of calls to a small number of                  
              Extended Basic Linear Algebra Subroutines each of which                        
              implements a basic operation such as matrix multiplication,                    
              rank-k matrix updates, and solving triangular systems.  These                  
              operations can be optimized for each architecture, but the                     
              underlying numerical algorithms will be the same for all                       
              machines.
