Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Triangular AF Algebras and TriangularHyperfinite Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1992      
File        : a9196026

Award Number: 9196026
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernard R. McDonald                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Baker baker@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9135,
Abstract    :
                   This Minority Research Initiation award is for the support                
              of Professor Baker's work on nonselfadjoint operator algebras. He              
              is particularly interested in subalgebras of approximately                     
              finite-dimensional C*-algebras (resp. von Neumann algebra                      
              factors) that play a role analogous to that of the upper                       
              triangular matrices in a full matrix algebra. The problems he                  
              will pursue have mainly to do with classification, isomorphism                 
              invariants, and isometric versus algebraic isomorphism.                        
                   The operators that lie at the heart of this project may be                
              thought of as a species of enriched numbers. They obey the same                
              laws of arithmetic as numbers with two notable exceptions, namely              
              that the result of multiplication depends on the order in which                
              the factors are taken, and not every nonzero operator has an                   
              inverse. Mathematical analysis knows only two number systems, the              
              real and complex, but there is an immense variety of operator                  
              algebras. Situations unsuitable for numerical representation can               
              often be represented in some fashion by operator algebras, thanks              
              to the greater degree of flexibility available with the latter.                
              The price for this is that understanding the structure and                     
              classification of operator algebras requires considerable effort,              
              as for instance the work to be undertaken in this project.
