Title       : Renegotiation and Bargaining in Dynamic Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1991      
File        : a9196001

Award Number: 9196001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dilip J. Abreu dabreu@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project addresses a neglected but crucial area of research                
              in the theory of strategic dynamics, i.e., renegotiation in                    
              repeated games.  Renegotiation and bargaining power are combined               
              in a unified, coherent theory.  Much of the project is concerned               
              with providing clean characterizations which make the theory                   
              tractable in applied economic problems.  Both the formulation of               
              the appropriate definitions and the characterizations become                   
              progressively more challenging as more complicated supergames are              
              studied.  The project gives definitions and conjectured results                
              for asymmetric strictly repeated games and for some dynamic and                
              stochastic games.                                                              
                                                                                             
              This is extremely important research because it corrects a major               
              flaw in models of repeated games and repeated game models are                  
              widely used in macro theory, industrial organization,                          
              international trade and many other areas of economic theory.  The              
              validity of repeated game models depend on the credibility of the              
              agreements reached by the players.  If players think they can                  
              escape punishment for violating agreements by renegotiating the                
              agreement after they violate it, then they no longer have an                   
              incentive to abide by the agreements.  Therefore, a model of                   
              repeated games without a theory of renegotiation is flawed                     
              because many different outcomes other than the one agreed upon                 
              are possible.
