Title       : Formation of Super Bounding Surfaces in Eolian Sandstones: Evidence from Modern
               Sand Seas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 1,  1991    
File        : a9196084

Award Number: 9196084
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Lancaster nick@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      P.O.Box 60220
	      Reno, NV  895060220    702/673-7311

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Bounding surfaces (disconformities) of regional extent (super                  
              bounding surfaces) have recently been recognized and described                 
              from a number of eolian sandstone units in the western United                  
              States.  These surfaces are a potentially important tool for sub-              
              dividing and correlating eolian sequences, leading ultimately to               
              a better understanding of how such sedimentary bodies evolve.                  
              However, features diagnostic of super bounding surfaces formed by              
              climatic, tectonic, eustatic or endogenic causes have yet to be                
              fully recognized and documented.  The best way to document such                
              features and to understand how they form is to study their                     
              occurrence in a modern sand sea that is known to have experienced              
              episodic eolian deposition.  The Gran Desierto sand sea in                     
              northern Mexico is an excellent example of a sand sea that been                
              strongly affected by changes in the regional tectonic, eustatic                
              and climatic environment.  These changes have resulted in an                   
              episodic deposition of eolian sand, separated by long periods of               
              stability and non deposition or erosion.  This study will                      
              undertake filed investigations of relations between sand bodies                
              of different ages and regional-scale bounding surfaces formed by               
              dune and sand sea migration, sea level change, and interruption                
              of sand supply due to climatic and other factors.  Criteria for                
              the recognition of super bounding surfaces of different origins                
              and more precise models for the formation of super bounding                    
              surfaces will be developed on the basis of these investigations.
