Title       : Functions of Acoustic Signal Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1994       
File        : a9196177

Award Number: 9196177
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 31,  1991      
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98684              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Greenfield   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In many species of animals, temporal relationships occur between               
              the female-attracting signals of adjacent males if population                  
              densities exceed critical levels.  When signaling involves the                 
              use of sound, these relationships appear as various formats of                 
              synchrony and alternation.  Dr. Greenfield's research will                     
              examine the adaptive functions of signal interactions in several               
              different singing insects that, among them, exhibit a range of                 
              synchronous and alternating formats.                                           
                                                                                             
              Observations and experiments will elucidate which of four                      
              hypotheses best accounts for the various formats of signal                     
              interactions.  The hypotheses are that (1) interactions enhance                
              "species recognition"; i.e., neighboring males time their songs                
              so as not to obscure species-specific sounds that females must                 
              hear before moving toward any one male; (2) interactions reduce                
              attacks by natural enemies that find their prey by listening to                
              the prey's female-attracting sounds; (3) interactions represent a              
              means by which groups of sexually advertising males compete with               
              one another to attract females to the group's vicinity; (4)                    
              interactions represent a by-product of sexual selection, wherein               
              individual males time their sound signals so that they can most                
              strongly attract females and, at the same time, obfuscate the                  
              sounds of neighboring males.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The results of this research project may reveal subtle aspects of              
              sexual selection that would remain undetected in studies focusing              
              on how females choose among isolated males or in studies that do               
              not measure and control temporal signal interactions.  Because                 
              some acoustic insects are agricultural pests, information on the               
              roles of signal interactions in female attraction may be                       
              pertinent to effective control and monitoring strategies for                   
              certain pest species.
