Title       : Organic Free Radical and Electron Transfer Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9196194

Award Number: 9196194
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 21,  1991    
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin E. Newcomb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant within the Organic Dynamics Program represents a                    
              continuation of the work by Martin Newcomb of Texas A&M                        
              University. The aim of this project is to elucidate the pathway                
              of organic reactions which involve free radicals or radical                    
              anions. This work is quite significant in that it will                         
              investigate many reactions suspected to proceed by the pathway                 
              known as SET (single electron transfer) which have previously                  
              been considered to react by other mechanisms.  This will                       
              enhance knowledge about how organic reactions proceed, and,                    
              therefore, how they can be improved.                                           
                                                                                             
              Continued studies in the areas of organic free radicals and                    
              mechanisms of potential electron transfer processes in organic                 
              reactions will be investigated.  Kinetics of exceedingly fast                  
              carbon radical rearrangemens will be studied by the PTOC/thiol                 
              method developed in the Texas A&M laboratory with the objective                
              of calibrating radical clocks so fast that they may be used in                 
              competition with diffusion-controlled second order processes in                
              non-viscous solvents.  In the PTOC/thiol method,                               
              N-hydroxypyridine-2-thione esters are employed as  radical                     
              precursors and thiophenol is used as a radical trapping agent,                 
              and reactions with first order rate constants in excess of 1 x                 
              10exp-9/s at 25 degrees C can be calibrated.  Aminyl and                       
              aminium cation radicals from N-hydroxpyridine-2-thione                         
              carbamates will also be studied.  The  main objective will be                  
              to determine the rate constants for simple second order                        
              reactions (such as hydrogen atom transfer) of these                            
              intermediates; with basis reaction rate constants available,                   
              nitrogen-centered radical clocks will be calibrated.  Potential                
              electron transfer processes (especially in reactions of lithium                
              dialkylamides) will continue to be studied.  Verification of                   
              the experimentally derived oxidation potential for the                         
              dialklamide anion--dialkylaminyl radical couple will be sought.                
               Reactions of lithium dialkylamides with trityl halides will be                
              studied; recent results suggest that a previously unconsidered                 
              reaction process may be operating in this case.
