Title       : Simulation Studies of Quantum Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1991   
File        : a9196098

Award Number: 9196098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Malvin H. Kalos kalos@tc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The investigation of quantum-mechanical many-body systems has                  
              been an important focus of theoretical researchers in statistical              
              physics.  They use Green' function Monte Carlo and path integral               
              Monte Carlo to provide detailed microscopic information about the              
              properties of quantum systems, especially quantum fluids and                   
              crystals.                                                                      
              They will continue to study the structure of two- and three-                   
              dimensional quantum fluids and solids and the nature of the                    
              melting-freezing transition at T = 0 and above.  They will                     
              emphasize the development of improved solid trial wavefunctions.               
              Studies of the changes in higher-order correlation functions as                
              the system freezes will be continued.  They intend to calculate                
              properties such as elastic constants in two and three dimensions               
              and the role of topological defects in two dimensions.  The                    
              computational results will be interpreted with the help of                     
              empirical and of density-functional theories.  They will also                  
              attempt to construct phenomenological density matrices to                      
              describe Bose fluids and to investigate pressure melting of                    
              Yukawa quantum systems.  Another new area will be the                          
              investigation into the properties of inhomogeneous systems,                    
              including slabs with liquid-vapor interfaces, quantum vortices,                
              droplets having large angular momenta, impurities in liquid                    
              Helium 4, and two-dimensional systems adsorbed on a substrate.                 
              Studies will be continued of the effects of various proposed                   
              Helium-Helium potentials.     //
