Title       : Transport Mechanisms in Mammalian Taste Transduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1995  
File        : a9196065

Award Number: 9196065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242039             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheella Mierson mierson@brahms.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Taste is a complex process beginning in the tongue, where the                  
              surface layer of cells, the epithelium, contains taste buds.                   
              Many taste compounds probably bind to specific receptor molecules              
              on membrane of the taste sensory cells.  But salts form a whole                
              class of tastants that produce ions in solution, and now are                   
              thought to stimulate the cells of the taste buds directly, by                  
              transport processes across the cell membrane.  These ions may use              
              specific channels in the membrane in a way similar to the use of               
              ionic channels in to stimulate excitable membranes of nerve and                
              muscle.  Understanding taste transduction, by which a particular               
              stimulus specifically excites a sensory cell, is a major goal of               
              chemosensory systems research.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This project will approach taste transduction by linking                       
              experiments on the physiology of tongue epithelial tissue with                 
              neurophysiology of taste receptors.  In vitro tongue tissue will               
              be tested to precisely measure ionic flows, and a mathematical                 
              model of ionic transport processes across the epithelium will be               
              refined and expanded by comparisons to data from experiments.                  
              These data will be compared to known data on excitation of taste               
              nerves from neurophysiology experiments.  Experiments and                      
              modelling should resolve which aspects of taste transduction can               
              be explained by properties of the tongue epithelium.  The model                
              incorporates organization of all the component membranes, and the              
              topology of the epithelium in which the taste buds are imbedded;               
              the model can be extended to include different cell types and                  
              different ions.  This study involves a novel quantitative                      
              approach to taste mechanisms, with a powerful merging of                       
              mathematics, chemistry, and biology; it may be useful in analyses              
              of tastant interactions by the food industry, and will have high               
              impact in chemosensory science and neurophysiology as well.
