Title       : tRNA Transcription in Bacillus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1991        
File        : a9196116

Award Number: 9196116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara S. Vold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syntex Research
	      
	      Palo Alto, CA  94303    /   -

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to elucidate the organization                
              and expression of tRNA genes from Bacillus subtilis.  B. subtilis              
              is chosen for study because it exhibits interesting differences                
              from Escherichia coli, the current prototype for bacterial                     
              systems.  Of special interest is the transcriptional regulation                
              during development within the two rRNA-tRNA operons of B.                      
              subtilis, which contain large clusters of tRNA genes.  Their                   
              function as promoter elements will be validated using the                      
              promoter probe plasmid system pDT.  Promoter elements will be                  
              synthesized or amplified with the polymerase chain technique.                  
              The activity of these promoters will then be tested during                     
              development in B subtilis. Promoter activity will be evaluated by              
              measuring levels of lacZ mRNA.  If these promoters show temporal               
              regulation, the protein factors affecting transcriptional                      
              regulation and flanking regions to which they bind will be                     
              investigated.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              These studies will greatly aid our understanding of tRNA gene                  
              expression, one of the key steps in the regulation of the growth               
              of bacteria and other cells.
