Title       : Efficiency of Human Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1990 
File        : a9196055

Award Number: 9196055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : June 30,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Kersten   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              There is an inherent degree of uncertainty involved in making                  
              perceptual decisions.  This uncertainty may come from ambiguous                
              causes of sensory input, or from random variation in the                       
              physical or biological processes involved in transmitting                      
              perceptual information.  Human observers are remarkably good at                
              making valid and reliable visual decisions despite random                      
              variation in the image, compared to capabilities of most                       
              artificial vision systems.                                                     
                                                                                             
              This project addresses how human observers process ambiguous or                
              "noisy" visual information.  Performance can be calculated for                 
              a theoretically "optimal" or "ideal" observer for a visual task                
              that has inherent uncertainty.  The optimal performance assumes                
              ideal performance from the optics and detector elements of the                 
              system, and the calculations are based on a branch of                          
              probability theory called statistical decision theory.  By                     
              measuring the visual performance of a human and comparing it to                
              the ideal benchmark, we can measure human absolute visual                      
              efficiency.  Patterns which are detected nearly optimally may                  
              reflect specialized neural mechanisms for a particular task.                   
              Here the role of spatial arrangement, color, texture, and                      
              motion will be studied to find out what types of images are                    
              detected most efficiently.  The limits to optimal coding of                    
              more natural images will be quantified by measuring the                        
              predictability  of various elements in pictures.                               
                                                                                             
              This study is an unusual combination of experimental work with                 
              very sophisticated mathematical modelling, and will help                       
              integrate visual perception theory with both machine vision and                
              human performance.  It should have substantial impact on vision                
              research.
