Title       : Middle Pleistocene Glacial-Interglacial Transitions and Their Effect on
               Mammalian Community Reorganization in Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1994      
File        : a9196082

Award Number: 9196082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268870             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony D. Barnosky barnosky@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project will finish collecting and will analyze a                    
              superb sequence of middle Pleistocene fossil-mammal faunas from                
              Porcupine Cave, located high in the Colorado Rocky Mountains.                  
              The fossils and other relevant data will be used to: (1) Identify              
              how high-elevation (2900 m) mammalian communities were                         
              reorganized through glacial-interglacial transitions between -                 
              400,000 and 800,000 years ago.  (2) Quantify, through                          
              computerized imaging and statistical techniques, the climatic                  
              signal contained in the biogeographic distribution and spatial                 
              morphologic variation of selected extant species that also are                 
              present in the fossil faunas.  (3) Test five hypotheses about the              
              interaction between climate and mammalian communities.  The                    
              hypotheses are formulated especially to test whether changes in                
              seasonality are important in triggering major community                        
              reorganizations, which is the cornerstone of the coevolutionary                
              disequilibrium model.   Testing the hypotheses will rely on                    
              comparing the faunal data with independent predictors of past                  
              climate, notably oxygen- and carbon-isotope curves (and their                  
              attendant implications for global ice volume, temperature, and                 
              CO2 levels) and model-generated estimates of seasonality and                   
              other climatic parameters.                                                     
                   This research is important in identifying how oscillations                
              in specific climatic parameters provoke changes in mammal                      
              communities in the absence of human impact.  Such information                  
              currently is unavailable -- human influence cannot be ruled out                
              of even late Pleistocene commu n  ity changes -- and will be                   
                 extremely useful in predicting what might happen to modern                  
                 "protected" ecosystems over tens to hundreds of years.                      
                      Additional significance lies in (1) providing an                       
                 exceptionally rich sample of the fossil fauna for a time and                
                 place where little is known, which in turn yields paleoecologic,            
                 evolutionary, and paleoclimatic insights; and (2) refining and              
                 developing quantitative techniques for extracting the climatic              
                 signal from biogeographic ranges and morphologic variation of               
                 mammal species that are present in numerous fossil sites of the             
                 American West.
