Title       : Automatic Fixture Design for Robotic Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1992   
File        : a9196231

Award Number: 9196231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucy S. King lking@kettering.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kettering University
	      1700 West Third Avenue
	      Flint, MI  485044832    313/762-9790

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   One of the missing elements in a push-button approach design              
              for robotic assembly is the automatic generation of fixturing                  
              configurations for part presentations.  Past research efforts                  
              have focused on fixturing for machining with minimal usage of                  
              workpart geometry.  This research addresses the question:  given               
              the part or subassembly geometry and its physical properties,                  
              automatically determine the fixture necessary to hold the part                 
              for a particular assembly operation.  For analysis, limited sets               
              of primitive shapes, grasp points, fixturing elements, and                     
              assembly operations will be used.  These sets are considered with              
              (a) resultant assembly force, (b) tolerance, (c) flexibility, (d)              
              material properties, and (e) stability with no slipping to                     
              establish, through an algorithm, a geometric configuration for                 
              the fixture.  This potential fixture can be modeled on a solid                 
              modeler.  Interference checks between the fixture and part                     
              models, can validate the fixture model.  The tools used will be a              
              solid modeler, a kinematics and dynamics simulation software                   
              package and a modular fixturing kit to empirically verify the                  
              analytic results.  This research formulates an analytical                      
              algorithmic approach for automatic robotic assembly fixture                    
              design.
