Title       : Integrated Control Structure for Construction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1993     
File        : a9196052

Award Number: 9196052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109938             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonhard E. Bernold bernold@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              PIs proposed to develop construction control systems to better                 
              understand production operations, to develop methods of satisfying             
              conflicting objectives, and to design standards for integrated                 
              process and project control.  An interdisciplinary research team,              
              including academics (Maryland, Virginia Tech, Stanford and Penn                
              State), NIST and construction industry, is assembled.                          
                                                                                             
              The team will work to develop and test on site, a computer based               
              open system for planning and control during the construction phase             
              of a project.  The overall goal of this research is to establish               
              an integrated and flexible control concept for construction which              
              is based on system and information theory, hierarchical control and            
              state-machine concepts, uncertainty analysis, and computer                     
              simulation and emulation.  In this context a generic framework will            
              be developed to provide a structure for controlling four specific              
              construction objectives:  Quality, Safety, Productivity and                    
              Precision (As-Built).  Data acquisition, reduction and analysis of             
              construction parameters are needed.  This process can be in the                
              form of point-in-time sampling rather than real time.  A case study            
              will be considered to perform this process.  Automatic data                    
              collection devices, such as senors (e.g., strain gauges) and voice             
              recognition systems, will be selected and tested for the case                  
              study.//
