Title       : Communicative and Cognitive Competence in an Exceptional Code
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1991   
File        : a9196066

Award Number: 9196066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133484             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irene M. Pepperberg impepper@media.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Developing the ability to communicate in a particular code                     
              involves learning not just how to produce that code, but also how              
              to use it.  Dr. Pepperberg will study these processes by                       
              determining the conditions that are required for teaching a                    
              subject a repertoire that it would not normally acquire (an                    
              "exceptional code"), and then examining its functional use of                  
              this code.  Dr. Pepperberg has shown previously that training                  
              procedures that rely on referential social modeling enable an                  
              African Grey parrot to acquire and combine English vocalizations               
              (an exceptional code) to (a) request, refuse, quantify, identify,              
              and categorize objects, and (b) control, to a limited extent, its              
              immediate environment.                                                         
                                                                                             
              Dr. Pepperberg will (1) extend her study to a second parrot,                   
              examining the effects of (a) species identity of the social model              
              (i.e., parrot vs. human) and (b) varying degrees of social                     
              interaction between the trainers and trainee; (2) examine the                  
              level of acquired competence by investigating the extent to which              
              this code can be used for comprehending questions, numerical                   
              concepts, object-object relations, prepositions, referring to                  
              objects not physically present (displacement), describing novel                
              objects or circumstances (productivity), recognizing two-                      
              dimensional forms, use of verbs, negation, and how labeling may                
              affect the ability to recall an object.  These tasks are                       
              comparable to those that have been used with dolphins and non-                 
              human primates.  In this way, Dr. Pepperberg's research is                     
              expanding our view of the cognitive capabilities of a non-                     
              mammalian species.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Dr. Pepperberg also will continue to examine how social modeling               
              may offer insights into other studies of vocal learning.  Through              
              such analyses, she is broadening and deepening our scientific                  
              understanding of the development of bird song and of human                     
              speech.  Training techniques that she devises may prove valuable               
              in work with developmentally retarded persons.
