Title       : The Regulation of Gene Expression in Streptomyces: ROW Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1991       
File        : a9196067

Award Number: 9196067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Westpheling   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9220,
Abstract    :
              The properties of certain S. coelicolor mutants blocked in the                 
              initiation of sporulation strongly suggest a direct connection                 
              between carbon-source catabolite repression, activation of                     
              antibiotic synthesis genes and morphological development.  As a                
              starting point for our investigation of how these complex                      
              metabolic and developmental processes interact, we have chosen to              
              characterize in detail the regulatory mechanisms that control the              
              transcriptional activity of the gal operon of S. coelicolor, a                 
              relatively simple transcription unit that is subject to both                   
              glucose-mediated catabolite repression and induction by                        
              galactose.  It is proposed to: 1) purify and characterize the                  
              polymerase forms that transcribe gal, 2) define the cis-acting                 
              elements of the operon that determine its regulation, and 3)                   
              identify and isolate the trans-acting factors that mediate                     
              repression and induction.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Members of the bacterial genus Streptomyces are of enormous                    
              industrial importance, since they are the source of about 80% of               
              known antibiotics.  These species are also of great interest                   
              from a genetic and developmental point of view because of the                  
              complexity of their life cycle.  When deprived of nutrients,                   
              these bacteria undergo a complex morphological differentiation                 
              culminating in the production of dormant spores which can                      
              germinate when and where environmental conditions favor                        
              vegetative growth.  The synthesis of antibiotics is intimately                 
              related to this developmental process, since it occurs during the              
              development, and since many mutants blocked in development can't               
              make antibiotics.  It is clear that one of the signals for                     
              initiation of development is depletion of an easily assimilable                
              carbon source, such as glucose. The mechanism whereby this signal              
              is translated into a decision to begin the developmental process               
              is not at all understood, but a working hypothesis is that this                
              mechanism is related to one by which, during growth on glucose,                
              genes whose activity is not essential under these conditions are               
              shut off.  The mechanism of this type of shutoff has yet to be                 
              investigated in detail in Streptomyces, but it is already clear                
              that it is very different from analogous but much better                       
              understood mechanisms in other unrelated species of bacteria.                  
              This proposal to elucidate the mechanism of shutoff of a gene                  
              unnecessary for growth on glucose is of particular interest                    
              because of the central importance of this process in the complex               
              life cycle of this bacterium (which also happens to be a species               
              of great industrial importance), and is of general interest                    
              because it may establish new principles of control of gene                     
              activity.
