Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Spectral and Fractal Geometry for Variational Elliptic
               Boundary Value Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1991      
File        : a9196085

Award Number: 9196085
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Y. Velez                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 31,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michel L. Lapidus lapidus@math.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1262      MODERN ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The relationship between the geometry of a manifold and the               
              invariants of the elliptic differential operators on it is one of              
              the main unifying themes of contemporary mathematical research.                
              (For instance, the natural frequencies of a vibrating membrane                 
              constitute the spectrum of a differential operator called the                  
              Laplacian; knowing the spectrum, one can infer a great deal about              
              the shape of the membrane.) The case of a region with                          
              fractal boundary, so irregular that its dimension is no longer                 
              an integer, has been the setting for some recent breakthroughs                 
              relating spectral information to geometry. In particular, thanks               
              to work of Professor Lapidus and a French colleague of his, it is              
              now known that one can recover the dimension of the boundary from              
              the spectrum of the Laplacian in such a region. This work, which               
              has involved both computer experimentation and sophisticated                   
              mathematical technique, has applications to the study of porous                
              media and the scattering of waves from fractal surfaces. Its                   
              continuation is the main thrust of the project supported by this               
              award.                                                                         
                   More precisely, Lapidus will investigate sharpened forms of               
              the asymptotic formula for the eigenvalue distribution of Laplace              
              operators with various boundary conditions. The goal is to make                
              yet clearer the role of the Minkowski dimension of the boundary                
              in this distribution. There are analogous formulas for the trace               
              of the associated heat semigroup. The case in which not only the               
              boundary of the domain, but the domain itself, is fractal will be              
              studied.
