Title       : RIA: Design Strategies For Algebraic Specifications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1990   
File        : a9196023

Award Number: 9196023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 25,  1990   
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergio Antoy antoy@cs.pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 2875      SYSTEM SOFTWARE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The lack of certain properties, such as completeness or termination, in        
              an algebraic specification of abstract data types is often the result          
              of design errors and can have significant consequences on processes,           
              such as code implementation or verification, which rely on the                 
              specification.  To alleviate the problem substantial efforts have been         
              devoted to understand better these properties and to implement tools           
              which may guarantee the presence of some properties or detect their            
              absence.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              To date, no work has yet been published for preventing design errors           
              rather than correcting them.  Two strageties are suggested which, under        
              reasonably general assumptions, can be used to produce specifications          
              which are complete, parsimonious, linear, and terminating.  The extent         
              to which these strategies are applicable is not yet known.  These              
              strategies are simple to use if the difficulties resulting from some           
              book-keeping they require is mechanized.  A prototipical implementation        
              improves significantly the productivity of designing specifications and        
              the specification quality.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The project has the following goals:                                           
                                                                                             
                   Explore the range of applicability of these strategies.  In some          
              situations, one property is not achieved, but it is still unclear              
              whether          the property is too strong or the strategy too weak.          
              Also, one strategy    is not the most convenient one in some                   
              situations.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                   Investigate the existence of other strategies.  Examples show that        
              these            strategies are sufficient for achieving desirable             
              properties, but are not    necessary.  Other strategies with similar           
              goals and performances may      exist.                                         
                                                                                             
                   Implement the available stategies.  Evaluate and improve their            
              effectiveness through their use for designing a set of basic, general          
              specifications.
