Title       : Dynamical Resonances in Chemical Reactions and Chemical Bonding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1991  
File        : a9196100

Award Number: 9196100
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 19,  1991  
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15300              (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Valentini jjvl@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                Dr. Valentini is supported by a grant fom The Physical                      
              Chemistry Program to study the structure and dynamics of                       
              transition states in gas phase chemical reactions.  Valentini                  
              has developed a spectroscopic technique which permits the                      
              indirect observation of the short-lived intermediates                          
              (transition states) which have long been theoretically                         
              predicted but never observed in chemical reactions.                            
                                                                                             
                 Dr. Valentini's research involves the studies of so-called                  
              Feshbach resonances in rotational excitation cross sections                    
              which are observed for chemical reactions in the gas phase.                    
              The direct observations involve state-to-state dynamics in                     
              which the vibrational and rotational quantum states (v,j) of                   
              the reactants are prepared by free-jet expansion cooling and                   
              probed by stimulated Raman excitation.  The collision energy of                
              the reactants is selected, varied, and precisely specified                     
              through laser photolysis of a diatomic precursor to generate                   
              the reactant atom.  Vibrational and rotational (v',j') analysis                
              of the reaction products under single collision conditions are                 
              effected using resonance-enhanced multiphoton ionizaiton.                      
                                                                                             
                 Dr. Valentini's research program is motivated by his recent                 
              discovery of Feschbach resonances in the ortho-, para-hydrogen                 
              exchange reaction.  This observation permitted him to infer the                
              vibrational energy states of the linear triatomic transition                   
              state which occurs in this reaction.  Further studies in this                  
              area will involve the hydrogen deuterium exchange reaction, the                
              reaction of chlorine with hydrogen chloride, and the reaction                  
              of iodine and bromine with their corresponding hydrogen                        
              halides.  Coherent Raman spectra of these species will be                      
              obtained to elucidate the nature of the theoretically predicted                
              vibrational bonding.
