Title       : Organization and Regulation of Muscle Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1991       
File        : a9196129

Award Number: 9196129
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keia' L. Thompson                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles P. Emerson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fox Chase Cancer Center
	      7701 Burholme Avenue
	      Philadelphia, PA  191112412    215/728-6700

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objectives of this proposal are to investigate the molecular               
              genetic and developmental mechanisms that regulate myosin heavy                
              chain (MHC) isoform structure and function in Drosophila. Unlike               
              other organisms studied, Drosophila has only a single muscle MHC               
              gene, but this single gene encodes multiple MHC protein isoforms               
              by a process of complex, developmentally regulated alternative                 
              RNA splicing. The Drosophila MHC gene has five sets of                         
              alternatively splice exons that are differentially expressed in                
              different larval and adult muscle types. These alternatively                   
              spliced exons are particularly interesting because they encode                 
              defined protein domains in the MHC head and hinge regions as well              
              as the carboxyl terminus. These domains are hypothesized to be                 
              important determinants of the distinct contractile activities of               
              specialized muscle types, including control of ATP binding and                 
              ATPase activity, actin/myosin cross bridge formation, myosin                   
              light chain binding, MHC head movement, and myosin filament                    
              assembly. Genetic, biochemical and transgenic experiment are                   
              proposed to investigate the muscle-specific functions of the                   
              variant protein domains in MHC isoforms generated by alternative               
              exon splicing. These approaches will also be used to investigate               
              the roles of intron and exon DNA sequences and RNA and protein                 
              splicing factors in the regulated splicing of specific exon                    
              sequences into MHC isoforms expressed in functionally specialized              
              muscles such as the indirect flight muscle.                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              The proposed studies undertake to reveal the functions of                      
              specific variants of MHC in specialized contractile activities of              
              different skeletal muscle types and to define fundamental                      
              developmental and molecular mechanisms that control alternative                
              RNA splicing. This alternative splicing gives rise to a family of              
              proteins with different properties from a single gene.
