Title       : RUI: Characterization of Corrosive Metabolites from Biofilms on Metal Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1991      
File        : a9196070

Award Number: 9196070
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gill G. Geesey gill g@erc.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This program is jointly funded by the Division of Chemistry               
              and Division of Materials Research as part of the Materials                    
              Chemistry and Chemical Processing Initiative.  Proposed is                     
              research on pitting corrosion in copper tubing related to the                  
              presence of biofilms of mixed bacteria on the surface.  Biofilms               
              of mixed bacterial populations excrete a variety of substances at              
              the metal surface which contribute to the formation of                         
              irregularly spaced pits that penetrate the walls of the tubing.                
              In this research attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform                
              infrared spectrometry (ATR/FT-IR) is used to identify specific                 
              biofilm bacteria species and their adhesive exopolymers which                  
              promote deterioration of the underlying copper and copper/nickel               
              surfaces.  A reflectance-absorbance cell will be designed for the              
              FTIR in order to identify chemical species that accumulate at the              
              metal surface beneath the biofilm.  A spectrochemical approach is              
              used to determine how the rate of biofilm development and                      
              microbial-influenced corrosion vary as a function of the applied               
              potential.  The identity of inorganic reaction products                        
              accumulating in the pits and around specific bacterial colonies                
              will be confirmed by Auger and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy.               
              Reactions involving the microbial metabolites and inorganic                    
              corrosion products accumulating at the metal surface will be                   
              identified from the experimental results.  A better understanding              
              of these reactions should result in improved measures to combat                
              this form of corrosion.
