Title       : Engineering Creativity Award: Piezoelectric Damping of Flexible Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1991   
File        : a9196093

Award Number: 9196093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Alberts   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Lightweight flexible manipulators are playing an important role                
              in                                                                             
              current and future space activities.  An existing example is the               
              Shuttle Remote Manipulator System (RMS) and future plans call for              
              other RMS-like arms to automate space operations, such as                      
              assembly.  A                                                                   
              key problem to be resolved is to dampen the vibrations caused by               
              the                                                                            
              necessary long reach and lightweight construction of the RMS                   
              system.                                                                        
              The objective of this research project is to investigate the                   
              potential                                                                      
              passive damping characteristics of piezoelectric film coatings                 
              when                                                                           
              applied to flexible structural members.  It is proposed to use a               
              polymer film, PVDF, which has piezoelectric characteristic, to                 
              dessipate vibrational energy by means of an electric current.  A               
              layer                                                                          
              of PVDF film applied to the surface of a vibrating member will                 
              generate an electric current due to mechanical deformations.  The              
              electric current can be passed through a passive impedance thus                
              dessipating vibrational energy thereby reducing the vibrations.                
              Using PVDF film to passively dampen vibrations is a new idea                   
              which has                                                                      
              not been investigated.  The ultimate goal is to provide an easily              
              implemented modification to the RMS, or similar flexible                       
              manipulator                                                                    
              that enhances performance without significantly increasing system              
              cost, weight, and complexity of control or computational costs.
