Title       : Sensor-Based Motion Planning System for a Robot Arm Operating Among Unknown
               Obstacles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1992   
File        : a9196187

Award Number: 9196187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: F. Hank Grant                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 10,  1991    
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir J. Lumelsky lumelsky@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This work is concerned with designing an experimental prototype           
              for a robot sensor-based navigation system for an arm manipulator              
              operating in an environment with unknown obstacles.  The motion                
              planning part of the system will be based on the algorithms of                 
              dynamic path planning (DPP).  The sensor system of the arm                     
              manipulator consists of dozens of active infra-red proximity sensors           
              covering the whole body of the arm.  This forms a kind of aura                 
              similar to that provided by the hairs on the leg of an insect.                 
              Within the radius of its sensitivity, the sensor system allows the             
              arm to feel the obstacle it is approaching, to identify which points           
              of its body are the closest to the obstacle, and to use this                   
              information to maneuver around the obstacle.  The work on the                  
              sensory modules is already underway; the first results indicate that           
              the system can be made sufficiently sensitive and immune to the                
              variation in object reflectivity and ambient lighting.  The proposed           
              work covers a period of three years and consists of the development            
              of the multi-sensor "skin" of the arm, including its control scheme,           
              integration of the sensor and the motion planning subsystems, and              
              extensive experimental work on the arm motion planning.
