Title       : Peroxisome Biogenesis in the Yeasts Candida tropicalis and Saccharomyces
               cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1993      
File        : a9196215

Award Number: 9196215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 20,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gillian M. Small   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Mt Sinai Sch of Med
	      One Gustave L. Levy Place
	      New York, NY  100296504    212/650-6500

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 Peroxisomes are nearly ubiquitous in eukaryotic cells and                   
              have essential functions in respiration and lipid metabolism.                  
              Peroxisomal proteins are nuclear-encoded and are synthesized on                
              free polyribosomes, then imported into pre-existing peroxisomes                
              post-translationally.  Peroxisomal proteins, unlike many                       
              mitochondrial and chloroplast proteins, are synthesized at their               
              mature size and lack cleavable transit peptides.  The long term                
              objective of this project is to understand the mechanism of                    
              peroxisome assembly.  The aims of this proposal are to identify                
              topogenic sequences that act to direct peroxisomal proteins to                 
              yeast peroxisomes.  Previously, this laboratory determined                     
              conditions for measuring the in vitro import of peroxisomal                    
              proteins to peroxisomes from the yeast Candida tropicalis, and                 
              identified topogenic sequences in one peroxosomal protein                      
              (aceyl-CoA oxidase) that are capable of direction this protein to              
              peroxisomes.  Nothing is known regarding the targeting and                     
              insertion of peroxisomal integral membrane proteins.  The plan is              
              to clone and sequence a matrix and membrane protein from C.                    
              tropicalis peroxisomes.  Using the established in vitro assay and              
              by an in vivo import assay, peroxisomal targetting signals will                
              be investigated and compared.  Also, the gene encloding                        
              peroxisomal citrate synthase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae is in               
              hand; this will be expressed and, using the above methods, it                  
              will be determined whether signal sequences are conserved in                   
              peroxisomal proteins from C. tropicalis and S. cerevisiae.                     
                                                                                             
                 By these means, it is hoped to gain a better understanding of               
              the mechanism by which peroxisomes are assembled.
