Title       : Isolation and Characterization of Sperm Acrosomal Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1991     
File        : a9196227

Award Number: 9196227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas L. Cross   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              At fertilization, sperm and egg membranes fuse to deliver the                  
              paternal genome into the interior of the egg, and the egg begins               
              development. The molecular mechanisms by which the membranes                   
              fuse and the sperm activates the egg are not well understood.                  
              This project will test the hypothesis that the portion of the                  
              sperm membrane that first contacts the egg contains molecules                  
              that mediate membrane fusion and egg activation. In starfish,                  
              this portion of the membrane covers the acrosomal process (AP).                
              The objectives of this project are to isolate starfish APs, and                
              to identify proteins that are unique to the AP membrane and are                
              therefore potential bearers of fusion or agonist activities. The               
              membrane proteins will be characterized by polyacrylamide gel                  
              electrophoresis and by surface labeling. The ability of the                    
              isolated APs to activate and/or fuse with denuded eggs, and to                 
              fuse with phospholipid vesicles will be tested.                                
              %%%                                                                            
              This work will serve as a foundation for efforts to identify and               
              isolate the sperm molecules that first act on the egg, and will                
              increase our knowledge of the general mechanisms of membrane                   
              fusion and signal transduction.
