Title       : Structure and Output Feedback in Singular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1990    
File        : a9196008

Award Number: 9196008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 27,  1990    
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank L. Lewis flewis@controls.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1454      SYSTEMS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Generalized state-space systems of the form Ex= Ax + Bu, with E                
              generally singular, arise naturally in the study of robots, networks,          
              large-scale interconnected systems, power systems, economic systems,           
              delay-differential systems, neural networks, and elsewhere.                    
                                                                                             
              Our main contentions are that there are some serious limitations in            
              state-variable theory and that singular systems provide a more general         
              context that yields important insight into some deep questions about           
              state-variable systems.  Two important cases will be studied in the            
              proposed research.                                                             
                                                                                             
              First, we point out that the inverse of a state-space system is not a          
              state-variable system.  Indeed, the inverse generally contains                 
              derivatives of the output, so that it is a singular system.                    
              Therefore, singular systems, not state-variable systems, provide the           
              natural dynamical formulation for the study of issues related to               
              inversion.  This includes high-grain feedback, singular optimal                
              control (in the traditional sense of incomplete control weighting),            
              and other important problems as well as the usual system inversion             
              problems.  Our first goal is, therefore, to study the extensions and           
              properties of the Singular System Structure Algorithm which has been           
              developed in connection with inversion and optimal control of singular         
              systems.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Second, if proportional-plus-derivative output feedback is applied to          
              a state-space system, the result is a singular and not a state-                
              variable system.  These systems therefore provide a nature formulation         
              for carrying out our second goal, the study of proportional-plus               
              derivative output feedback in state-variable and singular systems.             
              Recent results make it clear that using this technique, far more can           
              be achieved than the assignment of the traditional min(n, m+p-1)               
              poles.
