Title       : U.S. Participation in the Development of a Transnational Database on Family
               Income
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1991  
File        : a9196010

Award Number: 9196010
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry Whittaker                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 31,  1990    
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75706              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Smeeding TMSMEED@MAXWELL.SYR.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) is an international                     
              social science consortium currently participated in by 14                      
              industrialized nations which have agreed to pool microdata on the              
              incomes of families living within their divergent economies. The               
              data so furnished are made statistically comparable and stored at              
              a central facility in Luxembourg, where they may be accessed by                
              researchers either on-site or remotely through a computerized                  
              telecommunications network. The LIS database provides a rich                   
              resource for multifaceted analyses of income distributions, of                 
              systems of cash and noncash income transfers, of relative levels               
              of economic well-being across different demographic groupings,                 
              and of many other topics which are now, or soon will be, of                    
              worldwide societal concern.                                                    
                   Support for the data facility is provided by consortium                   
              member nations on a shared-cost basis. Funds provided by the                   
              National Science Foundation constitute United States                           
              participation in the consortium, and these funds help assure that              
              the potential value of the LIS database to U.S. social scientists              
              will be realized. The full cooperation of all member nations is                
              required in order to guarantee feasibility of data retrieval,                  
              maintenance of high standards of data quality,  and gradual                    
              relaxation of methodological constraints on certain types of data              
              analysis. National Science Foundation funds not only represent                 
              U.S. cooperation in the enterprise, they also assure U.S.                      
              involvement in all important developmental decisions as well as                
              helping to offset the costs of database mantenance and update.
