Title       : Developing an Intuitive Understanding of Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1992      
File        : a9196180

Award Number: 9196180
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139279             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry K. Au au@psych.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              An important insight about substances such as gold and glass is                
              that each substance is made up of a unique kind of tiny                        
              homogeneous particle.  While adults generally share this belief,               
              little is known about how it develops as a child matures.  It is               
              crucial to develop this concept in order to make sense of the                  
              behavior of various substances and to predict that behavior in                 
              everyday life as well as in science classes.  For instance, this               
              concept can help children appreciate that matter can exist as                  
              invisible particles and maintain its inherent, and in some cases               
              potent, properties; that the inherent properties of an aggregate-              
              -e.g., whether it is safe to touch, eat, inhale--depends more on               
              the nature of its constituent particles than on its gross                      
              appearance.  This project will chart systematically how this                   
              important concept develops by examining whether children think                 
              that a substance maintains its identity and inherent properties                
              despite dramatic changes in its chunk or grain size.  Identity                 
              refers to membership of a certain material kind (e.g., sugar);                 
              inherent properties are chemical properties described in ways                  
              that even young children can understand (e.g., smells good when                
              it burns); and size can vary from a large chunk to smaller                     
              pieces, powder, or even invisible particles.  This project will                
              also examine whether this concept helps children appreciate that               
              a substance such as sugar can continue to exist--in tiny                       
              homogeneous particles--even after it has become invisible upon                 
              dissolution.  A third goal is to explore how this concept may be               
              related to the way children and adults generalize what they have               
              learned about one sample of a substance to another sample of the               
              same substance.  Discoveries of links among different aspects of               
              children's understanding of matter can inform us about the nature              
              of children's theories of matter.  Such discoveries can enrich                 
              our understanding of how children and adults develop intuitive                 
              theories about the world.  Science educators can also make use of              
              such discoveries to develop curricula that young children can                  
              understand and from which they can learn.
