Title       : From Museums, to Movies, to Marineland: W.D. Burden, G. K. Noble, and the
               Marketing of Animal Behavior Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1991    
File        : a9196126

Award Number: 9196126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 25,  1991    
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregg A. Mitman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the interpenetration of science,                       
              education, and entertainment in the study and promotion of                     
              animal behavior research by Gladwyn Kingsley Noble and William                 
              Douglas Burden at the American Museum of Natural History from                  
              roughly 1928 to 1950.  Adept entrepreneurs, both Noble and                     
              Burden recognized the importance of film in behavior research                  
              and its significance as a medium for educational and                           
              promotional purposes.  The development of film represented an                  
              important technological breakthrough in the study of behavior,                 
              for the biologist could now isolate animal motion and behavior                 
              on a medium that could be studied and manipulated at will.                     
              Natural history films, however, served a dual function, for                    
              these films could be shown to the public as education and                      
              entertainment, a marketing strategy that Noble and Burden                      
              employed in promoting their Department of Experimental                         
              Biology, founded at the American Museum n 1928.  The interplay                 
              of science and entertainment in the careers of Noble and                       
              Burden reached its culmination in the late thirties with the                   
              establishment of Marineland, the first multi-species                           
              oceanarium of its kind, 18 miles south of St. Augustine,                       
              Florida.  Serving as a research center, entertainment park and                 
              film studio, Marineland represented a new approach to selling                  
              science in 20th century American culture fed on mass media.                    
              The object of study was also an important tool in generating                   
              mass appeal.  Capitalizing on the popular image of the dolphin                 
              as a "friend to gods, children, and men,"  Marineland                          
              cultivated the dolphin itself as a marketing ploy.  As a case                  
              study, this project bears directly on the history of animal                    
              behavior studies in America and on issues regarding the use                    
              of mass media in the popularization of science within 20th                     
              century American culture.
