Title       : Petrogenetic Processes and Sources of Volcanic Rocks in the Central Andes:
               Constraints from Mafic Monogenetic Centers in Bolivia (Collaborative Research)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1991        
File        : a9196118

Award Number: 9196118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Snyder                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 3,  1991        
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shanaka L. de Silva gesilva@scifac.indstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana State University
	      200 North Seventh Street
	      Terre Haute, IN  478091202    812/237-3085

NSF Program : 1557      VOLCANOLOGY & MANTLE GEOCHEMIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Studies of volcanic products along the Andes show a variation in               
              chemistry along strike and across strike with time.  These                     
              variations can be explained by two contrasting models; (1) that                
              the chemical variations simply reflect variations in the mantle                
              source (primary magmas are not modified by interaction with the                
              lithosphere); or (2) that these variations are due to                          
              modification of primary magmas due to interaction with the                     
              lithosphere through which they pass.                                           
              In the Central Andes, the similarity of the compositions of the                
              erupted andesites to typical continental crust, has led to the                 
              suggestion that these reflect the direct mantle to curst flux,                 
              and support a model for crustal growth through magmatic addition               
              at the subduction zone  Crustal thicknesses in the Central Andes               
              reach~70km, and it is difficult to envisage that primary magmas                
              would not be modified en route to the surface.  The alternative                
              interpretation is that Andean andesites are chemically similar to              
              continental crust because they have been extensively contaminated              
              by the crust.                                                                  
              This project will address this key issue by studying mafic                     
              monogenetic centres in Bolivia.  Available data suggests that                  
              these are the least differentiated lavas in the Central Andes and              
              have 87SR/86SR similar to the source of island arc magmas.  They               
              therefore represent the closest examples to primary magmas in the              
              Central Andes, and appear to be a vital window into the                        
              composition of the sub-Andean mantle.
