Title       : Sensory Components of Under-Ice Movement and Hole Finding Behavior of Ringed
               Seals and Weddell Seals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1991        
File        : a9196150

Award Number: 9196150
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Wartzok wartzok@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 5211      POLAR BIO & MEDIC ARCTIC RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Arctic and Antarctic seals are able to inhabit areas of complete ice           
              cover by virtue of their ability to make and maintain breathing holes          
              through the ice.  The sensory system of these marine mammals is                
              crucial for locating these holes while the animal is under ice.  The           
              difficulty of working with these animals in the natural environment            
              has resulted in few studies which address the orientation and                  
              navigation capabilities of marine mammals.  This project involves the          
              refinement of acoustic remote sensing technology and its application           
              to Weddell seals in the natural environment in Antarctica.                     
              Drs. Wartzok and Elsner have developed a system for acoustically               
              tracking seals as they swim under the ice.  Preliminary studies have           
              indicated that vision plays a dominant role in under-ice navigation            
              when this sensory modality is available.  More detailed and quantified         
              studies of the roles vision, audition and vibrissal senses play in             
              under-ice navigation and hole finding by seals will be conducted.  In          
              addition, the ranges at which seals can visually detect new breathing          
              holes will be correlated with the laboratory-based limits of visual            
              sensitivity and the field measured light extinction coefficients will be       
              determined.  Additional research will quantify the ranges at which seals       
              can use auditory cues to detect new breathing holes and what types of          
              auditory cues they use.  Once the importance of audition for these             
              animals in their natural environment is determined, the impact of              
              anthropogenic sound on the biology of these animals can be inferred.           
              The range over which vibrissae function in hole finding will be                
              determined.  The tracking of more than one seal under the ice will             
              provide an understanding of under-ice behavioral interactions.
