Title       : Ecological Significance of Planktonic Marine Archaebacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1998  
File        : a9529804

Award Number: 9529804
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319175             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward F. Delong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9529804 Delong  The primary objective of this research is to  investigate the
              physiological properties, metabolic  activities and ecological significance of
              a newly discovered  abundant component of marine picoplankton: planktonic
              marine  archaebacteria. Recently results have demonstrated that  planktonic
              marine archaebacteria are widely distributed and  can be relatively abundant in
              marine prokaryote assemblages.  Available data suggest that these
              microorganisms may  significantly influence carbon and energy flux in marine 
              picoplankton.  In addition, since all other known  archaebacteria have unique
              metabolic and physiological  properties, it is quite possible that planktonic
              marine  archaebacteria have unique characteristics which influence  their
              ecological function, and qualitatively distinguish  them from other prokaryotic
              picoplankters.  This study will  investigate the qualitative properties of
              planktonic  archaebacteria, and their quantitative contributions to 
              picoplanktom biomass and production in the Santa Barbara  Channel.  Methods
              that selectively detect planktonic  archaebacterial presence, metabolites, and
              activities will  be used to assess their ecological significance.  Measurements
              of archaebacteria relative abundance and  distribution will be used to estimate
              their contribution to  picoplankton biomass.  Techniques that estimate 
              incorporation of radiolabel into specific archaebacterial  cellular metabolites
              (rRNA, lipids) will be used to  determine the relative flux of nutrients into
              planktonic  archaebacterial metabolic pools.  This study will provide  new
              information on a ubiquitous but, little understood  component of marine
              picoplankton.  The ultimate goal of this  research is to relate the unique
              properties, biomass, and  metabolic activities of planktonic marine
              archaebacteria to  the biological interactions and biogeochemical processes 
              through which they influence flows of energy and matter in  the sea. ***
