Title       : Biomimetic and Enzyme Investigations of Haloperoxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2000       
File        : a9529374

Award Number: 9529374
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison Butler butler@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9117,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              program supports research by Dr. Alison Butler of the Chemistry   Department,
              University of California at Santa Barbara, on marine   haloperoxidase enzymes. 
              The reactivities of vanadium bromoperoxidase and   FeHeme bromoperoxidase,
              including their roles in biosynthesis,  will be   investigated using functional
              model complexes and enzyme studies.    Vanadium complexes of alpha-helical
              peptides and alpha-helical peptide   bundles that closely resemble vanadium
              haloperoxidases will be   synthesized and tested.  In addition some new
              mesoporous and titanium   dioxide materials will be prepared and tested for
              peroxidative   halogenation reactivity.  Reactivity comparisons will be made to
              marine   haloperoxides isolated from chiral halogenated acetogenins and  
              sesquiterpenes produced from marine algae.  The halide selectivity of  
              vanadium haloperoxidases from algae that evolve chlorinated and   brominated
              hydrocarbons will be investigated.  Many marine natural products and enzymes
              have important industrial   applications in the specialty chemical,
              diagnostics, pharmaceutical, and   biotechnology industries.   Development of
              the use of some of these   natural products has been inhibited by lack of
              availability of sufficient   quantities.  This work will identify functional
              mimics for some marine   haloperoxidases present in marine algae.  These
              compounds have potential   use as catalysts for production of oxidants and
              halogenating agents in   situ, processes that would be environmentally
              beneficial alternatives to   present technology.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
