Title       : General Research Strategies from the History of Florigen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1996     
File        : a9529363

Award Number: 9529363
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79190              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Allchin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              How do scientists deal with unsolved problems?  What general strategies can they
              pursue? An answer to these questions would certainly contribute to our
              understanding of the process of science, while also having practical
              significance.  Like many epistemic questions,  the nature of unsolved problems
              is well approached historically. Dr. Allchin is focusing on the history of a
              major unsolved problem in 20th century biology.   Evidence for a flowering
              hormone, `florigen,` was first published in 1936.  While the mechanism of
              flowering is central to basic plant physiology and agricultural and
              horticultural practice, over a half-century later the identity of this compound
              remains unknown despite repeated efforts to isolate it.  No alternative
              explanation for the observations has been substantiated.    This study draws on
              the 60 years of effort on this problem in order to articulate general
              problem-solving strategies in science.  In particular, it focuses on how
              researchers communicate and interpret unsolved problems and how they bring to
              them different methodologies and investigative techniques.  Work includes an
              extensive review of the literature, interviews with major researchers, and
              examination of unpublished lab work.  The results of this research promise to
              complement and extend recent work on discovery (problem-solving heuristics),
              while integrating it with work on the cognitive, social and experimental
              dimensions of research.  This work could be very relevant for shaping policy on
              supporting research at several levels, especially on long-standing and
              interdisciplinary problems.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
