Title       : Structure and Impact of Spatiotemporal Catalytic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1996  
File        : a9529393

Award Number: 9529393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220638             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Luss dluss@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Luss - 9529393    Many industrial chemical reactions are carried out
              using heterogeneous catalysts.  The phenomena of bistability, oscillatory
              motion and excitability, which induce a plethora of spatiotemporal motions in
              homogeneous liquid-phase reactions, exist also in heterogeneous catalytic
              reactions.  Recent experimental results indicate that periodic temperature
              patterns, such as rotating pulses, may be found on catalytic pellets during
              exothermic reactions.   The goal of this project is to explore and exploit such
              oscillatory thermal phenomena to enhance the yield and selectivity of desired
              products.    The PI plans to conduct a combined experimental-theoretical study
              with the goal of finding and classifying all the possible temperature patterns
              that may exist on either full or hollow cylindrical catalytic pellets kept in a
              continuously stirred tank reactor (CSTR) and in a radial-flow packed-bed
              reactor.  In the single-pellet experiments, the temperature patterns on the
              surface and sides of the catalysts will be measured by an infrared thermal
              imager.  The test reactions will be the oxidation of hydrogen on a
              nickel-on-alumina catalyst and the oxidation of carbon monoxide on a
              platinum-on-alumina catalyst.  The study will determine the conditions leading
              to the evolution of different patterns; the influence of intra- and
              interparticle transport limitations; the impact of the patterns on the
              performance of the catalyst; and the influence of inherent nonuniform catalytic
              activity on the patterns.  The main dynamic features of each motion, such as
              characteristic length, period, velocity, and shape, will be determined.  These
              periodic temperature motions are likely to stimulate attempts to benefit from
              them, especially when they induce corresponding periodic changes in the
              catalyst activity.
