Title       : TQO: The Role of Employee Performance Evaluations in a Quality Improvement
               Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1998       
File        : a9529884

Award Number: 9529884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan R. Sanderson                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293583             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Young health@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin P. Charns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Coffey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol VanDeusen Lukas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The financial services sector comprises over 4% of the Gross Domestic Product in
              the United States, and employs more than 5.4 million people (more than the
              combined total of the manufacturing employment in apparel, automobiles,
              computers, pharmaceuticals, and steel).  In addition, this sector plays a major
              role in the economy, providing payment services and financial products that
              literally fuel modern capitalist society.  Despite its size and importance,
              there are few rigorous studies of quality management in this industry.  The
              proposed research addresses this problem by investigating three sets of
              questions:  1) What are the key measures of quality as measured by the customer
              and how do they link to human resource practices, information technology (IT)
              and process management? 2) When these quality measures are incorporated, do
              Tayloristic work practices and associated IT investments still create efficient
              service delivery processes?  Do these results hold up when sales efficiency is
              considered?  3) Do the management practices that create high-performing service
              delivery vary significantly when one switches channels through which services
              are delivered?  Do the practices vary between branch and phone operations, and
              what are their impacts on the key measures of service quality, sales and
              efficiency?  These questions will be investigated through field research
              conducted in one Bank Holding Company, comprised of several semi-autonomous
              banks.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
