Title       : SBIR Phase II: Permeability and Complex Resistivity Measurements for
               Determination of Pore Structure in Rocks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1996 
File        : a9529800

Award Number: 9529800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298543             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg N. Boitnott   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New England Research Inc
	      76 Olcott Dr
	      White River Junction, VT  050012313    802/296-2401

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9529800  Boitnott     Many fundamental bulk properties of rock such as
              permeability, electrical resistivity,  and elastic constants are highly
              dependent on details of the pore structure. Attempts to infer   properties such
              as permeability from measurements of electrical resistivity and acoustic  
              velocities (common in borehole geophysics) require a thorough understanding of
              the inter-relationships between these and other bulk properties and the
              underlying pore   structure which controls them. While a number of models have
              been developed which   predict the inter-relationships between fundamental bulk
              properties and pore structure,   validation and routine use of these models
              require a means of making a large number   of diverse measurements on core in a
              routine fashion.  Permeability and electrical   resistivity are two of the most
              important properties for understanding pore structure.   While laboratory
              measurement techniques for these properties are well developed,   simultaneous
              measurement of permeability and electrical resistivity has been difficult   to
              perform, inhibiting routine and integrated measurement.  In addition,
              permeability   measurement during sample deformation has been difficult for a
              number of reasons.  Here newly developed methods for permeability measurement
              will be applied in order   to construct an apparatus for routine and automated
              measurement of permeability,   specific storage, electrical resistivity, and
              deformation.  The apparatus and techniques   to be developed here are well
              suited for routine measurements as well as experimental   studies of pore
              structure and its relationship to the fundamental bulk properties of rock.  
              The project has commercial potential in the petroleum and geotechnical
              industries   and perhaps in the rock-testing service industry.
