Title       : Steps Toward Resolving Ambiguities in University-Industry Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1998       
File        : a9529216

Award Number: 9529216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104145             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa I. Campbell tcampbell@pimacc.pima.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sheila Slaughter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Changing political and economic climates in the U.S. over the past decade have
              resulted in increasing partnerships between universities and industries. 
              Decision makers in government, business and universities are eager to learn how
              to shape and encourage successful allliances.  An earlier study by these
              investigators examined three types of conflicts that might affect their
              progress:  conflict of interest, conflict of commitment, and conflict over
              internal equity.  In this second phase, the investigators will explore a number
              of ambiguities with respect to such issues as modifications to traditional
              teaching loads and reduced interaction with students, allocation of credit and
              intellectual property, and oversight of faculty-industry interactions, that
              surfaced in the initial project.  The research consists of personal and
              telephone interviews with university administrators and science and engineering
              faculty at institutions with industry funds.  Its goal is to establish a clear
              understanding of the ways that ambiguities and related issues are being
              resolved.  It will identify and analyse administrators' and faculty's insights
              and responses with regard to such issues as allocation of time, publications
              restrictions, and incentives in order to understand how they are being resolved
              to foster successful university-industry relationships.  Success here refers to
              the extent to which the various participants resolve or minimize potential
              conflicts.  The study will utilize participants' perspectives to determine the
              implications for the colleges and universities and for federal policy toward
              these institutions, by focusing on specific ways successful partnerships are
              being nurtured and providing insight into the possible implications of
              organizational transformations that may be occurring to accommodate these
              relationships.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
