Title       : Code Delay in Legacy Software Systems: Measurement, Models, and Statistical
               Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9529926

Award Number: 9529926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mariann Jelinek                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247946             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan F. Karr karr@niss.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat'l Inst. of Stat. Sci.
	      PO Box 14006
	      Research Triangle Pk, NC  277094006    919/685-9300

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program is directed toward key problems regarding a massive, but
              largely unappreciated problem -- decay of computer software.  Three key
              problems to be investigated include describing code decay, identifying factors
              that cause code decay, and evaluating effects of reductions in code decay.  The
              research team, which represents a partnership between AT&T and the National
              Institute of Statistical Sciences, will develop indices (measures) of code
              decay that reflect key behavioral and managerial characteristics in the
              software development process.  Changes in controllable (for example,
              organizational) factors will change the indices, which in turn impact key
              responses:  cost, time and quality.  By incorporating adequate behavioral and
              organizational factors, as well as code characteristics, we will develop
              techniques to identify relevant factors and evaluate their effects on code
              decay.  The research team is cross-disciplinary, including experts in software
              engineering, behavioral issues, organizational theory, management and
              statistics.  Statistics -- especially measurement, modeling, prediction, and
              experimentation -- serves as the `glue` and enabling technology for progress on
              problems of code decay, and as the means to apply paradigms from the
              traditional sciences to software engineering.  Statistic strategies will be
              developed and used to model and control the effects of design decisions,
              software architecture and organizational factors.  The products will be the
              basis for management tools for achieving reductions in cost and development
              interval, increases in software quality and enhanced capability to predict
              cost, interval and quality.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
