Title       : IAI Workshop: Andean Amazon Rivers Analysis and Monitoring (AARAM) Project
               Start-Up Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1998     
File        : a9529788

Award Number: 9529788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48675              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey E. Richey jrichey@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9529788  Richey  This proposal seeks start-up funds for the Andean Amazon Rivers
              Analysis and Monitoring (AARAM) Project, which was conceived and organized
              specifically to address scientific questions and socioeconomic issues
              identified in the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI)
              scientific research agenda, particularly within the theme of -T  ropical
              Ecosystems and Biogeochemical Cycles.+  The AARAM project unites researchers
              from Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and the United States with the
              common objective of investigating the effect of global climate change and
              regional land use change on biogeochemical and hydrological cycles within
              terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems of  the Andean Amazon Basin.  To accomplish
              this objective the project will establish a network of river sampling stations
              throughout the Andean Amazon region, employing standardized methods to gather
              high-quality biogeochemical and hydrological data which is comparable over the
              entire region.  The sampling stations will be the foci for the following:  more
              detailed process-based studies; training of local scientists and students; and
              studies by other IAI research teams with broader geographic coverage.  The
              project will also assemble and utilize diverse data types from different
              sources including historical hydrological records, remote sensing images, and
              digitized map themes which mark the   course of land use change within the
              region.  The AARAM Project will rely on Geographic Information Systems-based
              management to assemble and organize these varied data sets into a coherent
              project database.   Specifically, this proposal seeks financial support to
              convene two working meetings:  the first meeting will bring together project
              participants in Lima, Peru, to develop the project research plan, devise a plan
              for student and young researcher involvement, and work out collaborative
              agreements between participating institutions.  The second meeting will be a
              smaller -writing+ meeting where the Project  PIs gather in Seattle, Washington
              to write the IAI Phase II Proposal for the project.  The institutions involved
              are the following:  the Greater University of San Andres (Bolivia), the
              Bolivian National Meteorological and Hydrological Service, the Center for
              Nuclear Energy and Agriculture   (Brazil), the National Agency for Water and
              Electric Power (Brazil), the National Institute for Environmental Studies
              (Colombia), the National Politechnical School (Ecuador), the Ecuadorean
              National Meteorological and Hydrological Service, the National Agrarian
              University at La Molina (Peru), the Peruvian National Meteorological and
              Hydrological S  ervice, the Peruvian Hydrographic and Navigational Service, and
              the University of Washington at Seattle.  %%%  The proposed project and working
              meetings are being organized by a group of scientists with extensive experience
              in multinational research efforts and Amazon ecosystems.  The characterization
              and monitoring of the biogeochemistry and hydrology of Andean Amazon rivers
              will provide a variety of benefits to the researchers and institutions
              involved.    The benefits to the Andean region will be the following: 
              increased knowledge of the state and functioning of their ecosystems;
              usefulness of the project data to the establishment of national and regional
              environmental policies, the raising of the level of local expertise through
              influx of technical and financial resources; and an increase in reg  ional
              collaborative links.  Brazilian and U.S. researchers will benefit from the
              expansion of their current research by gaining input from local experts and the
              access to laboratory facilities, field stations, and human resources.  The
              larger global change community will gain from this project a high quality base
              of data relevant to large-scale st  udies of water balance and cycles of
              bioactive elements such as carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus.  The AARAM Project
              has assembled a highly qualified team of research scientists.  The PIs have
              extensive experience in proje ct management, including such major international
              efforts as the Carbon in the Amazon River Experiment (CAMREX), and NASA+s Earth
              Observing System Regional Amazon Model Project (EOSRAM).  Additionally, this
              project will have   links with the following large international research
              programs: the Large-scale Biosphere-Atmosphere Program (LBA), the International
              Geosphere-Biosphere Programme+s Land-Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone
              project (IGBP/LOICZ), the International Council of Scientific Union+s
              Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environment (ICSU/SCOPE), U  NESCO+s
              Man and the Biosphere Program (UNESCO/MAB), and the French sponsored Bolivian
              Amazon Basin Hydrological and Climatological Program (ORSTOM/PHICAB).  The
              AARAM Project will integrate itself into the larger IAI Network by sharing data
              with these projects, and inviting other IAI projects to conduct research at its
              sampling stations.  The par  ticipating countries of Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia,
              Ecuador, Peru, and the United States are Member States of the IAI, a U.S.
              initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the
              scientific institutions of the Americas.  The U.S. National Science Foundation
              is the Government agency designated to carry out U.S. responsibili  ties within
              the IAI.  ***
