Title       : Anonymous Communications on the Internet: Uses and Abuses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1996       
File        : a9529238

Award Number: 9529238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87025              (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert H. Teich ateich@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Frankel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9180,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project explores through several inter-related activities the uses and
              abuses of anonymous communications on the internet.  The benefits and drawbacks
              of anonymous computer communication are just now beginning to be examined,  an
              examination rendered more difficult by the fact that the value of anonymous
              communication in a non-networked environment is itself a matter of debate. 
              Nevertheless, a growing number of computer and network professionals, lawyers,
              social scientists, and ethicists agree that anonymity is an important issue
              that needs to be addressed from a variety of perspectives. Building on an
              earlier project focusing on the ethical, legal, and technological aspects of
              computer and network use and abuse, the American Association for the
              Advancement of  Science (AAAS) plans to develop 1)criteria setting forth
              contexts in which anonymous communications are desirable (to be encouraged),
              permissible (to be tolerated), or undesirable (to be discouraged), and 2)
              preliminary guidelines for those situations where anonymity is to be either
              encouraged or tolerated.  AAA will conduct several interrelated activities: 1)
              background information and guidance will be provided through commissioned 
              papers on such topics as the individual and social uses and ramifications of
              anonymous communications, legal issues regarding anonymity, and the current and
              anticipated technical capabilities pertinent to anonymity on the net; 2)
              development of case studies based on individual experiences with anonymity; 3)
              convening of focus groups to frame issues for a two-day conference at which
              invited individuals from a variety of professional backgrounds and perspectives
              will discuss criteria and guidelines that can form the basis for normative and
              legal standards regarding anonymity.  Results will be disseminated in a number
              of forms, including the World Wide Web page.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
