Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Research in Parallel Computer System Design using
               Workstation Clusters with High-Speed Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1996  
File        : a9529541

Award Number: 9529541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51546              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kleanthis Psarris psarris@cs.utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samir R. Das  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rajendra V. Boppana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CDA-9529541  Psarris, Kleanthis  Das, Samir, R.  Boppana, Rajendra, V.    The
              University of Texas at San Antonio    Research in Parallel Computer Systems
              Design using   Workstation Clusters with High-Speed Networks     This award is
              for the acquisition of a cluster of four multiprocessor  workstations to
              support several research projects, including the   research on the design of
              architectures and compilers for distributed   shared memory multiprocessors and
              on large-scale applications such as   the design and implementation of parallel
              discrete event simulators.   The proposed instrumentation provides a
              multi-granular parallel and   distributed computing platform, where both
              tightly-coupled and   loosely-coupled systems coexist. It interconnects four
              Sun workstations   with an SCI (scalable coherent interface) based high-speed
              network.   The SCI interconnect will provide low-latency message passing and  
              shared memory support. The SUN workstations with Solaris OS support   threads
              and high precision clocks. The low-latency inter-workstation   communication
              and threads will be used to implement parallel architecture   simulators and
              parallel discrete event simulators. Precise clocks will   be used to extract
              message communication and shared memory traces from   applications. These
              traces in turn will be used to evaluate the new   architectural mechanisms
              through simulations. The shared memory support provided by the interconnect
              will be used to run the parallel code   generated by a parallelizing compiler.
              Several benchmark applications   will be compiled and run on the equipment to
              evaluate the effectiveness   of various dependence analysis techniques.
