Title       : Rapid Plasma Sintering of B"-Alumina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1998    
File        : a9529646

Award Number: 9529646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $423633             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Lynn Johnson dl johnson@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vinayak P. Dravid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9529646  Johnson    This is a renewal proposal based on the results and 
              accomplishments of an ongoing NSF-DMR project, which  demonstrated that
              microwave and RF plasma heating enhanced  densification of -alumina with a
              significant reduction in  sintering temperature.  The PI will extend the
              previous work  to a fundamental investigation of rapid sintering and 
              microstructure development of -alumina utilizing microwave  excited plasmas.   
              Preliminary results show that plasma sintering will  alleviate the problems of
              loss of volatile components in -  alumina without costly encapsulation. 
              Moreover, the plasma  sintering configuration is ideally suited for the rapid
              and  continuous sintering of tubes, which should improve product  uniformity. 
              The proposed research is focused on the  scientific issues that govern the
              sintering characteristics  of ceramics containing volatile components, such as
              sodium  and lithium in -alumina, which limit the technological  feasibility of
              -alumina as an electrolyte for sodium-based  battery applications.    The
              following objectives will be pursued:       1.  Investigate sintering of
              -alumina under microwave  excited plasma, with and without grain boundary
              dopant  additions.       2.  Quantify the microstructure development under 
              plasma sintering conditions using an arsenal of ion,  electron, and photon beam
              techniques.       3.  Elucidate the role of grain boundary dopants used  to
              manipulate the microstructure and alter the grain  boundary ionic conductivity.
               %%%  The outcome of the proposed research will shed light on the  potential
              for plasma sintering of ceramics containing  volatile components in general,
              and -alumina in particular.  The ultimate objective of our undertaking is to
              dramatically  reduce the processing cost and increase the performance and 
              reliability of -alumina to a point that it is attractive for  commercial
              application in sodium-based batteries and other  applications of sodium ionic
              conductors.  ***
