Title       : IAI Workshop: Potential Use of Biological Proxy Data as Climatic Change Impact
               Indicators in Southern American Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1996       
File        : a9529656

Award Number: 9529656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49875              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolina Villagran   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ De Santiago De Chile
	      
	      Santiage, CI  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9529656  Villagr=E1n  This Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
              (IAI) Start-Up   Grant Phase I proposal will support two workshops, which have
              the following goals:  linking the research activities of the principal
              paleoenvironmental research centers of southern South America; integrating
              different sources of proxy data for paleoclimatic reconstructions; and
              evaluating the effects of climate variability on the major ecosystems of the
              region.  The workshop will bring together researchers from the paleobotanical
              and palynological laboratories of several universities located in Argentina,
              Brazil, and Chile, recognized scientists from selected South American
              institutions, and representatives from the main dendroclimatological
              institutions of the region.  In addition, in order to promote future academic
              interaction among the institutions involved in this proposal, graduate students
              whose research deals with paleoenvironmental questions will be invited to the
              workshop.  The following topics will be covered at the workshops:  the
              relationships between proxy data and climate in subtropical-temperate
              ecosystems in southern South America and their values as analogs for
              interpretation of past paleoenvironmental changes; the evaluation of methods
              from different proxy data sources; field trips to select study sites; the
              determination of taxa to be studied; the design of research strategies and an
              academic exchange program; and the development of an IAI Phase II proposal with
              the purpose of predicting the possible effects of global changes on the
              ecosystems of southern South America.  This project will contribute to the
              ongoing work of the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme's Past Global
              Changes (IGBP/PAGES) and Pole-Equator-Pole (IGBP/PEP-I) projects.  %%%  This
              Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) Start-Up Grant Phase
              I proposal will support two workshops, which have the following goals:  linking
              the research activities of the principal paleoenvironmental research  centers
              of southern South America; integrating different sources of proxy data for
              paleoclimatic reconstructions; and evaluating the effects of climate
              variability on the major ecosystems of the region.  The workshop will bring
              together researchers from the paleobotanical and palynological laboratories of
              several universities located in Argentina, Brazil, and Chile, recognized
              scientists from selected South American institutions, and representatives from
              the main dendroclimatological institutions of the region.  In addition, in
              order to promote future academic interaction among the institutions involved in
              this proposal, graduate students whose research deals with paleoenvironmental
              questions will be invited to the workshop.  Considering the limited
              availability of emerged lands in the southern hemisphere, paleoenvironmental
              proxy data from southern South America are unique sources of information for
              understanding the dynamics of global change.  Antarctic ice records and records
              for the last glaciation from the surrounding oceans document changes in oceanic
              and atmospheric circulation patters, atmospheric carbon dioxide levels, and
              some of the possible mechanisms of abrupt climatic change.  Furthermore,
              several paleoenvironmental records document the history of ecosystem changes as
              a consequence of climate.  Additionally, along with natural vegetation changes,
              man has become a landscape-transforming agent which is as strong as, or
              stronger than, climate.  This proposal will make use of
              paleoclimatic-biological indicators of different temporal and spatial
              resolutions which have the potential to become excellent tools to evaluate the
              impact of climatic variability and anthropogenic disturbance on southern South
              American ecosystems, and provide a perspective for the prediction of future
              changes.  This proposal assembles a team of scientists from the following
              countries: Argentina, Brazil, and Chile.  These countries are Member States of
              the IAI, an initiative to stimulate cooperative research on g lobal change
              issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas.  The National Science
              Foundation is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry our the Unites
              States responsibilities within the IAI.  ***
