Title       : Equity, Low-Income Neighborhoods, and the Information Superhighway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1998     
File        : a9529254

Award Number: 9529254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86364              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lodis Rhodes lrhodes@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              There are numerous calls for information policies that will serve U.S. poor
              people equitably.  However, very little is understood about what poor people
              know about or might want or need from advanced information technologies, and
              how policies can be shaped to serve their needs as they define them.  This
              one-year research project will provide empirical data on the penetration of
              computers and on-line services in low-income communities in Austin, Texas, how
              this community's computers are being used, and what low-income citizens know
              about and want from electronic information resources.  The project team will
              conduct its research in both English and Spanish, using principles of
              participatory action research, a kind of investigation that involves the
              research subjects in the design and evaluation of the research parameters.  The
              project will begin with discussions among public housing residents who
              participate in Family Learning Center programs, after-school education programs
              located in public housing complexes in East and Southeast Austin. The residents
              will help the researchers develop surveys and approaches to assessing
              information resources available or desired in surrounding low-income
              neighborhoods.  Through the surveys, participants for small focus groups will
              be identified and recruited.  After introductions to computer networks, these
              focus group participants will be asked about how they might use networks and
              what kinds of access they believe their communities need.  Focus group
              participants will meet with City of Austin officials to assess opportunities
              for participation in the City's policymaking with respect to
              telecommunications.  The research team will attempt to understand and document
              what obstacles there are to such participation, what values and needs
              low-income citizens bring to this issue, and how well the City's policymaking
              process serves the assessed needs and values of low-income neighborhoods.  The
              project will include a participatory evaluation process.  Results of the study
              will be published in a scholarly journal and configured for access on the
              World-Wide Web so that researchers, citizens, and policymakers throughout the
              US will have access to them.  The project sponsor will also plan a public
              conference for fall 1996 on equity on the information superhighway.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
