Title       : Assessing Holocene Environmental Change in the Kara Sea, Eurasian Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1996 
File        : a9529133

Award Number: 9529133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95741              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Polyak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Little is known about the environmental change in the Eurasian Arctic, a
              major site for the formation  and passage of sea-ice and water masses in the
              Arctic Ocean.  The knowledge of climatic and oceanographic fluctuations in this
              region on a millenial and submillenial scale is especially important in view of
              the special role of the Arctic in the modern global change.  This project is
              aimed at the first time-constrained reconstruction of Holocene
              paleo-environments in the Kara Sea, which is strongly influenced by both the
              extensive continental run-off and the Atlantic water advection.  The Kara Sea
              sediments contain a unique record of variations in the discharge of Siberian
              rivers, Atlantic water flow, and the formation of bottom waters.    A number of
              sediment cores and surface sediment samples were collected recently in the Kara
              Sea.  Cores from key sites located in a corridor between the estuaries of Ob'
              and Yenisey Rivers and the marginal Saint Anna Trough, are chosen for a study
              of the Holocene environmental change on a  millenial to centennial time-scale. 
              Core stratigraphy will be time-constrained by AMS  14C dating of in situ
              calcareous faunal remnants.  Mineralogical, geochemical, and grain-size
              analyses will be used to assess sediment dispersal sources and depositional
              environments.  Stable isotopes will be measured on planktonic foraminifers from
              the northern Kara Sea to understand the relation between the Siberian river
              discharge and oceanographic change in the eastern Arctic Ocean.  Modern
              distributional patterns of foraminifers and ostracodes with respect to the Kara
              Sea hydrology will be established to provide reliable paleo-environmental
              reconstructions for the Holocene.    Results of this collaborative research
              will significantly improve our knowledge of  environmental change in the
              Eurasian Arctic.  Reconstruction of amplitude and timing of riverine and
              Atlantic water pulses throughout the Holocene will reveal new insights in
              mechanisms of heat and water vapor transfer from  the North Atlantic to the
              Arctic, and their controls on the extent of sea ice and formation of water
              masses in the Arctic Ocean.
