Title       : Coastal Ocean Space Utilization (COSU) Symposium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1996   
File        : a9529445

Award Number: 9529445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64145              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick K. Takahashi patrick@wiliki.eng.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9529445  Takahashi  The series of Coastal Ocean Space Utilization (COSU) 
              symposia sponsored by the National Science Foundation and a  significant number
              of partners has stimulated considerable  interest, cooperation, and agreement
              on balanced utilization  and management of our coastal region in harmony with
              the  environment.  The success of these gatherings can be  attributed to the
              quality of the conferees and the  philosophical format.    The COSU series has
              provided an excellent international  forum to review and discuss the latest
              technological  advances, concepts, and research needs on a variety of 
              interdisciplinary topics.  Inasmuch as more than 50 percent  of the world's
              population and industrial and research  activity is located within 100
              kilometers of the coast, this  is a very important region on which to focus in
              applying  advances in marine science and technology to achieve  sustainable
              development of the coastal infrastructure.  These symposia has been held in
              specific coastal regions of  the world to obtain different perspectives and
              thus  stimulate the cross-pollination of ideas for solving the  many
              environmental and developmental problems facing these  areas.    These
              gatherings have provided new insights and innovative  concepts to deal with the
              interdisciplinary problems of the  expanding coastal infrastructure, which are
              driven by the  steadily increasing coastal population with its attendant 
              environmental, social, and economic impacts.  Concepts  frequently introduced
              pertain to such topics as artificial  islands, floating cities, environmentally
              friendly coastal  reclamation, new ocean energy extraction techniques, off- 
              shore ranching, artificial upwelling, autonomous vehicles,  and remote sensing
              systems, to mention a few.  Various  international cooperative projects have
              already resulted.    There is great emphasis on sustainable coastal
              development,  i.e., development in harmony with the marine environment.  This
              has introduced new technologies, methods, and  techni ques that have greatly
              influenced the design of those  systems and projects comprising the coastal
              infrastructure.  ***
