Title       : TQO: Effective Implementation of High Performance Process Management Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a9529924

Award Number: 9529924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mariann Jelinek                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147357             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Ramberg ramberg@sie.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Many U.S. companies implement activities known as high performance process
              management, or HPPM.  Under HPPM, companies strive for extraordinary levels of
              product quality, great process efficiency, intensive process control, and very
              rapid response.  The desired effect is a dramatic increase in customer
              satisfaction and financial returns.  The agenda is augmented by improved vendor
              relations, increased employee involvement, and more rational product and
              process design.  While HPPM can deliver results, its implementation is
              difficult and failures do occur.  This project is a field study of the
              strengths and weaknesses of HPPM implementation at four companies.  The
              research will be interdisciplinary, involving both industrial and systems
              engineering expertise (including statistical analysis, process mapping, and
              control theory), and social science based organizational design and management
              of change frameworks (including organizational diagnosis and surveys, and
              anthropological field techniques).  The project engages the organizational
              partners in both design and execution of the research.  Expected results
              include an identification of generic HPPM implementation success factors and
              barriers, discovery of mismatches between current academic research on process
              management/engineering and actual industry needs, and recommendations for
              changes in how process management/engineering is taught in universities.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
