Title       : Dissertation Research: Searching for the Origin of Rice (Oryza sativa) in China:
               An Application of Phytolith Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9529664

Award Number: 9529664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah M. Pearsall ANTHDMP@MIZZOUl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9179,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Deborah Pearsall, Mr. Zhijun Zhao will  collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will travel to the Middle Yangtze region of
              China and collect soil samples from a series of archaeological sites which span
              the Neolithic period when settled village life first emerged. He, and his
              Chinese collaborators will also collect soil cores from areas most likely to
              preserve organic remains and they shall analyze the pollen and phytoliths in
              all of the materials collected. The goal of the project is to gain insight into
              the origins of rice domestication and on the basis of pollen grains and
              phytoliths, which are silicate bodies formed in plant tissues, it will be
              possible both to detect the presence of rice and to determine whether the
              species represented are wild or domesticated. The information derived from
              analysis of soil cores will allow the team to reconstruct changing climate over
              the Neolithic period and to examine the relationship between cultural and
              environmental change. Based on an extensive literature review and study of both
              botanical and archaeological information, Mr. Zhao postulates that rice was
              first domesticated in the Middle Yangtze region and that climatic change
              provided the proximate cause.  The changes which occurred in China and other
              parts of the world at roughly the same time are often referred to as a
              `revolution` because it was during this process that a variety of plants and
              animals were first domesticated, that pottery first appears in the
              archaeological record and that a settled village-based way of life emerges.
              This process appears to have occurred independently in China and the
              domestication of rice seems to have played an important role in this change.
              Archaeological data however are extremely scanty and plant remains are not well
              preserved in the archaeological record. Therefore it is not possible to
              determine either just when or where domestication took place and at what stage
              in the Chinese Neolithic domestication occurred. Without this knowledge it is
              difficult to unravel the chain of cause and effect which propelled the
              `revolution` along. Pollen, and especially phytoliths, are relatively well
              preserved in the archaeological record and Mr. Zhao's advisor, Dr. Pearsall has
              developed keys which allow the identification of both wild and domestic rice on
              the basis of the phytoliths they produce. Mr. Zhao will apply this technique in
              China.  This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of
              interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new insight into one of the most
              significant changes in human prehistory and will assist in the training of a
              promising scientist.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
