Title       : Cryogenic Helium Turbulence Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a9529609

Award Number: 9529609
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Donnelly russ@vortex.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Niemela  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katapali Sreenivasan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9166,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9529609  Donnelly    Turbulence  is undoubtedly the most outstanding unsolved 
              problem  of   classical  physics.  From  a  practical  turbulence  is  the 
              'limiting  factor' in the design and operation of various  energy  systems in
              aeronautical, chemical and mechanical engineering.  It  is  a  central theme in
              geophysics, meteorology, and other  areas  which  strongly impact human life.
              For these reasons, an enhanced  ability  to  understand and predict turbulent
              flows will  have  a  large  payoff.  This  project focuses on  fundamental 
              turbulence  research using a non-traditional fluid: cryogenic helium near its 
              critical  point  of  5  K.  Helium is  theoretically  capable  of  providing
              the highest Reynolds and Rayleigh number conditions for  controlled  turbulence
               experiments in  a  laboratory  on  earth.  However,   the  working 
              temperature  range  of  4-5  K  presents  challenges   to  existing  techniques
               and  instrumentation   for  turbulence  measurements. In addition, to  reach 
              the  limits  of  ultra-high Reynolds and Rayleigh numbers requires major
              cryogenic  facilities which are currently found only at high energy  physics 
              projects requiring large volumes of cryogenic fluids for  cooling 
              superconducting magnets or other apparatus. This  project  brings  together for
              the first time a team to meet these challenges.  The  team   is  composed  of 
              faculty  at  the  University  of  Oregon  (Professor  Russell  J. Donnelly) and
              Yale University  (Professor  Katapali  R.  Sreenivasan), together with
              co-workers (Michael  S.  McAshan  and James R. Maddocks) who will conduct
              on-site research  at  the  Brookhaven  National Laboratory Relativistic  Heavy 
              Ion  Collider  (RHIC) Cryogenic Facility (Dr. Satoshi  Ozaki,  Project 
              Director).  The  members  of the team include  world  leaders  in  helium 
              turbulence, fluid hydrodynamics and cryogenic technology.  The  project goals
              are to develop instrumentation for  turbulence  measurements  using cryogenic
              helium, to use this instrumentation   for fundamental turbulence measurements,
              and to construct a major  convection chamber at RHIC. Successful completion of
              this project  will  place the U. S. in a world leadership position in cryogenic
               helium  turbulence  research and lay the  foundation  for  future  research in
              ultra high Reynolds and Rayleigh number phenomena.  %%%  Turbulence  is
              undoubtedly the most outstanding unsolved  problem  of   classical  physics. 
              From  a  practical  turbulence  is  the  'limiting  factor' in the design and
              operation of various  energy  systems in aeronautical, chemical and mechanical
              engineering.  It  is  a  central theme in geophysics, meteorology, and other 
              areas  which  strongly impact human life. For these reasons, an enhanced 
              ability  to  understand and predict turbulent flows will  have  a  large 
              payoff.  This  project focuses on  fundamental  turbulence  research using a
              non-traditional fluid: cryogenic helium near its  critical  point  of  5  K. 
              Helium is  theoretically  capable  of  providing the highest Reynolds and
              Rayleigh number conditions for  controlled  turbulence  experiments in  a 
              laboratory  on  earth.  However,   the  working  temperature  range  of  4-5  K
               presents  challenges   to  existing  techniques  and  instrumentation   for 
              turbulence  measurements. In addition, to  reach  the  limits  of  ultra-high
              Reynolds and Rayleigh numbers requires major cryogenic  facilities which are
              currently found only at high energy  physics  projects requiring large volumes
              of cryogenic fluids for  cooling  superconducting magnets or other apparatus.
              This  project  brings  together for the first time a team to meet these
              challenges.  The  team   is  composed  of  faculty  at  the  University  of 
              Oregon  (Professor  Russell  J. Donnelly) and Yale University  (Professor 
              Katapali  R.  Sreenivasan), together with co-workers (Michael  S.  McAshan  and
              James R. Maddocks) who will conduct on-site research  at  the  Brookhaven 
              National Laboratory Relativistic  Heavy  Ion  Collider  (RHIC)  Cryogenic
              Facility (Dr. Satoshi  Ozaki,  Project  Director).  The  members  of the team
              include  world  leaders  in  helium  turbulence, fluid hydrodynamics and
              cryogenic technology.  The  project goals are to develop instrumentation for 
              turbulence  measurements  using cryogenic helium, to use this instrumentation 
              for fundamental turbulence measurements, and to construct a major  convection
              chamber at RHIC. Successful completion of this project  will  place the U. S.
              in a world leadership position in cryogenic  helium  turbulence  research and
              lay the  foundation  for  future  research in ultra high Reynolds and Rayleigh
              number phenomena.
