Title       : Managing External Linkages with Functional Departments to Enhance the
               Effectiveness of Cross-Functional Teams in Quality Organizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1999    
File        : a9529904

Award Number: 9529904
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mariann Jelinek                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236598             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Green   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn Y. Woo  (Principal Investigator former)
              W. Dale Compton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research project is to examine how the effectiveness of
              cross functional teams (CFTs) can be influenced by their relationships to
              organizational members outside of the team, and by relationships between these
              outside organizational members.  These external members fall into three
              categories:  1)  functional managers (e.g., marketing, manufacturing,
              engineering) to whom team members normally report; 2) functional peers from the
              team members' departments, and 3) the `principal in charge` who has ultimate
              responsibility for the project and to whom the team leader reports. Despite the
              large body of literature on team performance, the relationships among team
              members and their immediate functional peers and supervisors have received
              little attention.  Even less well understood are the relationships between
              functional parties that are outside of the team who may have an important
              influence on team performance.    The study is motivated by the central premise
              that the success of a team depends not only on the effectiveness of the team
              members in dealing with each other, but also on their ability to obtain
              collaboration from organizational members outside of the team.  These external
              relationships often are complicated by re-definition of roles and
              decision-making authority, pre-existing structural barriers to team
              functioning, differences in objectives, physical separation, and change in
              career tracks and advancement potential which frequently accompany the
              placement of individuals in highly visible CFT assignments.   The aim of the
              study is to better understand how the management of these external influences
              on team members affect the support, conflict, and performance of CFTs.  This
              study also will assess the impact that the degree of technical complexity can
              have on the nature and significance of the linkages described above.  Technical
              complexity often increases the number of activities to be undertaken,
              uncertainty associated with tasks, the number of interfaces which need to be
              managed, the likelihood of conflict, and the degree of interdependence between
              subunits.  The research effort will conduct surveys of at least one hundred
              CFTs.  A four-stage approach will be employed:  1) development of the survey;
              2) administration of the survey to members of CFTs and identification of
              relevant functional department managers, peers and principals in charge who
              will then be surveyed, 3) in-depth interviews with representative respondents
              associated with approximately fifteen of the projects, and 4) data analysis and
              interpretation.  Cross-functional projects characterized by tasks of differing
              degrees of technical complexity will be selected to understand the demands
              associated with technology.  In addition, arrangements that encompass varying
              degrees of commitment of members to team assignments (100% or less) will be
              studied to understand their impact on the establishment and management of key
              external relationships for the team.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
