Title       : The Authority of Science and the Imagination of Modern India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1996     
File        : a9529081

Award Number: 9529081
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gyan Prakash   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Modern science claims to be universal, yet its rise in the 17th century was a
              distinctly Western phenomenon.  This is not to say that no science existed
              outside the West - there were great scientific traditions in, for example,
              China or India.  Yet the institution which we know of as `modern` science was
              developed in Europe and then spread around the world.  But how was it accepted
              in non-Western cultures?  What were the impacts on these cultures and,
              reciprocally, on modern science itself?  This is an issue of central concern as
              science truly becomes `universal` in the contemporary world.  This is the focus
              of Dr. Prakash's study in the context of modern science's acceptance in India. 
              Dr. Prakash is examining the historical emergence of science as a metaphor of
              modernity in India.  Locating the emergence of science's dominance in its
              diffusion and dispersal in the discourse of the western-educated middle class,
              he intends to view the dissemination of science's authority as a process of
              translation-a process entailing the renegotiating and reconstitution of prior
              categories of identity and knowledge.  In doing so, it touches upon the
              emergence of scientific disciplines, but its principal concern is with
              discourse outside the laboratory-in arenas such as religion, textual
              traditions, social practices and national identity where sciences authority had
              far-reaching effects.  The purpose of such an inquiry is to examine and
              understand how science was institutionalized outside the West, and what were
              the effects and forms of its diffusion.  The questions he asks are:  How did
              science acquire its privileged status as a sign of modernity? What were the
              conditions and effects of its translation across geocultural and political
              borders?    Science's status as a sign of modernity in India became established
              during the second half of the 19th century.  It was then that new technologies
              of British colonial rule-railroads, telegraphs, census operations,
              administrative rationalizations, technical institutes, museums and industrial
              exhibitions-became an enduring and dominant part of the landscape.  The
              emergent western-educated middle class was drawn to science as a grammar of
              social, cultural, and eventually political reform. By the time India achieved
              independence, science had acquired a prominent place in imagining `modern
              India.`  Dr. Prakash is carrying extensive research into the processes of
              science's authorization.  He is carrying out this research in archives freshly
              opened in London and New Delhi.  This research promises to provide a rich
              portrait of the history of science's authority in India.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
