Title       : Family Patterns of Southern Migrants to the North, 1920-1960
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9529308

Award Number: 9529308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155172             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stewart E. Tolnay st716@cnsibm.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of African-American migration in the United States.  This
              project will investigate the family patterns of migrants from southern states
              who made their way to northern cities during the first half of the 20th
              Century.  Special attention will be devoted to the following five dimensions of
              family life: (1) the marital status of males and females, (2) the living
              arrangements of currently married males and females, (3) family headship by
              adult women with children, (4) parenthood among never married adult women, and
              (5) the living situations of young children, especially the presence or absence
              of parents.  The project will rely upon public use samples constructed from
              historical U.S. censuses to conduct this exploration.  Specifically, northern
              residents of large urban areas will be extracted from the 1920, 1940, and 1960
              public use samples.  These residents will then be classified according to their
              migration histories.  A comparative approach will be used to determine to what
              extent the family patterns of migrants from the South differ from long-time
              residents of the North.  To the extent possible, migrants will also be compared
              with the sedentary southern population.  Parallel analyses will be conducted
              for whites and African Americans, employing multivariate, "regression family"
              techniques such as logistic regression, multinomial logistic regression, and
              weighted least squares regression.   %%%   This historical study will help us
              understand contemporary America and its social problems.  Recently, the family
              patterns of inner-city African Americans have received considerable attention
              from social scientists and social commentators.  Many of the contemporary
              social problems of inner-city populations have been attributed to the
              "disintegrating" urban family.  Some authors have attributed the relatively
              high incidence of unstable marriages and single-parent households among
              inner-city residents to the transplantation of a southern "sharecropping
              culture" to northern cities -- a proc ess made possible by the massive
              South-to-North migration before 1960.  Yet, very little empirical evidence has
              been marshaled to describe thoroughly, much less explain, the family patterns
              of southern migrants.  To do so successfully will contribute significantly to
              our understanding of the etiology of modern family patterns in inner-cities,
              particularly among African Americans
