Title       : Relation of Gas Phase Species to Film Growth by Pulsed Laser Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1998       
File        : a9529309

Award Number: 9529309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300059             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Goodwin dgoodwin@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry A. Atwater  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1775,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Goodwin  9529309    In the last five years, considerable effort has been devoted
              to diagnostic analysis of the plumes of matter produced when pulsed lasers are
              used to ablate a solid target.  this has been primarily motivated by a desire
              to better understand the basic physical and chemical processes important to
              pulsed laser deposition, a newly popular thin film growth technique which is
              finding ever-increasing application to growth of superconductor, insulator and
              semiconductor structures.    The objective from laser-induced plumes, rather
              than to study exclusively plume formation.  The approach taken is a combined
              experimental and theoretical effort.  Briefly, the aim is to determine the
              extent to which film stoichiometry and microstructure are determined by:     
              Evolution of the energy distributions (both translational and internal) of the
              gas phase species as the plume approaches a substrate for thin film growth. 
              The incident species' energy will affect the sticking probability, the
              dissociate probability and mode of dissociation and incorporation (i.e.,
              adsorption or implantation) of gas phase constituents into the films.   
              Evolution of species distributions as the plume moves from the target to the
              substrate, including formation of reactive intermediates in the gas phase,
              which then condense onto the solid surface.    Prominent aspects of the
              experimental work are laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) measurements of gas
              phase plume an intermediate species in their electronic ground states, in situ
              surface analysis by reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) and a
              complementary core level spectroscopy technique developed at Caltech,
              reflection electron energy loss spectroscopy (REELS).   Various forms of
              postgrowth film microstructural analysis will be used to analyze film
              stoichiometry, density, crystallinity, bonding state, and optical properties. 
              The theoretical work will involve several efforts, including molecular dynamics
              (MD) simulations of energetic plume-surface interact ions and
              Director-Simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC) simulations of gas-phase plume dynamics,
              including chemical kinetics and substrate interactions.  ***
