Title       : Japan STA Program: Purification of Inulin and Inulo- oligosaccharides through
               Enzyme Extraction and Nanofiltration of the Jerusalem artichoke
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1996     
File        : a9529215

Award Number: 9529215
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Takashi Nakamura   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              60        Life Sciences                           
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9529215  Nakamura    This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology
              Agency  of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Takashi  Nakamura at the
              National Foods Research Institute, Tsukuba,  Japan.  Dr. Nakamura will work
              with Dr. Mitsutoshi Nakajima  of the Process Engineering Laboratory on a
              research project  entitled "Purification of Inulin and Inulo-oligasaccharides 
              through Enzyme Extraction and Nanofiltration of the  Jerusalem Artichoke".   
              The proposed research will concentrate on membrane  technology and its
              application to the purification of fats  and sugars from agricultural and
              biological products.  For  sugars, the focus of the application of membrane
              technology  will be on the Jerusalem artichoke, a Hokkaido agricultural 
              product, and the extraction and purification of inulin and 
              inulo-oligosaccharides.  The use of the appropriate enzymes  in the hydrolysis
              of fats and oligasaccharides as well as  establishing a well supported model to
              accurately predict  the permeate flux are necessary in creating viable and
              cost-  effective membrane technologies for the food industry.  As  the use of
              fats and sugars are widespread in the food  industry, the research will
              investigate and determine the  degree to which membrane technologies can be
              used to achieve  cost-efficient industrial processing.    The proposed research
              is of considerable theoretical and  practical interest to the bio-engineering
              community and the  benefits to be obtained from collaborative research will be 
              valuable to both participants.  Furthermore, the research  will likely yield
              positive results for the United States and  Japan as well as the international
              scientific community as a  whole.  As such, the research satisfies the
              objectives of  the program in its emphasis on the exchange and transfer of 
              scientific knowledge through international collaboration.  ***
