Title       : SBIR Phase II: Portable Superconducting Verticle Gravity Gradiometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1996  
File        : a9529827

Award Number: 9529827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Warburton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GWR Instruments
	      10623 Roselle Street
	      San Diego, CA  921211506    /   -

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9529827  Warburton    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              continues development of a  highly sensitive and portable vertical gravity
              gradiometer. This is based on using two GWR  Superconducting Gravity Sensors
              (SGS) mounted with their sensitive axes co-linear and  configured in a
              differencing signal mode. The SGS uses a 1/2" diameter niobium sphere 
              levitated in a magnetic field produced by superconducting coils. The goal of
              this research is  to shock harden the instruments during transport and field
              measurements. The technical  approach uses a mechanical constraint and a clamp
              to immobilize the sphere. Investigation  includes: the engineering of small
              structures and specific materials to minimize mechanical  creep, fatigue and
              hysteresis; and propose replacing the Nb sphere with Nb compounds to  increase
              pinning forces of magnetic flux in the sphere's surface. Remote detection an
              characterization of underground targets is of great importance in
              environmental, geologic, mining, engineering, law enforcement, and strategic
              arms treaty applications. Using gravity gradients to determine underground
              density is a far superior technique than present day gravity techniques which
              are time consuming and expensive. The proposed gravity gradiometer will make
              measurements more rapidly, will not require a precise elevation survey for
              interpretation, and will provide sharper resolution of underground density
              features.    The portable gravity gradiometer would have many engineering,
              environmental and military applications. Examples include: monitoring fluid
              leakage from waste storage area or underground tanks into the soil; locating
              abandoned mine workings, natural voids, tunnels or underground bunkers:
              monitoring natural geologic hazards such as volcanoes; and reservoir monitoring
              of petroleum, gas, groundwater or geothermal.
