Title       : IAI Workshop: Landscape Fragmentation Effects on Faunal Biodiversity in the
               Americas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1998     
File        : a9529872

Award Number: 9529872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47425              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gay A. Bradshaw bradshaw@fsl.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William C. McComb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
              82        Economics                               
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9529872  Bradshaw  This workshop has been designed to address several key issues
              proposed by the IAI Biodiversity and Temperate Terrestrial Ecosystems focus
              areas.  The central goal is to understand fragmentation effects on biodiversity
              as driven by human land-use patterns and climate change interacting with
              natural landscape heterogeneity.  The workshop will discuss the following
              topics:  the effects of landscape alteration and fragmentation patterns on
              faunal biodiversity; underlying processes influencing landscape patterns and
              resultant faunal responses; interactions and trends in human land development
              and conservation; and the evaluation of common, effective adaptable metrics to
              capture change.  Comparisons will include effects of major land -use activities
              among various ecosystems leading to an IAI Start-Up Grants Phase II proposal. 
              The workshop seeks to identify common principles and methods of assessment as
              well as understanding the limits of their application to specific biomes. 
              Although the workshop will focus on terrestrial systems, the intent is to
              contribute insight across ecosystems, and it seeks to complement other
              time-space issues of connectivity faced by aquatic and marine scientists.  In
              the development of a conceptual common ground, the PIs seek to coordinate
              technical communication by collating extant GIS, remotely sensed imagery and
              tabular databases which are all necessary for effecting consistent comparisons
              between systems.  The multiple-scale approach to be used by this proposal
              facilitates linkages with climate change and economic-ecological models.    %%%
               This workshop has been designed to address several key issues proposed by the
              IAI Biodiversity and Temperate Terrestrial Ecosystems focus areas.  The central
              goal is to understand fragmentation effects on biodiversity as driven by human
              land-use patterns and climate change interacting with natural landscape
              heterogeneity.  The workshop will discuss the following topics:  the effects of
              landscape alteration and fra gmentation patterns on faunal biodiversity;
              underlying processes influencing landscape patterns and resultant faunal
              responses; interactions and trends in human land development and conservation;
              and the evaluation of common, effective adaptable metrics to capture change. 
              Comparisons will include effects of major land-use activities among various
              ecosystems leading to an IAI Start-Up Grants Phase II proposal.  Land
              conversions, deforestation, and landscape alteration are processes which
              increasingly concern scientists and resource managers in southern and northern
              hemispheres.  One of the chief issues relating to these land changes has been
              the loss of faunal habitat and the drop in biodiversity.  These declines have
              occurred because of both direct and causes of mortality.  Despite the current
              scientific discussion concerning measures and approaches to reducing the rate
              of decline of biodiversity, the transferability of present monitoring and
              conservation plans among biomes remains largely untested.  The Americas provide
              an opportunity to compare relationships between human-generated landscape
              patterns and faunal patterns among quite different systems.  Many nations in
              this region seek to accommodate pressures of human development while retaining
              indigenous flora and fauna.  The similarities and differences in geologic and
              climate history, biotic evolution and human land-use patterns found in the two
              continents provide the opportunity for a coordinated effort to understand the
              issues of land alteration and biodiversity variability.    This proposal
              involves the following countries:  Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil; Chile; Colombia;
              Ecuador, Mexico; Paraguay; and the United States.  These countries are Member
              States of the IAI, an initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global
              change issues in the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is the
              designated U.S. Government agency for carrying out U.S. responsibilities within
              the IAI.    ***
