Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: A Next-Generation High Performance Network of
               Commodity PCs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1996   
File        : a9529418

Award Number: 9529418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Rinard   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tao Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Oscar H. Ibarra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Klaus Schauser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                CDA 9529418  Ibarra, Oscar H.  Rinard, Martin C.  Schauser, Klaus E.  Yang,
              Tao     University of California, Santa Barbara    A Next-Generation
              High-Performance  Network of Commodity PCs    The proposed instrumentation
              consists of a collection of commodity  personal computers (PCs) connected by a
              commodity ATM network. This  computing platform supports four experimental
              research projects in the  area of high performance parallel and distributed
              systems. The first  project investigates efficient communication primitives for
              cost-effective commodity computing and networking platforms. The objective is
              to enable important parallel computations to execute efficiently in this
              computing environment. The second project investigates a new parallelizing
              compiler technique called commutativity analysis. The objective is to extend
              the range of parallelizing compilers to include computations that manipulate
              complex pointer-based data structures.  The third project investigates
              scheduling and run-time supporting techniques for irregular scientific
              computations. The objective is to understand how to map these computations
              efficiently onto a modern parallel computing environment consisting of
              commodity hardware components.  The final project investigates issues in
              developing a scalable WWW server for digital library applications.  The
              objective is to strengthen the server's processing capabilities to match huge
              expected increases in simultaneous access requests from the Internet. The main
              research activity in all of these projects is developing, testing and measuring
              software.  The instrumentation provides the hardware platform required to
              perform these activities.
