Title       : Collaborative Research: Biogeochemical and Hydrologic Controls on Solutes and
               Flowpaths in Alpine Watersheds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1997     
File        : a9529088

Award Number: 9529088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill S. Baron jill@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diana H. Wall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1584      ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,1167,1584,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research will elucidate geochemical and biogeochemical processes that are
              important  at the watershed scale in alpine basins.  It will examine these
              processes using a multidisciplinary  approach that combines stable and
              radiogenic isotopic tracers, plot level experiments, process-level  modeling,
              and field research to constrain the modeling results.  New isotopic tools will
              be used in  combination with field measurements of water quality and quantity
              to separate the relative  contributions of atmospheric and soil-derived sources
              of nitrate in streamwaters, increase our  understanding of the biogeochemical
              reactions controlling alkalinity, and provide insights into the  dynamics of
              sulfur deposition.  A key objective is the development of a robust model for
              solute  transport built on fundamental principles to predict the fate of a
              variety of chemical constituents at  many sites and under a variety of
              conditions.  The relevant geochemical, biogeochemical and hydrologic  processes
              are interconnected at the watershed scale and therefore must be studied
              together.  The  algorithms used for this ph ysically-based mathematical model
              provide an integrated approach to  modeling the hydrology and biogeochemistry
              of seasonally snow-covered alpine basins with model  development and field work
              inextricably linked.  This research will contribute to a better fundamental 
              understanding of the biogeochemical and geochemical processes, which can be
              used in responding to  anthropogenic perturbations. The multidisciplinary
              research team has cooperative support from the  National Biological Service,
              U.S. Geological Survey, the National Park Service, and the Long-Term 
              Ecological Research Program.  The two study areas are Niwot Ridge/Green Lakes
              Valley and Lock Vale  Watershed, which lie on the east slope of the Colorado
              Front Range.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
