Title       : SYMPOSIUM: Amphibian Metamorphosis: An Integrative Approach:American Society of
               Zoologists Meeting in Washington, D.C., January 1996
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1996   
File        : a9529567

Award Number: 9529567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Tyrone B. Hayes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc for Intgr and Comp Bio
	      1313 Dolley Madison Blvd
	      McLean, VA  221013926    703/790-1745

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9529567  Hayes      This symposium brings together experts in ecology,
              endocrinology, developmental biology, and molecular biology to address
              integrative studies on amphibian metamorphosis. Metamorphosis is one of the
              most remarkable biological processes described. During amphibian metamorphosis,
              one animal (the tadpole) virtually transforms into another (an adult frog). In
              addition to the obvious external changes, such as the resorption of the tail,
              the growth of limbs, and the beginning of terrestrial life, there are many
              other less obvious changes. Tadpoles are typically vegetarian whereas adults
              feed on insects or small animals, thus the structure of the gut and all of its
              enzymes change at metamorphosis; the immune system is destroyed and rebuilt to
              suit the frog; the gills resorb and are replaced by lungs; the structure of
              hemoglobin (the oxygen carrying molecule) changes; the structure and function
              of the eye transform from one that sees underwater to one better suited for
              seeing in air; the skin glands (which produce mucous, important antibiotics,
              and toxins) develop; the reproductive organs develop; etc. All of the changes
              in structures and functions are regulated by hormones. Although, thyroid
              hormone is the principal hormone stimulating these changes, other hormones such
              as prolactin and the stress hormone, corticosterone, modulate development. All
              of these hormones function by regulating genes, turning off the "tadpole genes"
              and turning on the "frog genes". In addition, these hormones are controlled by
              external factors such as temperature, food level, water quality, the presence
              of predators, and population density. Because of these complex interactions
              across levels of organization, environment-organism gene, metamorphosis is an
              excellent process for integrative studies. Amphibians can be used as a model to
              examine how environmental changes affect physiological processes as well as to
              examine gene regulation. Amphibian metamorphosis is a vital model for
              understanding development an d the role of genes in all vertebrates (including
              humans), because the developmental processes at metamorphosis can be observed
              directly (unlike embryonic development in other animals that typically occurs
              inside an egg or inside the mother). In addition, understanding changes in
              physiology and gene expression in response to environmental changes is vital in
              understanding how animals adapt to changes in environment. This understanding
              will result in better utilization of amphibians as indicators of environmental
              degradation, which is urgent given evidence for the recent global decline in
              amphibian populations.
