Title       : IAI Workshop: Integrated Study of Temperate Coast Estuaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9529399

Award Number: 9529399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerardo M. Perillo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Instituto Argentino
	      Cerrito 1248
	      1010 Buenos Aires,       /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0521800   Shelf & Esturine Ecosystem              
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9529399  Perillo  This proposal is for a series of three workshops which have
              the purpose of beginning preparations for an international system for the
              integrated study of estuaries within the IAI region, establishing the basis for
              a structured estuarine management system, and defining specific temperate coast
              estuaries where comprehensive, multidisciplinay investigations will be proposed
              for IAI Phase II.  The goals of the workshop are the following:  to integrate
              researchers with common estuary interests; to define the elements of an estuary
              management system; to establish common methodologies that can be used in all
              regions, emphasizing measurements that can be made by low budget research
              groups; to define the characteristics of representative estuary systems; and to
              form groups to develop an IAI Phase II proposal to initiate research in those
              systems.  The Phase II proposal will address setting up an international IAI
              estuary study system which will be composed of a pool of experts that can
              devote their attention to problems in any IAI country.  The Phase II will
              establish the basis of an estuary management system to be used in all countries
              and will select several temperate estuaries as representative systems and
              design the research that will be carried out on those systems.    %%%  This
              proposal is for a series of three workshops which have the purpose of beginning
              preparations for an international system for the integrated study of estuaries
              within the Americas, establishing the basis for a structured estuarine
              management system, and defining specific temperate coast estuaries where
              comprehensive, multidisciplinary investigations will be proposed for IAI Phase
              II.  The Phase II program will develop a comprehensive multidisciplinary
              investigation combining both long term monitoring and intensive sampling
              strategies on each of the selected estuaries by an international team.  This
              will allow for the testing of new instrumentation, new field methodologies and
              will also provide a training gro und for groups willing to develop projects for
              studying estuaries in their own country.  The ultimate goal of Phases I and II
              is to provide decision makers with the basic elements for them to evaluate and
              to make decisions and to take actions in order to prevent harmful effects of
              climate change on their respective country's estuaries, the population and
              biota associated with them, and the general economic welfare of the region. 
              This proposal brings together participants from Argentina, Brazil, Canada,
              Chile, Mexico, Peru, the United States, and Uruguay.  These countries are
              Member States of the IAI, an initiative to stimulate cooperative research on
              global change issues in the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is the
              designated U.S. Government to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI.  
               ***
