Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis and Numerical Methods in Stochastic Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1996      
File        : a9529738

Award Number: 9529738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66330              (Estimated)
Investigator: G. George Yin gyin@math.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9529738  Yin        This project in stochastic optimization consists of four
              parts: an examination   of the properties of singularly perturbed Markov
              chains; a development of global  stochastic optimization algorithms; a study of
              passive stochastic approximation  procedures; and the design of numerical
              methods for stochastic optimization in  manufacturing systems.  The first part
              is intended to derive asymptotic properties of  singularly perturbed
              nonstationary Markov chains and perturbed chains with weak and  strong
              interactions, and to obtain asymptotic optimality in related control problems. 
               The second part comprises the development of asymptotic properties of global 
              stochastic optimization algorithms.  By using weak convergence methods,
              convergence  and rates of convergence are to be established, and the
              convergence of suitably scaled  sequences to the solutions of appropriate
              stochastic differential equations is to be  ascertained.  In the third part, by
              combining stochastic approximation methods with  kernel estimators, passive
              stochastic approximation algorithms are to be obtained.   Here the goal is to
              establish convergence of the algorithms and to obtain error  estimates.  The
              fourth part encompasses numerical procedures for solving a class of  robust
              control problems of piecewise deterministic Markov chains, and the  development
              of stochastic gradient descent algorithms for approximating the optimal 
              threshold values under the WIP (work in progress) policies for multi-machine 
              manufacturing systems.  Convergence and asymptotic properties of the algorithms
              are  to be obtained.  The entire research project will include two components:
              analysis and  simulation. The main objectives are to enhance basic
              understanding of the asymptotic  properties of the underlying systems and to
              develop sound and feasible algorithms.        This proposal consists of four
              closely related topics. It is a bridge-building  attempt to link theory and
              application in stochastic optimization.  Emphasis is on the   development of
              efficient numerical methods via analysis and numerical  experimentation. The
              first topic deals with systems that are subject to rapid and  random
              variations. The results obtained are intended be useful for applications 
              involving hierarchical decision making, production planning, queuing networks
              in  communication, and system reliability. To meet the increasing demand for
              efficient   numerical procedures for global optimization, the second part of
              the project focuses  on the development of numerical algorithms when random
              errors in the data have to  be taken into account.  The results are applicable
              to an ever expanding range of  applications in estimation, identification and
              optimization problems.  The research  undertaken in the third part of this
              program derives from steady state estimation and  detection problems in
              chemical engineering (for a continuously stirred tank and for a  binary
              distillation column).  The emphasis is on the design and implementation of 
              numerical algorithms, which are expected to also have a variety of applications
              in  target recognition, tracking, system failure detection, signal processing
              and related  fields. The fourth part of the program is concerned with
              optimization methods for  unreliable manufacturing systems.  By emphasizing
              system stability rather than  optimality alone, numerical methods for a class
              of robust control problems of  production planning are to be developed.  Under
              nowadays popular Kanban policies,  which were originally promoted by the
              Japanese auto industry, a numerical procedure  that will provide a systematic
              way of finding the optimal number of Kanbans for  manufacturing systems is to
              be developed..  ***
