Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Low Dimensional Manifolds: Their Symmetries and
               Topological Invariants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1996      
File        : a9529310

Award Number: 9529310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronnie Lee rlee@math.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9529310  Lee       A famous problem in 3-dimensional topology is to list all
              finite  groups which are the fundamental group of some closed 3-manifold. 
              Since  all the known examples come from subgroups of the rotation group that 
              act freely on the 3-sphere, the manifolds involved have positive constant 
              curvature, and the problem is known as the spherical space-form problem. 
              Together with I. Hambleton, Ronnie Lee plans to solve this problem using 
              Donaldson's theory of instantons.  Closely related to the above and in 
              collaboration with S.Cappell and E.Miller, Ronnie Lee plans to study 
              generalizations of Casson's invariants and show that they belong to the 
              so-called "finite type invariants."  With Weiping Li, the principal 
              investigator plans to investigate two types of Floer homologies.  The first, 
              known as the instanton Floer homology, is obtained by applying Morse  theory to
              an infinite dimensional space of connections, and the second,  known as the
              symplectic Floer homology, is based on the Lagrangian  intersection theory of a
              representation variety.  They plan to show that  these are the same theory and
              hence establish a conjecture of Atiyah.  Finally, with Wilczynski, the
              principal investigator plans to study the  problem of finding locally flat
              surfaces of minimum genus representing a  given homology class of a simply
              connected 4-manifold.  In the smooth  setting, the corresponding problem is
              known as the Thom conjecture and  has been solved recently by P.Kronheimer and
              T.Mrowka to great acclaim.       In short, the project plans to study several
              well-known  problems in 3- and 4-dimensional manifold theory concerning the
              basic  symmetric nature of these objects and also the geometry of the 
              submanifolds inside them.  Many of the techniques to be used in solving these 
              problems are new and were not previously available.  They were  developed
              through the interaction between quantum physics and topology  in recent years. 
              On the mathematics side they are known under the  heading of Sympl ectic
              Invariants, while on the physics side they have  their counterpart in Quantum
              Field Theory.  ***
