Title       : Recurrent Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9529809

Award Number: 9529809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211435             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Hart   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Flynn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Current fractal tools lack the level of control necessary to  model specific
              natural structures.  For example, many fractal  models of trees have been
              constructed, but given a particular  tree, it would be difficult to represent
              the tree's specific  shape   using current models of fractal modeling.  The
              recurrent  modeling project identifies three aspects to this problem, and 
              attempts to solve each with several new fractal modeling tools.    Objective I:
               Recurrent Model Representation.  Recurrent  modeling strives to elevate
              fractal representation to the level  of sophistication that smooth surfaces
              enjoy in computer-aided  geometric design by translating their classical
              self-referential  representation into standard implicit and  parametric forms. 
              Recurrent modeling also attempts "procedural geometric  instancing," and
              enhancement of the classic object instancing  paradigm that enables it to more
              efficiently represent the  development fractal models currently specified by
              L-systems.    Objective II:  Interactive Recurrent Modeling.  Recurrent 
              modeling extends the tools of computer-aided geometric design to  fractal
              geometry.  A direct manipulation interface provides real  time feedback in the
              fractal modeling  process.  The implicit  formulation from the previous
              objective allows the application  of standard blending formulations
              specifically designed for  natural modeling.  Extending constructive solid
              geometry to  include fractal models supports the construction of complex 
              shapes from primitives.    Objective III:  Automatic Recurrent Modeling. 
              Recurrent  modeling attacks the inverse problem of fractal geometry:  "find 
              the parameters of a fractal model that approximates a given  shape" from the
              domain of model-based computer vision.  The  second PI is an NSF-supported
              model-based computer vision  researcher.  His unique perspective on this
              problem resulted in  a new solution, called "similarity hashing".  Similarity
              hashing  successfully detects self-similarity and returns the paramete rs  of
              the selfsimilar model in initial tests.  Recurrent modeling  continues  this
              research to develop an automated system for discovering  selfaffinity in
              natural structures.    The new tools recurrent modeling proposes would impact
              the  fields of computer graphics and forest science.  The new tools  would
              represent highly detailed geometrics, such as a forest and  crops. Such models
              would have applications in image synthesis,  particularly in animation, virtual
              environments, physically-  based modeling and remote sensing.    As the smooth
              representations of computer-aided geometric design  aid manufacturers, the
              efficient representations of detail  proposed by recurrent modeling
              representations would aid the  study of the environment.    ***
