Title       : Engineering Research Center for Innovation in Product Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a9529140

Award Number: 9529140
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lynn Preston                            
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2983057            (Estimated)
Investigator: Maurice F. Holmes mholmes@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven D. Eppinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren P. Seering  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              69        Life Sciences NEC                       
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9529140  SEERING       This award establishes a new Engineering Research Center,
              the  Center for Competitive Product Development at the Massachusetts  Institute
              of Technology.  The award initiates a potential 11-year  life span with a new
              five-year cooperative agreement, renewable in  the third and sixth years of the
              center's operation.       The vision of the Center is to develop methods,
              procedures,  and software tools to improve the product development process. 
              The  product development process is the critical industrial procedure  for
              bringing new and innovative products to market.  The challenge  is to improve
              methods to guide the complexity of product  development.  The process is
              performed by teams from an array of  organizational units, with participants
              having a diversity of  skills and perspectives.  From the perspective of the
              marketplace  and engineering, this vision is very important.  The success or 
              failure of products into the marketplace depends on the details of  how
              engineers translate their understanding of customer needs and  desires and
              business practices into product specifications.       To provide a systems
              perspective, the research on the product  development process is organized into
              three thrusts:  (1)  customer/engineering interface, (2) product family
              strategy, and  (3) organization of the product development process.  The
              research  output of the joint industry/engineering/business teams will take 
              the practical form of improved product development methods,  techniques, and
              tools.  These will be developed from research on  challenging problems faced by
              their industrial partners.       In education, the Center will create a new
              educational  experience for MIT undergraduate and graduate students, first-hand
               involvement in the product development.  In addition, the Center  intends to
              curricular material to improve the training of  engineering and management
              students for industry in order to  produce a new generation of engineers and
              managers, skilled  efficient and co mmercially successful product development
              and  design.  The ERC will help develop a major in product development  for the
              MBA degree offered by the Sloan School of Management.  In  addition, the Center
              will help develop a new professional  engineering degree in product
              development, which the Engineering  School will offer.  The ERC will
              collaborate with industrial  partners in offering courses for product
              development processes for  their on-site training programs.       In outreach,
              the Center will provide biennial conferences for  faculty in U.S. engineering
              and business schools interested in  product development.  The ERC also will
              introduce the principles  and excitement of competition to minority high school
              students  through the MIT Minority Introduction to Engineering and Science 
              Program.  Professor Woodie Flowers, a member of the ERC, will  create an
              alliance for the ERC with U.S.  First, a nonprofit  organization.         This
              ERC is an interdisciplinary partnership between the MIT's  School of
              Engineering and the Sloan School of Management.  Dr.  Warren Seering, a
              Professor of Mechanical Engineering will be the  Director of the Center.  Dr.
              John Hauser, a Professor of Marketing  in the Sloan School of Management, will
              serve as Associate  Director.  The research team is multidisciplinary, with
              strong  collaboration between faculty in MIT's engineering and business 
              schools.       The strong support of MIT for the Center is demonstrated by 
              active cooperation among deans and faculties of the engineering and  management
              schools.  Product development is a central core of MIT's  strategy for the
              continued improvement of engineering and business  education.  MIT will
              construct a new facility to house a state-of-  the-art prototyping facility for
              product development process  research.  ***
