Title       : For History and the Rise of Modern Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1996        
File        : a9529326

Award Number: 9529326
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn K. Nyhart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Modern biology arose from a number of sources including medicine, agriculture,
              animal husbandry, and `natural history.`  Historians of science have already
              examined how natural history affected the rise of modern biology in England,
              especially with respect to Charles Darwin and the theory of evolution.  But,
              just as the United States does not represent all of progressive science that is
              currently being undertaken in the world today, England certainly did not
              represent all of the major contributions to the rise of modern biology. 
              Indeed, one of the most significant traditions in the rise of modern biology
              came from German natural history of animals.  It is this subject that Dr.
              Nyhart is examining.    By analyzing the history, social organization, and
              intellectual contributions of institutions of natural history that lay largely
              outside the university realm, Dr. Nyhart seeks to provide the first integrated
              picture of activities surrounding natural history.  These activities extend
              across a spectrum from the popular end (fireworks at the zoo) all the way to
              the most esoteric scientific studies (the systematics and anatomy of sponges). 
              In doing so, she has two aims:  first to broaden our sense of the culture of
              German natural history and biology and second to identify the sources of the
              great upsurge in interest in animal geography and `biology.` This interest in
              the study of the living animal in relation to its conditions of existence
              became the basis for new research streams in animal behavior, ecology, and
              evolutionary studies.  Dr. Nyhart is using archival sources  in Berlin as well
              as all over the rest of Germany.  She is examining university papers,
              government archives, and materials in museums, zoos, aquariums, independent
              natural history societies and even private firms.  Her study promises to extend
              our understanding of the origins of several biological fields beyond the narrow
              Anglo-American focus that we currently  confront.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
