Title       : SBIR Phase II: High-Frequency Shearing Interferometer Emission Velocimeter
               (SIEVE) for High-Temperature Gas Diagnostics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1997    
File        : a9529856

Award Number: 9529856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282152             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Rostler OFFICE@SRL.COM  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Science Research Lab Inc
	      15 Ward Street
	      Somerville, MA  02143    617/547-1122

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0512202   Improved Resolution & Sen               
Program Ref : 0000,1407,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rostler  9529856     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              will develop a powerful optical diagnostic for high temperature gases that is
              fundamentally different from any technique currently in use. This diagnostic is
              spatially localized but completely nonperturbing. For hot luminous gases it
              utilizes the optical emission from the gas itself. For less luminous gases, the
              new method can also be used by monitoring refractive effects on laser beams
              passed through the flow. In either realization, the light emerging from the gas
              is separated into two components whose intensity difference is due only to
              fluctuations of selected scale size in a spatially localized region within the
              extended volume of the flow. For low-frequency (<10 MHz) phenomena, the method
              has already been demonstrated and is currently being developed under other
              programs. The purpose of this Phase II program is to extend the technique to
              much higher frequencies, which will allow study of smaller-scale phenomena and
              faster flows, as well as fast waves in plasmas. In Phase I a high-frequency
              detector head was designed and a new ultrahigh-frequency instrument was
              invented. Prototypes of both instruments will be fabricated and tested in Phase
              II.   A high-frequency localized optical velocimeter would be a valuable
              diagnostic for very hot gases such as are found in arcs, combustion furnaces
              and industrial plasma processing chambers. It would also be useful for detailed
              studies of small-scale phenomena in flowing gases, such as boundary layers and
              turbulent wakes in wind tunnels. In the future, it is envisioned that this new
              instrument could also be used in process control applications. Groups
              conducting research on gases and plasmas would be the initial customers for
              such an instrument.
