Title       : Collaborative Research: Late Quaternary Glaciations of Northern Novaya Zemlya,
               Russia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9529293

Award Number: 9529293
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Odile de la Beaujardiere                
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88222              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Forman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  The extent and timing of Pleistocene ice sheets over northern Eurasia remain
              unresolved.  The views range from full coverage of the Barents and Kara Seas by
              a marine-based ice sheet to land-based ice-cap systems on adjacent
              archipelagos.  The heart of the divergence on the nature of last glaciation in
              northern Eurasian is uncertainty on ice sheet thickness over Novaya Zemlya and
              extension into Siberia.  In collaboration with the Murmansk Institute of Marine
              Biology we propose to initiate basic glacial-geologic, stratigraphic and
              geochronologic studies to provide new field data to independently evaluate the
              limits and timing of Weichselian glacial  and deglacial events on Novaya
              Zemlya, Russia.  Field research will focus on three field areas on northern
              Novaya Zemlya, where ice-free forelands contain abundant raised marine and
              glacial features.  We plan to use the following approaches to decipher the
              record of Quaternary glaciations on Novaya Zemlya:  1) High resolution (10-m
              pixels) SPOT satellite imagery will be used to evaluate large scale sea-level,
              glacial erosional and depositional features (moraines) that may not readily be
              discernible in the field.  2)  Documentation of the timing and rate of the
              glacial-isostatic response by radiocarbon dating of subfossils included in
              raised beaches of known elevation.  3)  A study of the stratigraphy and
              sedimentology of superimposed Quaternary sediments in cliff sections. 
              Particular attention will be given to the recognition of glacial damicts and
              unconformities, and the collection of micro-and macro-fauna for
              paleoenvironmental assessment and chronologice control.  Provenance studies of
              clasts from glacial diamicts and fabric analysis should provide new information
              on glacial source area.  4)  Age control for the latest glacial/sea level
              events will be derived from conventional and AMS radiocarbon dating of included
              marine subfossil and driftage.  The number and timing of older events  will be
              constrained by amino acid epimerization analyses of  mollusks using
              L-isoleucine/D-alloisoleucine ratios and higher resolution D/L aspartic acid
              ratios.  Numeric age will be determined by luminescence geochronometry on the
              fine-grained fraction (4-11(m) from raised sublittoral sediments.  5) 
              Integration of field data with isostatic and glaciological modeling to provide
              insight into glacier thickness, position of ice divides, domes and streams and
              response to sea level rise.  Results from this study are important for
              evaluating if ice sheets on northern continental shelves responded
              synchronously, if the Barents, Kara and Norwegian Seas deglaciated prior to 14
              ka ago, and the effect of Eurasian ice sheets on North Atlantic thermohaline
              circulation.  This field-based research will provide new data on Weichselian
              glacier geometry in the Russian Arctic, where little currently exists, which is
              a critical boundary condition for evolving global climate models.
