Title       : IAI Workshop: Development of an IAI Research Center on Red Tides and Harmful
               Algal Blooms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9529691

Award Number: 9529691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39297              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. Anderson danderson@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0511303   Toxicology                              
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9529691  Anderson  The proposed workshop will bring scientists from nine IAI
              countries together to establish a cooperative research program.  An IAI
              Research Center for the study of Harmful Algae Blooms (HAB) will be formed,
              consisting of a group of investigators and institutions from the region.  The
              participants will work on common problems using uniform techniques and
              approaches.  The overall goal of the program will be to examine the trends of
              HAB incidence, mechanisms underlying their formation, and possible linkages to
              human activities and global change phenomena.  The ultimate objective is to
              develop common strategies to reverse the trend, manage affected resources and
              mitigate impacts.  Workshop participants will develop four to five projects for
              the proposed Research Center, to be submitted to IAI for Phase II of the IAI
              Start-Up Grants.  The scientific areas which will likely be addressed within
              the context of an IAI HAB Research Center are the following:  oceanographic and
              environmental mechanisms underlying HABs; the relative importance of natural
              versus anthropogenic factors in HAB dynamics and distribution; HAB events
              associated with river outflows into coastal water; cooperative research into
              toxic dinoflagellate physiology and bloom dynamics; and assessing the extent to
              which harmful species have dispersed, either naturally or with accidental human
              assistance.  In addition, the Phase II proposal for an HAB Center could also be
              used as a information network linking scientists, administrators, agencies
              involved in HAB issues.  The HAB Center may also be used for educational
              activities which target both the scientific community and the general public. 
              %%%  The proposed workshop will bring scientists from nine IAI countries
              together to establish a cooperative research program for the study of Harmful
              Algae Blooms (HAB), consisting of a group of investigators and institutions
              from the region.  The participants of this Research Center will work on common
              problems using uniform techniq ues and approaches.  The overall goal of the
              program will be to examine the trends of HAB incidence, mechanisms underlying
              their formation, and possible linkages to human activities and global change
              phenomena.  The ultimate objective is to develop common strategies to reverse
              the trend, manage affected resources and mitigate impacts.  The workshop
              participants will develop four to five projects for the proposed Research
              Center to be submitted for Phase II of the IAI Start-Up Grants.  The nature of
              the HAB problem has changed considerably over the last two decades in the
              Americas.  In recent years, there has been a steady and alarming increase in
              marine HAB incidence that poses a serious threat to human health and economic
              development throughout the Americas, and there is therefore an urgent need to
              better understand this increase in marine HAB incidence.  Two decades ago, only
              a few countries were affected, and then only in scattered locations. Now
              virtually every coastal country is threatened, in many cases over large
              geographic areas and by multiple harmful or toxic algal species.  All coastal
              IAI member states have serious HAB problems, including Argentina, Brazil,
              Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Mexico, Peru, the United States, and Uruguay.  Each
              of these countries will participate in the workshop as Member States of the
              IAI, an initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues in
              the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is the designated U.S.
              Government to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI.  ***
