Title       : International Conference on Forensic Statistics, June 30 to July 3, 1996 at the
               University of Edinburgh, Scotland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9529348

Award Number: 9529348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Fienberg fienberg@stat.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Kaye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph L. Gastwirth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              :    The International Conference on Forensic Statistics, scheduled  for the
              University of Edinburgh June 30-July 3, 1996, is the  third in a series of
              tri-annual conferences intended to provide a  forum for the interaction of
              researchers in the areas of law,  forensic science, social sciences, and
              statistics.  Among the  goals of this conference are (a) the fostering of
              interaction  among research specialists in different disciplines, (b) advances 
              in topics of current interest to the courts, and (c) the  development of a firm
              scientific basis for the use of statistical  evidence in the courts.   
              Presentations scheduled include reports on the ethics of expert  testimony, DNA
              fingerprinting and its forensic uses, inferring  causality, statistical
              evidence of environmental harm, the use of  econometric models in anti-trust
              litigation, and the judicial  reception of meta-analysis for combining
              statistical information  across scientific studies, especially those involving 
               the harmful effects of exposure to drugs and environmental  hazards.    This
              travel grant supports the participation in the Conference by  several leading
              American statisticians, forensic scientists, and  social scientists as well as
              several promising young scientists  who are currently beginning to pursue
              research in this  interdisciplinary field and have sought the opportunity to 
              present their work in an international context.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 Over the past four decades
              statistics and statistical methods  have played increasingly important roles in
              the evaluation of  forensic evidence and in the presentation  of scientific
              evidence  more broadly in the courts.  American scientist have played a 
              prominent role in this development and have led initiatives  intended to
              improve the quality of statistics as  evidence as well  as to improve the
              interaction between statisticians and other  scientists as they prepare
              materials for use in a legal context.   While expert testimony in the American
              legal system has unique  features, important aspects of the science associated
              with the  expert testimony transcend national boundaries. The Third 
              International Conference on Forensic Statistics, to be held on  June 3 to July
              3 1996, is a unique forum for the interaction of  researchers in the areas of
              law, forensic science, social  sciences, and statistics and this travel grant  
              supports the participation of several leading American  researchers from these
              different fields of interest.  Among the  topics of current federal strategic
              interest featured in the  conference presentations are biotechnology and its
              role in the  manufacture of drugs as well as the evaluation of forensic  
              evidence, and the assessment of harmful effects as a result of  environmental
              exposure.
