Title       : IAI Workshop: Biogeochemical Consequences of Land Use Change in the Amazon Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9529836

Award Number: 9529836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Steudler steudler@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry M. Melillo  (Principal Investigator former)
              Christopher Neill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              65        Agricultural                            
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9529836  Melillo  The first major research issue which will be addressed by
              these workshops is the quantification of the areal extent of agricultural land
              in the southwestern Amazon Basin, past and present, and the patterns of
              agricultural use on large and small farms.  The focus will be on what area the
              dominant agricultural land-uses occupy (pasture, row crops and small farm slash
              and burn) in the southwestern states of the Amazon Basin, how these areas vary
              on large and small farms, and how these areas have changed over the past thirty
              years.  The second major issue is the quantification of the biogeochemical
              consequences of the dominant land uses in the southwestern Amazon Basin.  The
              focus will be on how various agricultural land uses affect the cycling of
              carbon and nutrients in the southwestern Amazon Basin, and what are the
              consequences of these effects of soil fertility and the sustainability of
              agriculture, and for regional and global biogeochemistry.  To address the above
              mentioned issues and questions, the PIs have established two tasks; Task 1 is a
              workshop; and Task 2 is a field trip and a workshop.  Task 1 will involve a
              total of thirteen scientists for the workshop from the Brazilian and US
              scientific communities, and will emphasize inviting scientists from the Amazon
              Basin region.  These scientists are also the participating scientists for Task
              2.  Task 2 will focus on the effects of the dominant land cover and land use
              conversion on biogeochemical cycles.  The workshop structure is designed to
              enable individual subgroups to identify and outline proposals to be submitted
              as an IAI Phase II proposal.    %%%  The two workshops in this proposal will
              facilitate the preparation of proposals for Phase II of the IAI Start-Up Grants
              program.  The objective of the Phase II proposal is that biogeochemical
              modification of cleared tropical forest lands and their consequences that
              control soil fertility and the sustainability of cropping or pasture systems. 
              Because these areas affected are  large, changes to nutrient and organic matter
              cycles also have the potential to influence regional and global element cycles.
                 This proposal will be jointly administered by scientists from the Ecosystems
              Center of the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) in Woods Hole, Massachusetts
              and the Centro de Energia na Agricultura (CENA) of the University of S o Paulo
              in Piracicaba, Brazil.  This collaboration combines the strengths of two very
              active institutions for research on the biogeochemistry of global change in the
              United States and in Brazil.  MBL and CENA currently jointly conduct research
              that examines the effects of forest clearing for pasture on carbon and nitrogen
              cycling in the State of Rond nia in the southwestern Brazilian Amazon, and have
              collaborated in the sponsorship of several workshops in Brazil.  The MBL-CENA
              collaboration was formalized in 1992 with the adoption of a formal research
              agreement between the MBL and the University of S o Paulo.    In addition, this
              project will make significant progress toward involving the scientific
              community inside the Amazon Basin in studying patterns of land use change and
              their consequences for biogeochemistry at the international level.  This goal
              is important to the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI)
              science agenda, and both the United States and Brazil are Member States of the
              IAI, a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change
              issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas.  The National Science
              Foundation is the U.S. Government agency designated to carry out U.S.
              responsibilities within the IAI.
