Title       : IAI Workshop: Biological Invaders - Their Increasing Role as Disrupters of Earth
               System Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9529787

Award Number: 9529787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49912              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary T. Arroyo condor abello.dic.uchile.cl             phone number:  56 (2) 271-9171  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Chile
	      
	      Santiago, CI  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9529787  Kalin Arroyo  Invading organisms often cause enormous economic and
              environmental impact,   resulting in the disruption of many earth systems
              processes.  Invaders   represent a major but poorly understood global change
              element.  This   proposal would start a process with the following foci:  the
              development of   a new protocol to quantify the changing presence of invaders
              in carefully   matched managed and natural ecosystems in the western Americas,
              extending   from the subarctic to the true deserts; the development of new
              approaches   for assessing the impacts of the invaders in both environmental
              and   holistic economic terms; and the preparation of a Phase II proposal for
              the   establishment of a research network in the Americas to apply the new
              tools   developed and to promote the development of new research expertise. 
              For some biota, there is relatively good information on the numbers of  
              species of invaders in given regions, and to a certain extent, how these  
              numbers are changing through time.  To a larger degree though, there is not  
              much information on the abundance of invaders, their population dynamics,   or
              their particular and total environmental impacts.   There is virtually   no
              fine structure of information on the changing abundance of invaders   through
              time or how many invaders remain at low levels of abundance, for   how long,
              and when they may suddenly increase in abundance as climate, land   use, or
              management practices change.  This proposal will try to fill these  
              information gaps through a planning meeting in Phase I to develop a Phase   II
              proposal for the study and analysis of, and predictions about the   biological
              invaders.  Specifically, Phase I will develop a research plan which addresses
              the   following areas:  assessing the current knowledge and information gaps on
                the distribution of invasive species; assessing the available information  
              for invasive species patterns affecting international trade, quarantine  
              control, and commercialization of flo ra and fauna; developing criteria and  
              methodologies for rapid field assessments of invasion patterns of exotic  
              species in different ecosystems and under different types of management;  
              developing criteria for selection of field sites so as to represent   different
              land-use patterns and the main natural vegetation types;   developing criteria
              to determine relevant experimental work for determining   predictions about the
              long-term impacts on difficult invasive species;   developing methods to assess
              impacts of species on ecosystem functions;   assessing the sort-term and
              long-term manpower and institutional   requirements in the participating
              institutions to undertake the project   successfully; initiating discussion on
              how to value the impacts of invasive   species in both economic and
              environmental contexts; and establishing   mechanisms for evaluation of the
              progress of the project, data sharing,   communications, publication of
              results, and making results available to   managers and government agencies. 
              %%%  Invading organisms often cause enormous economic and environmental impact,
                resulting in the disruption of many earth systems processes.  Invaders  
              represent a major but poorly understood global change element.  This   proposal
              would start a process with the following foci:  the development of   a new
              protocol to quantify the changing presence of invaders in carefully   matched
              managed and natural ecosystems in the western Americas, extending   from the
              subarctic to the true deserts; the development of new approaches   for
              assessing the impacts of the invaders in both environmental and   holistic
              economic terms; and the preparation of a Phase II proposal for the  
              establishment of a research network in the Americas to apply the new tools  
              developed and to promote the development of new research expertise.  One of the
              largest, but perhaps least recognized elements of global change   is the
              increasing homogenization of the world's biota.  We are witnessing a   massive
              exchange of b iological material between previously isolated   continents and
              regions.  Although many of these exchanges are purposeful   and beneficial to
              human endeavors, they may do tremendous harm to the   productive capacity of
              natural and managed ecosystems.  Furthermore, they   can alter fire and
              nutrient regimes, water quality and quantity, sediment   movement, forest
              regeneration, as well as disrupt genetic systems and   fragment or homogenized
              biotic communities and habitats.  One reason   introductions can be so
              detrimental is that their population densities can   be far higher in new areas
              than in their native habitats, because they are   often removed from their
              natural controls in their new homes.  Because of   the potential ecological and
              economic consequences of invaders, both good   and bad, there is a great need
              for knowledge on the biology, origins,   movement and fates of invaders in
              order to develop predictive tools for   evaluating their potential success and
              impacts in any given region.  This proposal will address the information on the
              characteristics, impacts   and controls of invading species which have
              relevance for local national   and international policy-makers.  Therefore,
              this proposal includes   participants from the following countries:  Argentina,
              Chile, Mexico, and   the United States.  These countries are Members States of
              the   Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI), a U.S.  
              initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among  
              the scientific institutions of the Americas.  The U.S. National Science  
              Foundation is the U.S. Government agency designated to carry out U.S.  
              responsibilities within the IAI.  ***       
              --========================_13392216==_--
