Title       : Resolution of Site Response Issues from the Northridge Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1996       
File        : a9529159

Award Number: 9529159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keiiti Aki aki@coda.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,9196,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9529159  Aki  This project brings together a strongly coordinated group of 
              geologists, geotechnical engineers and seismologists from a  number of
              organizations to address geotechnical site  characterization and ground motion
              response issues resulting from  the Northridge earthquake.  The proposed work
              is heavily  leveraged by cost-sharing from the California Department of 
              Transportation, with additional cost-sharing from the Electric  Power Research
              Institute, the Southern California Earthquake  Center, and the U.S. Geological
              Survey, and with cooperation from  the California Department of Mines and
              Geology.    The objectives of the project are:  1) collection, compilation, and
              rapid dissemination of high-  quality site geotechnical and geophysical data to
              the research  community; and  2) focused analyses limited to the following:  *
              determining the extent to which local site and regional wave  propagation
              effects control strong ground motion, including  nonlinear site response;  *
              evaluating the adequacy of the conventional approach to  estimating site
              effects using: measured shear-wave velocities,  the results of laboratory
              tests, and one-dimensional equivalent-  linear and nonlinear analyses;  *
              assessing the degree of model complexity (2- and 3-D analyses)  required to
              adequately explain site effects; and  * determining the uncertainties in
              measured properties and how  these uncertainties affect ground motion
              predictions.    The research objectives are addressed in three phases by the 
              integrated group of geologists, seismologists and geotechnical  engineers. 
              Extensive coordination between institutions is  facilitated through a formal
              advisory structure.  In Phase 1, a series of geotechnical investigations are
              conducted  at significant sites of strong motion recordings and/or  structural
              failures.  In Phase 2, data collected in Phase 1 is evaluated and combined 
              with results of other data collection efforts to establish a  comprehensive
              database for modeling ground motion.  The aim is to   establish standard 1-D
              geotechnical models that include material  strain dependencies, as well as 2-
              and 3-D structural models.  A  workshop will facilitate coordination between
              investigators and  dissemination of data.  Phase 3 involves site response
              analyses of the data collected in  Phase 2, with comparisons made of ground
              motion response  calculations to Northridge earthquake observations.    The
              final report will document site investigations and site  response issues as
              well as all of the ground motion analyses  conducted.  ***
