Title       : Coupling of Micro- and Meso-Scale Processes During Early Stage Plasmaspheric
               Refilling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9529623

Award Number: 9529623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138390             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nagendra Singh singh@eb.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This study addresses the problem of ion-beam driven waves and their  effects
              on the accumulation of ionospheric plasma in the outer  plasmasphere.  This
              addresses a major problem in magnetospheric  physics, that is, the refilling of
              the plasmasphere following  geomagnetic storms.  The primary goal of the
              project is to firmly  establish the methodology of the following basic paradigm
              and  modeling approach assumes that as soon as the plasma flow  parameters
              cross marginal stability conditions for the waves, the  instabilities are
              triggered and clamp the flow near the conditions  for marginal stability. 
              Thus, from the waves and instability  standpoint, the quasisteady state of the
              plasma is known a priori.   When the macroscopic processes drive the plasma
              away form this  state toward instability, we know the excess momentum and the 
              directed kinetic energy which need to be thermalized by the  instability
              process.  This facilitates an easy calculation of the  anomalous plasma
              transport coefficients to be included in a  mesoscale model based on plasma
              transport equations without knowing  the details of the instabilityprocess. 
              This approach is termed the  Anomalous Plasma Effects or APE model.  The
              research strategy  consists of 1) systematic determination of easy-to-use 
              semiempirical relations for the marginal stability conditions for  the plasma
              during the refilling situation, 2) small-scale particle-  in-cell simulations
              to characterize plasma heating by the  instabilities and to test the APE model,
              and 3) mesoscale modeling  using two-stream hydrodynamic code including the
              anomalous  transport coefficients.
