Title       : SBIR Phase II: Range and Image Acquisition Using Active Control of CCD Plane
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a9529961

Award Number: 9529961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417199             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Hart jmh@vision.ai.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vision Technology Inc
	      1808 Forxborough Ct
	      Champaign, IL  61821    217/244-4174

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9529961  Hart     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              will develop a new imaging technology called nonfrontal imaging. The core of
              this new approach is active control of imaging geometry to eliminate the
              mechanical adjustment of sensor plane location usually required for focusing,
              and exploit imaging geometry and optics to achieve focusing from camera's
              panning motion alone. This not only results in high imaging speeds but also in
              seamless panoramic images. A nonfrontal imaging camera can obtain a panoramic
              focused image of all objects in an arbitrarily large scene regardless of their
              locations, which is in registration with a range map acquired in parallel.
              Development of algorithms and the building of a working prototype are proposed
              which will have the following capabilities: panoramic focused image
              acquisition, panoramic range image acquisition, and omni-focused 3D stereo
              display. All these capabilities will be achieved at multiple resolutions and
              for up to 360-degree views of the scene. Sensor surface orientation will be
              controlled in a dynamic, data-driven mode. The prototype will be tested
              primarily in applications involving photography and surveillance, and to a
              lesser extent surgery and manufacturing. The system development will be done in
              consultation with industry. It is expected that the resulting technology will
              introduce hitherto unavailable capabilities as well as lead to significant
              strides in existing capabilities. A US patent on the camera has been awarded,
              and foreign patents have been filed.   Potential commercial applications are:
              Wide-scene studio photography; Outdoor nature photography; Endoscopic and
              neurosurgery; Television broadcasting; Geometric modeling for computer aided
              manufacturing; Surveillance of homes, stores and compounds; Virtual reality
              using omni-focused 3D display; Advertising; Visual art; Monitoring and control
              of hazardous environments; Visualization; Interactive video games.
