Title       : SBIR Phase II: Design and Development for a Decision Support System for
               Emergency Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9529706

Award Number: 9529706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299806             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Sorensen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Isera Group Inc
	      5370 Hollister Avenue Suite 5
	      Santa Barbara, CA  931112399    805/967-3820

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***  9529706  Sorensen       This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project from ISERA Group, Inc. involves the research and development of a
              prototype decision support system (DSS) for fire protection and emergency
              medical services (EMS).  Currently, most fire and EMS agencies resort to manual
              planning techniques in the development of deployment strategies, leading to the
              probability of inefficient resource deployment.  To address this situation, the
              DSS will support optimization routines for the design of efficient deployment
              strategies, including station/vehicle location models, crew scheduling models,
              and dynamic vehicle move-up models.  In addition, the DSS will provide a
              simulation model to allow for the evaluation of altemative deployment
              strategies prior to actual implementation.  To insure the accuracy of the
              optimization and simulation routines, the DSS will include a sophisticated
              point-to-point travel time estimation model that incorporates a variety of
              geographic, temporal, and response-specific factors.  Each of the models will
              be based on the specific planning needs encountered at various fire and EMS
              agencies visited during the Phase I research study.  The models will be
              constructed in a generalized format and equipped with a variety of customizable
              elements in order that they may be tailored to the individual needs of
              different agencies.  The DSS will also include data communication protocols for
              transferring planning-related data from existing sources, including
              computer-aided dispatching (CAD) systems and geographical information systems
              (GIS), along with a sophisticated, intuitive graphical user interface.  Use of
              the DSS will result in efficient resource deployment strategies, leading to
              significant cost savings and/or improved levels of service.       The principal
              commercial application of this research will be an Emergency Services DSS for
              use in medium- and large-sized fire departments and EMS agencies/companies
              facing planning problems of significant scope and  complexity.  Within the
              United States alone there are more than 4,600 fire departments and more than
              1,800 EMS agencies serving populations in excess of 25,000.  ***
