Title       : Norms and Practices Relating to Fact-Checking in the Reporting of Science News:
               An Exploratory Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1997 
File        : a9529299

Award Number: 9529299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah L. Illman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This professional development fellowship supports training and research
              activities on ethics and current practices of fact checking in the reporting of
              science news.  While accepted in some publication domains, fact-checking or the
              sharing of written text with news sources for their review for inaccuracies is
              a controversial practice.  Critics charge it compromises journalistic
              independence, while proponents believe the practice would improve accuracy and
              quality and build trust and respect between scientists and journalists.  The
              fellow is a chemist with experience writing science news articles, whose
              faculty appointment is in technical communication.  The project mentors are
              professors of journalism and mass communications with specialties in the
              sociology of risk communication and ethics.  With the assistance of her mentors
              over the course of this award, the fellow will develop and participate in
              seminars and tutorials to 1) lay the fundamental groundwork for understanding
              the ethical issues and the dynamics of power and control in the interactions
              between scientists and journalists over fact-checking, 2) trace the historical
              origins of ethical guidelines and attitudes relating to the practice of
              fact-checking, 3) survey reporters in the field in order to understand better
              the current practices and attitudes toward fact-checking, and 4) explore
              casuistry or the use of cases, as a framework for analyzing journalists'
              decision-making processes relating to fact-checking.  In addition to assisting
              in research in areas of interest to the mentors and publishing results in the
              literature, the fellow will enhance her capabilities to carry out further
              scholarly work in the realm of science communications.  The team will also
              develop a workshop based on project outcomes for scientists and journalists.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
