Title       : Workshop on Interdisciplinary Research and Training Program in Ethics for
               Business, Science, and Engineering in the Puerto Rican Context, April 24-26,
               1996 in Mayaquez
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1996      
File        : a9529280

Award Number: 9529280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10590              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge I. Velez-Arocho jvelez@exodo.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elena Lugo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hector J. Huyke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Frey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This  award is for a planning workshop that will address important issues in
              integrating ethics and value studies more fully into the business, science, and
              engineering curriculum at the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez.  Special
              attention will be given to the cross-cultural variables affecting professional
              ethics.  Much has already been done to promote integration of ethical studies
              there, but specific areas still demand more attention.  Offering courses in
              ethics is not enough; ethics classes added on to the existing curriculum give
              the impression that ethics is merely an afterthought.  Rather ways must be
              found to integrate ethics into the business, science, and engineering
              curriculum.  This involves a different set of challenges that this award will
              address.  For example, it involves not only ethicists teaching ethics to
              science and engineers, but more importantly involves also  science and
              engineering faculty incorporating ethical case studies into their courses.  It
              also involves consideration of the wider institutional and political culture as
              well as the differences in cultures within diverse Hispanic populations. The
              planning workshop will last three days and will involve the participation of 
              science and engineering faculty from the University of Puerto Rico and as well
              as prominent ethicists. Topics covered in the workshop will be preparing
              faculty to teach ethics across the curriculum; case selection and cultural
              implications of teaching ethics; and ethics and research.  Areas of emphasis in
              this planning workshop will be: discussing the feasibility of selecting cases
              of relevance to other Hispanic groups than just Puerto Ricans; generating
              measurable outcomes and instruments of evaluation; and involving science and
              engineering faculty up front in the curriculum design issues, along with
              applied ethicists and others from the university community.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
