Title       : A Workshop and Symposium to be held in Boston, March 1-3, 1996
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1996       
File        : a9529112

Award Number: 9529112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tian Yu Cao tycao@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Our present conception of nature, concerning the ultimate constituents of the
              physical world and the laws and principles that govern them, is largely shaped
              by quantum field theory (QFT).  Hence, many philosophers of science see QFT as
              the locus of research when they try to use current physical theory as a guide
              to resolving questions such as "is the world ultimately continuous, or
              discrete, or dual in nature?" "what is individuality?" and "what is the
              relation between matter and force?"    Novel features of QFT have been
              developed since the 1950's.  These features include the non-linearity of
              non-Abelian gauge theories and its consequences (asymptotic freedom and
              topological solutions).  These new features also bring new philosophical
              implications  on such issues as the nature of a vacuum, a particle, and the
              global features generated by QFT, a local theory.   QFT also raises questions
              concerning the causal connections between different levels of the physical
              world as is embodied in the idea and technique of renormalization group and
              symmetry-breaking.  The issues raised by these new features of QFT need very
              much to be incorporated into philosophy of science.    In order to bring
              philosophers and historians of physics up to date on QFT and to set a new
              agenda for future research, Dr. Cao has organized a symposium that aims to
              analyze various formulations and understandings of the foundations of QFT. 
              Following the symposium, Dr. Cao has organized a workshop to investigate the
              historical and philosophical issues associated with these formulations.  
              Participating in this combined symposium and workshop is a stellar group of
              mathematicians, physicists, philosophers and historians of science.  These
              include two Nobel Laureates, Sheldon Glashow and Steven Weinberg as well as
              such leaders in their respective fields as S. Coleman, R. Jackiw, D. Gross, A
              Wightman, A. Jaffe, M. Redhead, J. Cushing, and L. Brown.  This workshop and
              symposium promise to promote a mutually beneficial dialog among the sci
              entists, mathematicians, historians and philosophers interested in foundation
              issues in science.
