Title       : Clusters of Galaxies: Insights into Large-Scale Structure Formation and Galaxy
               Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1996  
File        : a9529259

Award Number: 9529259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann I. Zabludoff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1207,1217,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zabludoff - Abstract      Two  of  the  fundamental questions in astronomy 
              today  are  how  structures  form in the galaxy distribution and  to  what 
              extent  environment affects galaxy evolution.  Surprising results from an 
              on-going survey of five nearby galaxy clusters (Zabludoff et  al.  1995)
              underscore the power of observing clusters of galaxies  for  data  to 
              understand these issues.  The research will consist  of  observations  of 
              three  unique,  carefully  chosen  samples   of  clusters of galaxies and
              smaller groups of galaxies.  The results  from  the  observations will be used
              to, 1)  to  place  stringent  constraints  on  how  clusters  of  galaxies 
              form  and  on   the  cosmological  mean  mass  density parameter  Omega  zero, 
              2)  to  isolate  the  contribution of the cluster environment  to  galaxy 
              evolution, 3) to determine whether "E+A" galaxies, those  strange  objects with
              strong Balmer absorption lines but no line emission,  are  a  link  in  the
              chain that connects blue  spirals  to  "SO"  galaxies,  and  4)  to uncover the
              shape of the faint-end  galaxy  luminosity  function in clusters.  Additional 
              results  from  the  reduction  and interpretation of the data will include  a 
              better  understanding of the causes of the Butcher-Oemler effect  and  of  the 
              evolution of the intracluster medium.   The results  of  the  observations  of
              the three samples will be used  to  unravel  the  detailed  evolutionary
              history of clusters  and  their  galaxies.  The   results  will  provide 
              invaluable  baselines  for   future  research,  when  compared  with similarly 
              extensive  surveys  of  higher redshift systems underway with the new
              generation of large  ground-based telescopes and NASA satellites .    The 
              results from the projects will not only yield answers to the  important 
              questions discussed above, but will also be the  first  and  necessary step in
              the planning of the most extensive  survey  of  nearby  clusters and their
              galaxies ever conceived.   Warrick  Couch   (Ang lo-Australian  Observatory 
              and  Australia   National  University),   Ian  Smail  (Carnegie 
              Observatories),   and   Ann  Zabludoff (Carnegie Observatories) are planning to
              use the Anglo-  Australian  Telescope's (AAT) 2DF multi-fiber spectrograph, 
              with  its   400   fibers,   to   observe  10,000-20,000   galaxies   in 
              approximately  50 rich clusters in a well defined, volume-limited  sample.  The
              completion of the 2DF project in the next five years  is  timed to match the
              completion of other major redshift surveys  of  galaxies  (Las Campanas, Sloan
              Digital Sky  Survey,  and  AAT  redshift  surveys).   To  understand how all 
              types  of  galaxies  evolve, large statistical surveys like these, which sample
              comple  mentary  environments, are needed.  The 2DF cluster  survey  will 
              sample  the  far tail of the distribution of dense  environments,  regions 
              which  are strongly dependent on the conditions  in  the  early  universe  and 
              are  thus powerful  tests  of  cosmological  models.   The  timing of the 2DF
              project will also coincide  with  promising  new  N-body/hydrodynamic 
              simulations  of  large-scale  structure  formation (Evrard, Steinmetz, Lake,
              and others),  with  enough  dynamic range to include tens of clusters  per 
              universe,  while  maintaining sufficient resolution to monitor the evolution 
              of  individual galaxies.  For the first time, it will be possible  to  compare 
              the  details of cluster dynamics and cluster  galaxy  evolution   directly  
              with   the  predictions   of   theoretical  cosmological models.  ***
