Title       : Ceramic and Metal-Composite Membranes: Synthesis, Characterization and Reaction
               Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1999     
File        : a9529172

Award Number: 9529172
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246624             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arvind Varma avarma@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Varma - 9529172    The eventual successful industrial application of
              inorganic membranes for simultaneous reaction and separation in membrane
              reactors depends on the ability to produce membranes of desired structural,
              catalytic and permeation properties.  In many cases of practical interest, the
              optimal distribution of catalyst is a multiple-step function within the pellet
              and in the membrane.  In catalytic membranes, precise distribution of the
              active element can be obtained using sequential slip-casting of active and
              inert sols.  In these membranes, permeation studies indicate Knudsen flow with
              high fluxes.  Synthesis procedures have been developed to prepare permselective
              metal composite membranes and microporous membranes with controlled active
              catalyst distributions.  It has been demonstrated that for the same amount of
              catalyst and active surface area, nonuniform pellets have a higher overall
              conversion than uniform pellets.    The PI plans to study metal composite and
              microporous ceramic membranes.  For the case of metal composite membranes, he
              will determine the mechanism of film growth during electroless plating and
              osmosis, derive the deposition kinetics and develop a mathematical model based
              on the experimental findings.  The synthesis chemistry and kinetics will be
              correlated with the film microstructure (using computer simulation) and
              membrane performance.  On the basis of these results, the synthesis parameters
              will be optimized to yield membranes of desired properties.  In the case of
              microporous membranes, the role of synthesis parameters (sol-gel and
              slip-casting characteristics) on the structure, permeation and catalytic
              properties of membrane materials will be determined to provide an understanding
              of the synthesis process.  Further, methods will be developed to obtain and
              maintain high catalyst surface area per unit reactor volume.  Finally, the
              stability of these membranes under the severe chemical and thermal conditions
              encountered in practice will also be examin ed.  The performance of these
              membranes for reaction and separation, and that of a novel thin film composite
              catalytic membrane, will be evaluated using dehydrogenation (ethane to
              ethylene, ammonia decomposition) and partial oxidation (ethylene epoxidation)
              as probe reactions.  A successful completion of this work will enhance the
              fundamental understanding of the relationship between synthesis and structure,
              and how the structure affects the material, permeation and reaction properties
              of the membrane.
