Title       : SBIR Phase II: Object-Oriented Grammars for Syntactic and Semantic Analysis of
               Natural Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1996     
File        : a9529726

Award Number: 9529726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299185             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Slocum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Goodbyte Inc
	      1302 Darter Lane
	      Austin, TX  787466638    512/328-0226

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              ***  Slocum  9529726              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase
              II project conducted by Goodbyte, Inc. seeks to adapt Object-Oriented
              Programming (OOP) technology to the construction of computer systems that
              understand statements and questions posed in natural human language, such as
              English or Japanese.  Previous Natural Language Processing (NLP) systems have
              suffered from a common scaling problem:  As the number of linguistic rules is
              increased to cover the language more fully, interactions among rules become so
              complex that the systems eventually collapse.  This situation is similar to
              adding feature upon feature to large software systems.  The Phase I studies
              indicated that OOP concepts, which have been of great aid in organizing
              conventional software, can be adapted to linguistic rules as well, allowing
              them to be structured as independent objects with inheritance, while the
              encapsulation of information within an object holds the promise of extending
              rules without disrupting previous coverage.  With the basic methodology for
              Object-Oriented Grammars (OOG) now in place, the chief objective for Phase II
              is to put OOG to the acid test by developing a prototype system with
              substantive coverage.  In the process, the equivalent of an OOP class library
              will be developed, upon which new NLP applications can be based.  It is
              anticipated that such a class library will allow natural language interfaces to
              be developed rapidly for a variety of applications, just as OOP and associated
              visual programming tools have made it possible to rapidly develop graphical
              user interfaces.       Potential applications of a computer system that
              understands statements and questions posed in natural language include
              conversational access to information in databases, catalogs, almanacs,
              encyclopedias, and documents distributed across networks such as the Internet;
              automatic translation of documents from one language to another; document
              classification based on content; and automated response to e-mail mes sages,
              including electronic commerce.  In combination with speech technology, the
              possibilities for machines to converse with people are enormous.  ***
