Title       : Advancing the State of Knowledge on Social and Economic Outcomes of Fundamental
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1997  
File        : a9529715

Award Number: 9529715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Dean, Jr.                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah G. Johnson johnsd@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              80        Social Sciences                         
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ADVANCING THE STATE OF KNOWLEDGE ON SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC OUTCOMES OF FUNDAMENTAL
              RESEARCH WORKSHOP      ABSTRACT    In a competitive global environment where
              the allocation of scarce resources is a matter of intense interest and debate,
              it is important that policy-makers have a clear picture of the social and
              economic outcomes of public expenditures for fundamental scientific and
              engineering research.    Since World War II, policy-makers and the public have
              come to expect social and economic returns from public investment in
              fundamental research.  The National Science Foundation has responded to these
              expectations by supporting research aimed at understanding the contributions of
              science and engineering to the U.S. economy and society at large. Such research
              has been conducted predominately by economists, who have developed several
              methodologies which measure the influence of research and development (R&D) on
              outcomes.    While economic studies have confirmed a strong relationship
              between R&D and growth of output and productivity, they are limited in their
              focus on economic outcomes.  Consequentially, many other putative benefits that
              may result from investments in science and engineering research have scarcely
              been investigated, including quality-of-life outcomes in the areas of public
              health, food and nutrition, environmental quality and sustainability, the
              development of human capital and its relation to socio-economic mobility,
              communications and transportation, education, neighborhoods and communities,
              and the nature of work and recreation. This over-reliance on economic outcomes
              has resulted in the underestimation of the full-range  of benefits that are
              derived from fundamental research. Furthermore, results from economic studies
              are accompanied by a high degree of uncertainty that makes interpretation
              difficult, and limits their utility for policy purposes.    An expansion of the
              body of knowledge concerning the interrelationships  between science,
              engineering, and society as they pertain  to the impact of new research
              activities would enable a more complete understanding of the social and
              economic outcomes of fundamental research. Advances in the state of knowledge
              in this area require that we move beyond our historic focus on economic
              outcomes, and toward alternative conceptualizations and measurements of
              outcomes in other areas that are important to Americans and their
              quality-of-life.     The purpose of this grant is to support a workshop focused
              on developing these alternative concepts and measures of the social and
              economic outcomes of fundamental research.
