Title       : Atomic-Powered Communism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  1996  
File        : a9529124

Award Number: 9529124
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Cathy Frierson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Josephson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Paul Josephson is examining the cultural and political history of peaceful
              nuclear programs in the former Soviet Union.   In order to undertake such a
              study, Dr. Josephson is focusing on the Soviet physics community and the
              physics institutes which served as the locus of the interactions between the
              Soviet government and the Communist Party on the one hand and the public or
              Soviet citizenry on the other.  He is seeking to explain how physicists
              developed broad political and cultural support for an expansive research
              program that involved application of nuclear physics throughout the economy for
              peaceful purposes.    As in the United States, the Soviet nuclear program had
              several different components aimed at military, research and power-generating
              ends.  Both  the Soviets and the US programs, for example, developed nuclear
              reactors for research and strictly military purposes . as well as to generate
              electricity for public use.  Both undertook nuclear explosions for both
              military and "peaceful" aims.  Both also examined the use of various
              radioisotopes for a number of medical, industrial and military purposes.  This
              broad-ranging program in the Soviet Union reflected soviet-wide enthusiasm in
              science and technology as a panacea for many social, economic and developmental
              problems.  This effort was not an attempt to deceive the Soviet public or
              international audiences about middling achievements nor an attempt to mislead
              them about extensive environmental and health hazards that came to be associate
              with nuclear power.  Rather, atomic-powered communism is revealing of  the
              deeper political and administrative structures and research processes that were
              paradigmatic for science and technology in the Soviet Union.  A relatively
              closed political system and an overly centralized scientific enterprise often
              permitted one individual, school or institute to dominate an entire area of
              research.  There were few external controls on the scale, extent or speed of
              diffusion of technologies.  This was compo unded by inadequate concerns about
              the health and safety of the population and the environment owing to overriding
              pressure to meet plan targets.  In this case, while certainly not the
              intention, the result was hastily approved programs that acquired great
              momentum and premature standardization of nuclear technologies in which bland
              and functional designs predominated.    In this study, Dr. Josephson will
              describe the genesis and history of the Soviet breeder and thermal reactor
              programs, the fusion program, various attempts to construct flying and mobile
              reactors, the peaceful nuclear explosions program, applications of
              radioisotopes in mining, medicine, and agriculture, particle accelerators and
              the spread of the nuclear empire based on the "Moscow model" to other union
              republics.  He will reexamine the political significance of Chernobyl in a
              period of glasnost and perestroika, the economic and environmental fallout that
              accompanied the accident and  the breakup of the Soviet Union and of the Soviet
              physics enterprise.
