Title       : Identification of the Chemical Mechanisms of Heterogeneous Processes on Sea Salt
               Particles Using Stable Chlorine Isotope Ratios
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1997   
File        : a9529451

Award Number: 9529451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Wahlen mwahlen@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9529451  Wahlen, Martin  University of California, San Diego 
              Title: Identification of the Chemical Mechanisms of Heterogeneous  Processes on
              Sea Salt Particles Using Stable Chlorine Isotope  Ratios    Field and
              laboratory and laboratory evidence indicates that  significant quantities of
              sea salt chloride are volatilized by one  or more chemical pathways other than
              desorption of hydrochloric  acid following reaction with nitric or sulfuric
              acid.  Laboratory  experiments indicate that heterogeneous reactions can occur
              between  sodium chloride and reactive atmospheric species such as nitrogen 
              oxides and ozone, however, the prevalence of these reactions in the  lower
              troposphere is still not understood.    The primary objective of this project
              is to use stable chlorine  isotopes ratios to support or dismiss reactions
              potentially  responsible for chlorine volatilization throughout the world's 
              oceans.  The isotopic ratios are altered during chemical reactions  where
              covalent bonds are formed or broken.  Thus, different  chemical reactions lead
              to different isotopic signatures.  Measured  isotopic fractionation in residual
              salt particles can be compared  to the fractionation factors of the reactions
              simulated in the  laboratory.    In this project, laboratory investigations
              will be carried out in  collaboration with Prof. Jonathan Abbatt at the
              University of  Chicago to determine the isotopic fractionation factors of 
              individual volatilization reactions.  In addition, archived aeroslo  samples
              from various oceanic regions will be analyzed for chlorine  fractionation, 
              From this information, the heterogeneous processes  responsible for chlorine
              volatilization in the aerosols will be  determined.
