Title       : IAI Workshop: Global Change in the Southwestern Atlantic from the Coast to
               Adjacent Deep Basins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1996      
File        : a9529791

Award Number: 9529791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmo J. Campos edmo@vortex.io.usp.br  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Sao Paulo
	      
	      Sao Paulo, BR  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9529791  Campos  This proposal builds on a 1994 meeting of the Southwestern
              Atlantic Program (SWAP).  This workshop will develop concrete research projects
              around the issues of mesoscale shelf processes, large-scale shelf dynamics, and
              issues concerning the impacts of these dynamics on several other biological,
              ecological and socio-economic processes.  The overlaps between these
              perspectives will be integrated during the proposed meetings to ensure that the
              various components of the program are well-connected.  The end product of the
              meetings will be a Phase II proposal for the IAI Start-Up Grants.  %%%  This
              proposal will support a series of meetings of the Southwestern Atlantic Program
              (SWAP).  In order to continue work that was begun at a workshop in December
              1994, the SWAP group will hold a series of meetings to discuss mesoscale shelf
              processes, large-scale shelf dynamics, and issues concerning the impacts of
              these dynamics on several other biological, ecological and socio-economic
              processes.  The meetings will include physical and biological oceanographers as
              well as social and other environmental scientists whose goal would be to
              develop multidisciplinary projects focused on the impact of oceanic circulation
              on the ecology, on the environment and on sociological aspects in the coastal
              area extending from Cabo Frio in Brazil to Patagonia in Argentina.  The result
              of the meetings will be a Phase II IAI Start-Up Grants proposal.  This proposal
              includes participants from Argentina, Brazil, the United States, and Uruguay. 
              These countries are members of the IAI, an initiative to stimulate global
              change research among the scientific institutions of the Americas.  The
              National Science Foundation is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry
              out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI.  ***
