Title       : IAI Workshop: Inter-American Institute for Global Change Start-Up Grants, Phase
               I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9529839

Award Number: 9529839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45830              (Estimated)
Investigator: Konstantine P. Georgakakos kgeorgakakos@hrc-lab.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexandre Guetter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hydrologic Research Center
	      12780 High Bluff Drive
	      San Diego, CA  92130    /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0511603   Societal Aspects                        
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9529839  Georgakakos  The multi-disciplinary research proposal developed under
              this planning grant   will integrate regional predictive models of
              low-frequency atmospheric   variability, predictive models of watershed
              hydrology and ecology, and   optimal management practices of reservoir systems.
               The ultimate goal of the   research effort is to assess ecological and
              water-system vulnerabilities to   potential changes in weather forcing, to
              changes in land use, and to changes   in regional water management practices.
              The Igua=E7u River region in   southern Brazil and the
              Alabama/Apalachicola/Savannah River region in the   United States have been
              selected for comparative purposes due to their   similar areal extent, land
              use, and climate responses to El Ni=F1o events.    Both regions have large
              reservoir projects with multiple objectives, such as   municipal and
              agricultural water supply, the production of hydropower, and   the preservation
              of water quality and local ecology.  A good network of   hydro-meteorological
              and agro-meteorological observing stations exists in   both regions with the
              capability of retrieving remotely sensed data.  These   conditions make
              possible the prediction of hydroclimatological variables   like rainfall,
              potential evapotranspiration, river flow, and estimated soil   water, which
              could then be used for inputs to regional distributed   hydrologic models that
              took into account local land-use and land-cover   patterns to produce local
              predictions of energy fluxes, soil water, and   surface and sub-surface runoff.
               These types of predictions can be further   used in ecological models to
              assess impacts on ecosystems resulting from   climate variability, and are
              extremely useful for when estimating the   impacts and risks associated with
              natural variability and uncertainty in   water resources management models. 
              The multiple objectives of the water   management models would include in
              addition to hydroelectric power   production and urban water supply,
              agricultural objec tives and objectives   related to riverine ecosystem health.
               This proposal brings together   participants from member countries of the
              Inter-American Institute for   Global Change Research (IAI), a U.S. initiative
              to stimulate cooperative   research on global change issues among the
              scientific institutions of the   Americas.  The NSF is the lead U.S. Government
              agency designated to carry   out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI.  %%% 
              The multi-disciplinary research proposal developed under this planning   grant
              will combine models of atmospheric variability, hydrology, and   ecology in
              order to assess optimal management practices for large reservoir   systems. 
              The ultimate goal of the research effort is to assess ecological   and
              water-system vulnerabilities to potential changes in weather, land use   and
              regional water management practices.  The Igua=E7u River region in   southern
              Brazil and the Alabama/Apalachicola/Savannah River region in the   United
              States have been selected for comparison due to their similar   climates and
              responses to weather.  Both regions have large reservoir   projects with
              multiple objectives: municipal and agricultural water supply,   the production
              of hydropower, and the preservation of local ecology.  A   good network of
              observing stations exists in both regions which, when   combined with the
              appropriate models, makes possible the prediction of   variables like rainfall,
              river flow, and ground water levels.  These types   of predictions can be
              further used in ecological models to assess impacts   on ecosystems resulting
              from climate variability, and are extremely useful   for when estimating the
              impacts and risks associated with natural   variability and uncertainty in
              water resources management models.  This   proposal brings together
              participants from member countries of the   Inter-American Institute for Global
              Change Research (IAI), a U.S.   initiative to stimulate cooperative research on
              global change issues among   the scientific institutions of the Am ericas.  The
              NSF is the lead U.S.   Government agency designated to carry out U.S.
              responsibilities within the   IAI.  ***
