Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Layered Manufacturing Machine in Support of Rapid
               Prototyping and Unmanned Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1996   
File        : a9529530

Award Number: 9529530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76918              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine Cohen cohen@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel H. Drake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Henderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard F. Riesenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CDA-9529530    Cohen, Elaine  Drake, Samuel H.  Henderson, Thomas C. 
              Riesenfeld, Richard F.    University of Utah    Layered Manufacturing Machine
              in Support of Rapid Prototyping and Unmanned Manufacturing    A rapid
              prototyping machine, Helisys, supports research in computer and information
              science and engineering, particularly in following projects: (1) Science and
              Technology Center for Computer Graphics and Scientific Visualization,  (2)
              Concurrent Integrated Design and Manufacturing, (3) Rapid Virtual Prototyping
              of Mechanical Assemblies, and (4) Sensing Strategies for Advanced
              Manufacturing.  The machine is a Laminated Object Manufacturing (LOM) System
              which is used to generate visualization models, to help in verification of
              reconstructed models, and to support a variety of casting operations and other
              secondary manufacturing operations including vacuum forming and silicon rubber
              molding.  The LOM process in the Advanced Manufacturing Laboratory is used
              primarily for research in manufacturing and to produce prototype parts for
              other research programs.  The process is also used to offer a variety of
              experimental manufacturing services over the network.    The educational use of
              rapid prototyping provides strong visualization feedback in solid modeling and
              shape understanding for undergraduate and graduate level courses as well as for
              high school students selected from the state of Utah under a National Science
              Foundation Young Scholars Program.
