Title       : SBIR Phase II: Heavy Metals Removal from Industrial and Environmental Wastes
               Using Exopolysaccharide Adsorbants Produced by Marine Microorganisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9529946

Award Number: 9529946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. Carlson pcarl@oceanix.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan B. Chmurny  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Oceanix Biosciences Corpor
	      7170 Standard Dr
	      Hanover, MD  210761334    410/712-4411

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1440,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9529946  Chmurny   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is
              designed to establish the commercial feasibility for use of a novel marine
              microbial polysaccharide in the removal of heavy metals from industrial
              effluents and environmental media including potable water.  These metal
              pollutants are among the most prevalent and problematic waste treatment and
              environmental remediation targets.  Current technologies provide only partially
              effective treatment and are costly to implement and use.  It is proposed that
              this complex polysaccharide cell matrix designated MHS-3, which was shown in
              Phase I work to have exceptional affinity for heavy metals including lead and
              mercury, be developed into an integrated metals removal system.  Cell mass
              fabricated into a number of resin-like matrices will be evaluated for its
              ability to adsorb heavy metals from complex waste streams containing
              non-hazardous metals and organic materials under anticipated field conditions. 
              The objectives of this Phase II project are to: 1) establish conditions for the
              cost-effective production of MHS-3 cell mass; 2) characterize the performance
              of MHS-3 bioadsorbents against a full panel of regulated and nonregulated
              metals; 3) characterize bioadsorbent performance in at least two treatment
              system configurations; 4) evaluate prototype bioadsorbents in the treatment of
              model and real-world streams 5) establish procedures for the cost-effective
              preparation of selected bioadsorbent(s); and 6) carry out bench scale, large
              laboratory-scale and small pilot-scale demonstrations with prototype adsorbent
              treatment systems.  It is anticipated that this work will document that these
              adsorbent systems offer superior treatment economics for many wastes and are an
              enabling technology for the treatment of others, including the removal of trace
              metals from drinking water.    This research will form the basis of lower cost,
              more efficient, and lower energy- demanding methods for removing heavy metals
              from metal finishing plants, la ndfill leachates, contaminated aquifers and,
              potentially, radioactive materials storage sites in the U.S. and world-wide. 
              Initial commercialization of this technology will target applications with low
              volume, well defined, highly similar wastes, modest equipment and capital
              requirements for the treatment system, low projected operating costs and ease
              of market entry.  Such applications include printed wiring board manufacturing
              sites and lead-acid battery reprocessing facilities.  Sales of materials and
              systems in these areas are expected within three years and should provide Phase
              III program revenue to fund significant portions of the longer term development
              targets in high volume applications such as potable water treatment and
              refinery effluent clean-up.
