Title       : Modelling Studies of Coupled Biological-Physical Processes Affecting Recruitment
               on Georges Bank
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9529402

Award Number: 9529402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glen G. Gawarkiewicz ggawarkiewicz@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cabell S. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1308,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The project involves the development of a series of coupled biological-physical
              models to examine the effects of wind forcing and seasonal stratification on
              the recruitment of zooplankton and fish to Georges Bank.  These models will
              examine the influence of transient and seasonal forcing of an idealized bank
              ecosystem, with the goal of elucidating the mechanisms which lead to trophic
              uncoupling.  Trophic uncoupling results from spatial or temporal dislocation of
              populations within a community, and can lead to rapid growth or depletion of
              affected populations.  Physical modelling will focus on the response of an
              idealized bank and bank-shelf system to wind forcing and to seasonal buoyancy
              forcing.  The biological modelling will have three major objectives: (1) to
              understand the long term effects of `wash out` events and advective losses on
              trophic interactions and recruitment; (2) to study the mechanisms by which the
              dynamics at tidal fronts influence trophic coupling and production; and )3) to
              explore novel techniques of reducing complexity of biological models while
              maintainin g biological system necessary for robustness.  The ultimate goal of
              this work is to investigate the couplings between the biological and physical
              systems, in particular the effect of advective losses on recruitment of cod and
              haddock and the influence of tidal  fronts on primary and secondary production.
               These results can then be tested by, and used to guide  the upcoming field
              observations and further analysis of historical data.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
