Title       : Best Practices, Maturity, and Diffusion in New Product Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1997      
File        : a9529921

Award Number: 9529921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James W. Dean, Jr.                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182493             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin J. Dooley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Riley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William K. Durfee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The quality and timelines of new product development (NPD) is a critical
              strategic factor for the success of American organizations.  Improvements in
              response time in the innovation process can be a source of significant
              competitive advantage.  Three key concepts that relate to NPD improvement are: 
              1) best practices, or what is done (e.g., cross-functional teams, customer
              involvement, rapid prototyping); 2) maturity, or how well the system does what
              it does (a concept developed in the software engineering industry); and 3)
              diffusion, how widely and often does the organization perform the best
              practice.  In combination, widely diffused best practices in a mature NPD will
              lead to greater organizational effectiveness and more successful products.  An
              organization with limited capital and personnel resources which can be devoted
              to improvement efforts, must determine how to balance these three components. 
              Are best practices most important?  If so, which ones are most critical?  Or is
              it more important to have a mature process, regardless of the practices? 
              Should a few practices be diffused widely?  Is it possible to diffuse best
              practices in an immature process?  Does the nature of the environment (e.g.,
              uncertainty or volatility in one's competitive market) alter the best strategy
              for success?  These are some of the questions that drive the project's research
              objectives.  The research team will refine and test a theory relating best
              practice, design maturity, and diffusion to various product/organizational
              success factors.  Surveys will be developed which consequently can be used by
              organizations to conduct their own quality/NPD self-assessment.  Deeper,
              exploratory studies within a few companies will be conducted to determine how
              the sequence of components unfold.  Theory will be built using process-based
              models which describe how these components lead to systemic change.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
