Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Multiprocessor Workstation for Advanced Digital
               Signal Processing Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1996   
File        : a9529520

Award Number: 9529520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31051              (Estimated)
Investigator: Armando B. Barreto barreto@eng.fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kang K. Yen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CDA-9529520  Barreto, Armando B.  Yen, Kang    Florida International University 
                CISE  Research Instrumentation: Multiprocessor Workstation for Advanced
              Digital Signal Processing  Research    Emerging Digital Signal Processing
              techniques are being applied to the solution of  challenging problems of signal
              detection and system modeling: Dynamic neural networks are  used as 
              spatio-temporal classifiers for the detection of electroencephalographic (EEG) 
              patterns that can be elicited voluntarily, as part of the process of motion
              preparation.  Reliable detection of these patterns will provide the basis for
              the development of a new  form of computer interface that will be accessible
              even to individuals deprived of motor  execution functions. Similarly, chaotic
              dynamics analysis is being applied for the detailed  study of the
              three-dimensional propagation of ocean acoustic waves. Indices such as the 
              Lyapunov exponent are numerically estimated using real sound propagation data
              collected in  the North Atlantic to characterize the chaotic properties of the
              phenomenon. While these  emerging DSP techniques hold great promise to increase
              our capability to obtain useful  information from signals and develop accurate
              models of physical phenomena, they are  complex and computationally intensive.
              The availability of multiprocessor workstations is  necessary to shorten the
              algorithm development and analysis cycles (i.e., large-scale  dynamic neural
              network training, numerical Lyapunov exponent estimation, etc.) to practical 
              levels. Additionally, these systems will familiarize our faculty and students
              with parallel  algorithm development techniques
