Title       : Engineering Research Center for Reconfigurable Machining Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a9529125

Award Number: 9529125
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Tapan Mukherjee                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12355420           (Estimated)
Investigator: Yoram Koren ykoren@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9529125  KOREN   This award is to support the establishment of an Engineering
              Research Center on Reconfigurable Machining Systems at the University of
              Michigan under a new five-year cooperative agreement.     The proposed ERC is
              to help the United States respond to the global challenges in manufacturing by
              establishing a base of strong fundamental engineering knowledge in
              reconfigurable machining systems for flexible manufacturing technology.  The
              distinct feature of the proposed Center is to focus on fundamental engineering
              issues, such as modularity, customization, convertibility, integrability, and
              diagnosability in reconfigurable machining system.  The vision will be
              fulfilled by improved engineering knowledge and methodologies in
              stream-of-variation theory, system reliability theory, and open-architecture
              principles.  A testbed will be developed to demonstrate the systems challenges
              of reconfigurable machining systems.   The research is organized into five
              thrust areas:  Thrust 1 on system design & integration with focused research
              activities on stream-of-variation theory in relation to economics, reliability,
              integration, and diagnosability; Thrust II on software architecture with
              focused research activities on open-architecture principles in relation to
              software reconfigurability and salability; Thrust III on measurement and
              control with focused research activities on sensors development and modular
              motion control system; Theory IV on mechanical design with focused research
              activities on reconfigurable design theory in relation to components, machines,
              and systems; and Thrust V on processes and tooling with focused research
              activities on various tooling systems for machining, boring, and drilling, and
              their process models.   The education programs of the ERC will involve
              undergraduates and graduates in research teams involving industry.   The ERC
              will enhance the industrial exposure to students enrolled in the new
              practice-oriented M.S. and Ph.D manufacturing degree programs.  The ERC wil l
              provide curricular modules which will be developed and tested in partnership
              with the Greenfield Engineering Education Coalition.   This vision is
              enthusiastically endorsed by 32 companies in the automotive industry, the
              machine tool industry, and the aerospace industry.  The research team includes
              25 researchers from three UM engineering departments and the UM Business
              School.  In addition, researchers from four universities, including Wayne State
              University, Michigan Technological University, University of Illinois, and
              UC-San Diego will be involved in the research activities within the Center.
