Title       : IAI Workshop: Fire and Global Change in Temperate Ecosystems of Western North
               and South America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9529655

Award Number: 9529655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49930              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas T. Veblen Thomas.Veblen@Colorado.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0304040   Fire                                    
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9529655  Veblen  This project proposes an international workshop on "A
              comparison of Fire   Regimes in Terrestrial Ecosystems of Western North and
              South America" to be   held in southern Chile in September of 1996.  Within the
              context of fire   and global change research, the goals of this workshop are
              to:  assess   current knowledge of potential influences of global change on
              fire regimes;   devise a research agenda on the potential effects of global
              change on fire   regimes; evaluate methodologies for analyzing the influences
              of climate and   land-use changes on fire regimes; form a network of researcher
              and research   institutions interested in developing an interdisciplinary
              research agenda   that focuses on inter-hemispheric comparisons of fire regimes
              and global   change; and to develop research proposals for Phase II.  The
              temperate ecosystems of western North and South America are chosen for   this
              research program because of the comparable climates and ecosystems of   these
              regions.  They are broadly similar in climate and vegetation   physiognomy but
              differ importantly in terms of climatic history,   phylogenetic origins of the
              biota, and human history.  Broad similarities   in present day climate and
              vegetation of these two regions provide the   potential for comparative studies
              of the effects of climate variation and   human activities on fire regimes and
              the responses of these ecosystems to   altered fire regimes.  Comparative
              studies can effectively exploit the   important differences in settlement
              history, land use, and resource   technologies between temperate North and
              South America to disentangle the   influences of climatic variation and human
              activities on fire regimes.  The   specific goals of the proposed workshop are
              to assess and synthesize the   existing knowledge of fire and global change, to
              define a research agenda,   to evaluate methodologies appropriate to the study
              of fire history in   different ecosystems, to develop research proposal to be
              submitted to Phase   II , and to develop a network of researchers and
              institutions capable of   carrying out the research agenda on fire and global
              change.  %%%  This project proposes an international workshop on "A comparison
              of Fire   Regimes in Terrestrial Ecosystems of Western North and South America"
              to be   held in southern Chile in September of 1996.  Within the context of
              fire   and global change research, the goals of this workshop are to:  assess  
              current knowledge of potential influences of global change on fire regimes;  
              devise a research agenda on the potential effects of global change on fire  
              regimes; evaluate methodologies for analyzing the influences of climate and  
              land-use changes on fire regimes; form a network of researcher and research  
              institutions interested in developing an interdisciplinary research agenda  
              that focuses on inter-hemispheric comparisons of fire regimes and global  
              change; and to develop research proposals for Phase II.  One of the major
              research challenges in ecology is to identify and quantify   the ecological
              mechanisms and processes that control ecosystem responses to   altered climatic
              conditions.  Such studies are required to understand how   present landscape
              patterns have been influenced by climatic variation and   to predict future
              landscape patterns that may develop in response to   climatic change.  Fire
              frequency in any ecosystems is a consequence of   interactions among fuel
              accumulation, fuel moisture content, and ignition   sources.  Climatic
              variation influences fire regimes across a broad range   of temporal scales. 
              Analysis of fire regime responses to climatic   variation across a range of
              time scales is important for separating the   effects of seasonal and annual
              variations on fuel desiccation and ignition   from longer-term climatic
              influences on fuel types and loads.  Additionally, it has been recognized that
              understanding climatic influences   on fire regimes is critical to predicting
              the effects of climatic variation   on vegetation change.  The f ollowing
              countries are participating in this proposal:  Argentina;   Canada; Chile; and
              the United States.  These countries are Members Statesof   the Inter-American
              Institute for Global Change Research (IAI), a U.S.   initiative to stimulate
              cooperative research on global change issues among   the scientific
              institutions of the Americas.  The U.S. National Science   Foundation is the
              U.S. Government agency designated to carry out U.S.   responsibilities within
              the IAI.  ***            --========================_13392216==_--
