Title       : Biochemical Control of Larval Settlement and Recruitment of the Major
               Reef-Building Coral, Acropora Palmata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a9529730

Award Number: 9529730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Morse d_morse@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aileen Morse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter T. Raimondi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9529730  MORSE    The goal of the research is to determine whether molecular 
              signals and mechanisms similar to those that control larval  settlement,
              metamorphosis and recruitment of the Agariciid corals  also regulate these
              centrally important processes in Acropora  palmata, one of the most
              ecologically important, abundant and  rapidly growing major reef-building
              corals of the Caribbean.  This question is of major ecological significance
              because A.  palmata is representative of the most specious genus of corals on 
              Earth, and is representative of the ecologically dominant corals  that
              reproduce by synchronous mass spawning to yield larvae that  lack endosymbiotic
              algae (zooxanthellae).  The corals in which  signal-dependent induction of
              larval settlement and recruitment  previously had been demonstrated (the
              Agariciid corals) reproduce  by brooding and release of mature larvae that
              already contain  endosymbiotic zooxanthellae, and these corals often play 
              relatively minor ecological roles in the natural environment.  Following up on
              recent research leads, the specific objectives of  the proposed renewal are to
              test the following specific  hypotheses: (1) That specific crustose coralline
              algae are  required to induce larval settlement and metamorphosis of the 
              mass-spawning A. palmata; (2) That chemosensory recognition  mediates larval
              responsiveness to any such required substratum;  (3) That the molecular inducer
              of settlement and metamorphosis  recognized by A. palmata larvae is an algal
              (or microbial) cell-  wall compound identical or closely similar to that which
              controls  larval settlement, metamorphosis and recruitment of the sympatric 
              Agariciids; (4) That larval recognition of this inducer molecule  (purified and
              immobilized on a "larval flypaper") can be shown to  be responsible, in part,
              for substratum-specific settlement,  metamorphosis and recruitment of A.
              palmata in the natural  environment; and (5) That species-specific differences
              in larval  orientation at settlement reduce the  potential for competition 
              between Acropora palmata and Agaricia humilis.    ***
