Title       : Quality Management in the Public Sector: The Next Paradigm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9529900

Award Number: 9529900
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan R. Sanderson                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196320             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francois Sainfort   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Lund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Soren Bisgaard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pascale Carayon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research proposes to examine the transformation to quality in local
              government agencies.  The research is based on an on-going partnership between
              a research team from the Center for Quality and Productivity Improvement at the
              University of Wisconsin - Madison, and the City of Madison.  For over ten
              years, the City of Madison has been recognized as a pioneer in implementing
              total quality concepts and principles in government.  A conceptual framework is
              proposed by which the degree of institutionalization of quality principles is a
              function of the implementation process, the organizational structure and
              culture.  In turn, the degree of institutionalization is believed to influence
              the perceived impact of quality initiatives.  Feedback loops are an integral
              part of the model whereby positive impact increases degree of
              institutionalization and institutionalization contributes to a change in
              organizational structure and culture.  The objective of the project is to
              collect employee level data to test the hypothesized relationships among these
              constructs.  Implementation will focus on employee development, while structure
              will include employee participation and labor/management relations, and culture
              will include leadership and management style.  The study is designed around the
              department/agency as a second unit of analysis, providing variability in
              quality implementation, structure and culture. An action research paradigm will
              be used to guide the design and conduct of research.  A variety of data
              collection methodologies will be utilized, including surveys of employees and
              citizens, and an analysis of archival material.  Regression and path analyses
              will be performed to test relationships specified in the model.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
