Title       : Femtosecond Studies of Chemical Reaction Dynamics in Simple Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1998   
File        : a9529105

Award Number: 9529105
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $671000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Harris harris@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Charles Harris is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his research in femtosecond   studies of chemical
              reaction dynamics in simple liquids.  Two main lines   of research will be
              pursued. The first line of research involves the   investigation of
              solute/solvent interactions of polyatomic molecules in   solution using
              femtosecond and picosecond infrared and visible laser   experiments as well as
              molecular dynamics simulations.  This work will   extend the work already
              completed on iodine in liquid krypton and xenon    to diatomic molecules such
              as diatomic iodine anion, iodine chloride and   iodine bromide in liquid
              krypton and xenon.  Infrared pump and probe   techniques will also be used to
              examine carbon-hydrogen stretching mode   relaxation times of simple polyatomic
              as a function of pressure in   krypton and xenon solvents.    The second area
              of study involves the use   of femtosecond and picosecond infrared and visible
              spectroscopic   techniques to study reaction mechanisms of several
              organometallic   compounds whose branching ratios and quantum yields are
              controlled by the   ultrafast energy transfer between solute and solvent. 
              These studies will   encompass  a broad range of mechanistic studies, including
                carbon-hydrogen and silicon-hydrogen bond activation in transition metal  
              compounds and photochemical ring slippage of an aromatic ligand.  Since many
              commercially important chemical reactions take place in   solvents, it is
              important to understand  the influence that such solvents   have on the
              reaction dynamics.   A number of effects, such as solvent   cage effects, 
              vibrational relaxation and quantum mechanical tunneling,   that are not present
              in the gas phase, completely dominate condensed   phase chemical reactions.  It
              is important to develop reliable theories   for model chemical systems that can
              then be applied to improving the   efficiency of commercially important
              chemical reactions.  The work that   is being performed by Harris provides an
              important experimental basis for   the development of such theories.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
