Title       : U.S.-Polish Collaborative Research on Electroanalytical Chemistry in the Absence
               of a Bulk Solution Phase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9529589

Award Number: 9529589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra M. Dudka                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39171              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Cox   (Principal Investigator current)
              Pawel J. Kulesza  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,5953,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9529589  Cox    This U.S.-Polish Cooperative Research award will study 
              "Electroanalytical Chemistry in the Absence of a Bulk Solution  Phase."  The
              principal researchers are Dr. James A. Cox of Miami  University, Ohio, and Dr.
              Pawel J. Kulesza of the University of  Warsaw.  The general goal of this
              program is to characterize  certain ionically-conducting solids in terms of
              their ability to  serve as media for electrochemical studies in the absence of
              a  contacting solution phase.  Of particular interest would be to  establish
              conditions where electrolyses of gas-phase components  can be performed at
              cells using these electrolytes under  conditions where the rates and mechanisms
              of the electrode  reaction are not influenced by concomitants in the gas phase.
                The components of interest in this study are generally  electrochemically
              silent at conventional, bare electrodes, so the  investigation of catalysis in
              the environment of these solids is  a required part of this program.  The
              researchers will  investigate two general materials as solid electrolytes,
              glassy  substances prepared by sol-gel processes and polyoxometallate  powders.
               The former will be xerogels with known or predicted  ionic conductivity such
              as polymeric vanadium, ruthenium, and  iridium oxides.  The catalysts will be
              in the form of surface  layers on electrodes coated with films of the xerogels
              or  dispersions with these films.  In addition, conversion of  selected
              xerogels into redox mediators by electrochemically  generating lower oxides of
              the metal centers will be explored.   Keggin-type heteropoly-12-tungstates will
              comprise the primary  polyoxometallates investigated.  The test systems will be
               selected on the basis of formation of mixed-valent systems.  The  kinetics of
              electron self-exchange will be determined along with  the effective transport
              coefficient.  Once characterized, the  polyoxometallates will be encapsulated
              in xerogels.  Here, the  objective is to exploit the catalytic activity of the
              former in  an envi ronment that permits the selected redox reaction to  proceed
              without interference from other components, including  water, of the
              surrounding atmosphere.  The studies will be  performed with conventional
              electrochemical instrumentation,  including voltammetric and a.c. impedance
              methodology.  The  results of this investigation will guide the development of 
              amperometric sensors for hazardous components in air and for the  presence of
              targeted solids or liquids with finite vapor  pressures.  In addition, these
              electrochemical systems are  projected to be suited to purifying the atmosphere
              of small  environments.  Other possible applications include the design of 
              energy-storage devices and microscale electronic components such  as bilayer
              switches.    This research in chemistry fulfills the program objectives of 
              bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and Poland to  combine
              complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong  mutual interest and
              competence on the basis of equality,  reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.
