Title       : RUI: A Determination of the Fundmental Properties of Galaxies in the Local Part
               of the Universe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1998     
File        : a9529169

Award Number: 9529169
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140856             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert D. Grauer algrauer@ualr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Little Rock
	      2801 South University
	      Little Rock, AR  72204    501/569-3000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1207,1217,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              AST-9529169  Grauer    The purpose of this observationally-based research
              program is to  measure the basic structural and color parameters of a
              representative  sample of galaxies in the local part of the Universe.  The
              research  plan is designed to address a broad range of questions: How are 
              structural scale lengths and measures such as the bulge-to-disk ratio  related
              to a galaxy's Hubble type?  Are these parameters significantly  different for
              galaxies with active nuclei when they are compared to  "normal" galaxies?  What
              is a "normal" galaxy?  How is the central  surface brightness of a galaxy
              related to its Hubble type?  What is the  distribution of integrated magnitudes
              for galaxies of all types?  What  is the range of vertical scale heights for
              disk galaxies?  What are the  range of arm amplitudes in spiral galaxies?  What
              can color gradients  reveal concerning the age and chemical composition of
              stellar  populations in and the dust content of galaxies?  What fraction of 
              spiral galaxies have nuclei which are not in the center of their disks?  How
              are disk scale lengths related to the galactic environment, bulge  size, and
              other parameters?  To what extent does the spiral arm  amplitude depend on the
              galactic environment and/or other structural  parameters?    The Steward
              Observatory 61-inch telescope, on Mt. Bigelow near Tucson,  Arizona, will be
              used with a NICMOS3 256X256 pixel infrared photometric  camera to obtain
              J(wavelength 1.25 micrometers) and K(wavelength 2.2  micrometers) band infrared
              images for a representative sample of 321  galaxies from the Uppsala General
              Catalogue (UGC).  Collaborators will  provide the corresponding optical images.
               This data base of structural  and color information obtained over a wide range
              of wavelengths will be  invaluable in modeling stellar populations,
              bulge-to-disk ratios, and  surface brightness-distributions for galaxies of all
              types.  The data  should be crucial in understanding the effects of evolution
              in distant  galaxies and will aid in  understanding the morphologies of these 
              galaxies.  This information should also provide insights into active  galaxies
              by providing the comparison objects required to determine if  their global
              properties are as different from "normal" galaxies as are  the nuclei of the
              galaxies.    A sample data set consisting of 64 deep images of 44 galaxies has
              been  obtained, reduced, and evaluated.  The mean limiting isophotes at the 3 
              sigma confidence level are 20.4 magnitude per square arcsec at K band  and 21.7
              magnitude per square arcsec at J band in the infrared region  of the spectrum. 
              These data have been analyzed to produce radial  profiles, bulge-to-disk
              ratios, central surface brightness, a vertical  disk scale height, arm
              amplitudes for some nearly face-on spiral  galaxies, and color gradients for 15
              galaxies.    When the project is completed, half of the deep images required
              for the  entire survey of 321 galaxies will have been obtained and calibrated. 
              In addition, the investigation of the astrophysical content of this  data set
              will be well underway.    This project will help to significantly improve
              research capabilities  at an undergraduate institution.  Students will be
              directly involved  with science projects  that are in progress.  The
              involvement of the  students in the research will substantially improve the
              educational  experience for students at a primarily undergraduate institution
              by  serving as the impetus for importing new ideas and forefront technology  to
              the undergraduate students.
