Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Statistics in Atmospheric Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1996     
File        : a9524770

Award Number: 9524770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399511             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Guttorp peter@stat.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald B. Percival  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher S. Bretherton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1325,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               9524770  Guttorp    The problem of subgrid scale variability in general
              circulation models,  and the generally poor quality of the precipitation part
              of such models,  indicate the need for precipitation models based on
              large-scale atmospheric  processes.  A realistic stochastic model of
              precipitation can be based   on meteorologically homogeneous weather states,
              each driving a simple   stochastic model of precipitation. In order to
              determine appropriate weather   states, a variant of canonical correlation
              analysis, appropriate for dependent   data, is developed.  Statistical theory
              allowing a space-time decomposition   of atmospheric fields with attendant
              standard error assessment is developed.  When applied to the leading canonical
              variates, such a method can isolate spatial   and temporal scales of interest.
              A slightly different approach uses a hidden   Markov model, driven by
              atmospheric data in a less explicit form than expressed   above. This model is
              fairly accurate on relatively small spatial scales, and for  temporally
              homogeneous parts of the year.  This hidden Markov model approach  is extended
              to a seasonal model, and its performance compared with the weather state
              approach, as well as with general meteorological forecast models.  %%%  The 
              general circulation models used to assess climate change have relatively  poor
              performance when it comes to precipitation. Furthermore, in order to  assess
              the effect on regional hydrology of climate changes, models with a finer 
              resolution than the circulation models are needed, since the hydrologic 
              processes usually operate on a much smaller scale than the large-scale 
              atmospheric processes that dominate the global climate models. Rather than 
              developing precise deterministic models of rainfall, the researchers build  a
              partly probability-based class of models, and compare it with  meteorological
              forecast models and applied to both weather data and circulation  model
              outputs.  ***
