Title       : Ecosystem Responses to Stratospheric Ozone Reduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1998     
File        : a9524144

Award Number: 9524144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $444000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martyn M. Caldwell mmc@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1095,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9524144  Stratospheric ozone loss, resulting primarily from chemicals  generated
               by  human  activities, results  in  an  increased  amount  of solar
              ultraviolet-B radiation reaching the earth.  Ultraviolet-B  radiation is
              capable of  damaging  biological  systems,  including DNA. Only a modest amount
               of  research,  however,  has been directed toward the potential  biological 
              consequences of stratospheric ozone depletion, and virtually  nothing   has  
              been  done  at  the  level  of   terrestrial  ecosystems.   This research is an
              ecosystem-level  study  of  the responses to elevated solar ultraviolet-B
              resulting near  Ushuaia,  Argentina.   The site is on the  southern  tip  of 
              South  America  across the Drake Passage from the  Antarctic  Peninsula.  This
              location experiences more pronounced  ozone  reduction   than  at  anywhere 
              else  in  the  world   where  terrestrial  ecosystems with appreciable plant
              cover  occur.  Three  phenomena  contribute to this: The  so-called  "ozone 
              hole"  can pass directly overhead, parcels of ozone-depleted  air  can  float
              northward from the ozone hole, and a general  erosion  of  the  ozone  layer is
               most  prominent  at  high  latitudes  and  in the Southern Hemisphere.   At 
              the  study  site, extremely high fluxes of ultraviolet-B can occur  when  skies
               are  clear and, when cloudy, there can be  very  high  ultraviolet-B relative
              to total solar radiation. Thus,  this  will  be  an extreme case study to
              determine ecosystem-level  effects  of  ozone reduction.  A three-year, 
              on-site  field  study  of a shrub-grass community will be conducted. Effects 
              of  elevated  ultraviolet-B will  assessed  for  both  acute  exposures,  such
              as when the ozone hole passes overhead  and  as  chronic,  growing-season and
              multi-season  exposures  to  elevated ultraviolet-B.  For responses to acute
              exposures to  high   ultraviolet-B  and  high  ultraviolet-B/(total  solar 
              radiation) ratios, damage to DNA and photosynthesis will  be  determined. 
              Acute exposures will be  studied both as natural  events  (tracking  the 
              precession  of  the  ozone  hole  by  downloading satellite-based images and
              anticipating overhead  passage) and by simulating such occurrences with special
               UV  lamp  systems.   Most  of the effort  will  be  directed  to  effects of
              chronic exposures at the population level  (e.g.,  reproduction   and  
              expansion  or  contraction   of   plant  populations)  and at the ecosystem
              level.  Researchers  will  determine  changes  in  competitive balance  among 
              species,  timing  of  annual biological events, plant  consumption  by 
              insects,  and  decomposition  of  plant  litter.   If  solar  ultraviolet-B
              affects such ecosystem-level processes,  there  are  many  implications for the
              function  and  integrity  of  these  systems.  Preliminary evidence collected
              recently  in  Argentina  shows large effects of sunlight ultraviolet-B  on  DNA
               damage, plant growth and insect herbivory.  Changes  in  litter decomposition
              may affect ecosystem carbon balance and  atmospheric carbon dioxide
              concentrations. Knowledge of  the  direction and magnitude of such changes is
              essential  if  we  are  to  predict  the  biological consequences  of  changing
               atmospheric   chemistry  and  develop  rational   management  strategies.
