Title       : Forest Change in a Boreal Transition Region: Productivity, Nutrient Cycling and
               Biodiversity at Multiple Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1997     
File        : a9524078

Award Number: 9524078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $428275             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Reich   (Principal Investigator current)
              David F. Grigal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin E. Bauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul V. Bolstad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1095,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9524078  Reich  Forest Change in a Boreal Transition Region: Productivity,
              Nutrient Cycling and Biodiversity at Multiple Scales.   The actions of human
              society  have profound impacts on boreal forests worldwide. Land use such as
              timber harvesting, climate, elevated carbon dioxide levels, and altered fire
              regimes all contribute to changes in the composition (species make-up),
              function and biodiversity of boreal forest ecosystems.  This  project will
              assess how forests are changing, and why, in relation to key regional and
              global factors such as logging, fire, elevated carbon dioxide, and climate. Why
              is it important that we better understand what those impacts are at present,
              and may be in the future?  First, boreal forests contribute to the economic
              well being of the USA and globally as a source of fiber for the forest products
              industry.  Second, boreal forests play an important role in global carbon
              cycles, and thus influence global carbon dioxide levels.  Third, boreal forests
              represent the largest intact forest biome on the planet and house a better
              balanced flora and fauna than any other forest biome.  This last point has
              importance economically as well as ecologically.  Regions with major boreal
              forest coverage are used by native peoples and support a growing recreational
              industry that depends on wildlife, clean water, and natural beauty. Changes
              that alter the productivity or long-term soil fertility of boreal forests, or
              that alter the plant and animal diversity of such regions, are likely
              occurring. However, a critical question is whether they are altering such
              processes in ways that are beneficial, neutral, or detrimental to our long-term
              goals for such regions, and equally critical is the question of the magnitude
              of such changes, both on a forest stand basis and for a forested region as a
              whole.  The answers to such questions will help us in two main ways. First they
              aid in our overall assessment of forest response to global atmospheric change
              and its associated climate impacts. Secon d, they enable better design of
              timber harvesting (and other management options), with respect to scope, type,
              timing, and landscape configuration.  Just how much timber harvesting can
              occur, and how and where, with minimal detriment to the environment, is a very
              difficult question (and usually quite controversial) but one that is important
              to society .
