Title       : Characterization of Metal Ion Complexation and Aggregation of Humic Substances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1996      
File        : a9524514

Award Number: 9524514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221401             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia K. Larive   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1099,1237,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Chemistry Division supports research by Cynthia K.   Larive of
              the Chemistry Department, University of Kansas, for the   development of a new
              method for characterizing metal ion complexation and   the aggregation of humic
              and fulvic acids isolated from ground and   surface waters.  The award is made
              in the Environmental Geochemistry and   Biogeochemistry section of the Water
              and Watersheds activity of the 1995   NSF/EPA Partnership for Environmental
              Research.  Collaborating on the   project is W. Robert Carper of the Chemistry
              Department, Wichita State   University.  Pulsed field gradient nuclear magnetic
              resonance (NMR)   spectroscopy will be used to determine the aggregation state
              of humic and   fulvic acids and the degree of metal-ion induced aggregation.   
              Potentiometric titration methods will be used to measure metal ion  
              complexation, and NMR relaxation rates will indicate metal ion exchange   rates
              and formation constants.  This broad-based approach will enable   investigators
              to construct a model of competitive metal ion binding and   exchange rates in
              fulvic and humic acids.  Samples from the Suwannee and   Wakarusa Rivers will
              be used in initial tests of the generality of the   new method.  Humic and
              fulvic acids leach into ground and surface waters from soil and   plant organic
              matter and are inherently heterogeneous in nautre.  They   are the major
              constituents of dissolved organic carbon and, as a group,   interact with
              organic pollutants such as pesticides and herbicides,   increasing their
              solubility.  For this reason, they play an important   role in the transport
              and bioavailability of anthropogenic organic   contaminants.  This research is
              focused on the participation of humic and   fulvic acids in the complexation of
              metal ions and the development of new   methods for analysis which will
              simultaneously determine metal ion   concentration, complexation, and
              aggregation in samples from natural   systems.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
