Title       : Shortgrass Steppe Ecosystem Dynamics and Trace Gas Exchange Under Elevated CO2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1996   
File        : a9524068

Award Number: 9524068
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429933             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arvin R. Mosier amosier@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack A. Morgan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis S. Ojima  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Parton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel G. Milchunas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Valentine  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Agrl Research Serv
	      301 South Howes Street
	      Fort Collins, CO  805212700    303/221-0578

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1095,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9524068  Future atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations will almost  certainly
                be   at   least  twice  as   high   as   current  concentrations.   It  is
              crucial that research  address  how  such  a  dramatic change will affect
              ecosystems,  especially  those   needed  for  food  production.   The  vast 
              semiarid  grasslands  of the Great Plains has been grazed  extensively  for 
              thousands  of years, and is comprised of grass  species  that   have   "normal"
                (C3)   and   water-efficient   (C4)  photosynthetic  pathways.   It is  not 
              known  how  elevated  atmospheric  carbon dioxide concentration  will  affect 
              the  shortgrass  steppe ecosystem of the western  United  States.  Increasing
              carbon dioxide concentrations will likely  impact  the  productivity  of arid
              and semiarid  ecosystems  through  increased  carbon,  nitrogen and water use 
              efficiencies  in  individual  plants  and may affect the  competitive  balance 
              between   C3  and  C4  plants  because  of  their  different  responses. 
              Changing patterns of growth, nutrient  use,  and  species  composition  may 
              alter soil  nitrogen  and  carbon  cycles  and affect the long term viability
              of the grassland.  This  research  couples the use of large, open-top  chambers
               for  field carbon dioxide enrichment with studies  of  plant  physiology  and
              soil nutrient balance through soil  nitrogen  cycling  and trace gas flux
              measurements.  There  are  three  basic objectives in this research.  First, it
              will determine  the  impact  of  doubling carbon dioxide on  photosynthesis, 
              productivity, water and nitrogen use efficiency, plant water  relations, and
              allocation of carbon and nitrogen above-  and  below-ground in two dominant
              grass species, one a  C3  grass  and  the  other  a C4 grass.  Second, it will
              determine  the  impact of doubling carbon dioxide on soil water and nitrogen 
              dynamics.  The knowledge gained from these studies  will  be  incorporated 
              into  simulation models that  will  allow  for  realistic  extrapolation
              through  tim e  and  space  of  soil  moisture, nutrient cycling, plant
              productivity, and  overall  ecosystem response.  This program will provide
              insight  into  the  effect of elevated carbon dioxide on this ecosystem  to 
              help maintain long term viability of the shortgrass steppe.
