Title       : Effects of Elevated CO2 on a Mojave Desert Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1995    
File        : a9524036

Award Number: 9524036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $415000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley D. Smith ssmith@ccmail.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yiqi Luo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Ball  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Nowak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey R. Seemann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1095,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9524144  Current atmospheric carbon dioxide levels are more than 25%  higher
              than pre-industrial levels.  Projections based  upon  the  present  rate  of 
              carbon input  into  the  atmosphere  indicates that the atmospheric carbon
              dioxide content  will  double in less than a century.  Although there is debate
              as  to  whether this increase will result in significant global  warming, there
              is little doubt that this increase will have  potentially dramatic effects on
              plant production  and  will  possibly  result in changes in plant composition 
              of  major  world  ecosystems.   There  is a  need  to  understand  the 
              spectrum  of  responses  that will  occur  over  the  major  ecosystem  types 
              of the world as a consequence  of  rising  atmospheric  greenhouse  gas
              concentrations,  most  notably  carbon  dioxide, and it is critical that these 
              experiments  be  conducted  in  intact  ecosystems,  not  in  artificial 
              conditions such as greenhouses or growth chambers.  Deserts  account  for  the 
              largest percentage of the  earth's  land  surface   area,   and   through  the 
              process   of   global  desertification,  are showing the most  rapid  increase 
              in  surface area.  Deserts are also the ecosystem type that are  predicted to
              be the most sensitive to global change because  elevated carbon dioxide relaxes
              the effects of water stress  in  plants.   Elevated  carbon  dioxide  may 
              significantly  impact   the  productivity  and  biodiversity   of   desert 
              ecosystems  and  result  in  a substantial  change  in  the  function  and
              land-use patterns of this prevalent ecosystem  type.   However,  there  have
              yet  to  be  any  large-scale  studies   of  the  effects  of  global  change 
              on   desert  ecosystems.   The  Mojave Desert is one of  the  most  arid 
              deserts in North America and most resembles true deserts in  other parts of the
              world, giving the potential to serve  as  a  model  system  for the study of
              the response  of  desert  vegetation  to elevated carbon dioxide.  A Free Air 
              carbon  dioxide    Enrichment  (FACE)  system  is  currently   being 
              constructed  on  the  Nevada Test Site  within  the  Mojave  Desert  of 
              southern  Nevada.  This  technology  entails  a  series  of  experimental
              "rings" in which  elevated  carbon  dioxide  is  constantly  supplied to  an 
              intact  ecosystem  within  each ring, and does not otherwise alter the climate 
              of   the   site   with  artificial  enclosures.    Specific  experiments to be
              conducted in this study include  analysis  of  the  responses  of plant
              production,  reproduction  and  survival,  and  landscape water balance to
              elevated  carbon  dioxide.  These specific  experiments  will  be  integrated 
              through  a   series   of  ecosystembased  models that will be developed 
              specifically  for  the  Mojave  Desert site.  The  modeling  effort  will 
              particularly emphasize two integrating concepts: (1)  under  the  extremely dry
              and infertile soils of deserts,  intense  competition  between plants controls
              the  function  of  the  ecosystem,  and  elevated carbon  dioxide  may  change 
              the  competitive   balance  that  currently  exists;   and   (2)  recruitment  
              and  survival  of  plants  in   deserts   are  determined  by episodic
              conditions (droughts  and  abnormal  wet  cycles), and elevated carbon dioxide
              may change  plant  responses  to these episodic conditions.  Desert ecosystems 
              may   become  more  productive  and  will  use  water  more  efficiently  under
               elevated carbon  dioxide,  but  complex  ecosystem  feedback processes may
              limit this response  over  the long term.  Experiments like this will provide
              the data  we  need  to  predict how these changes  will  affect  arid  lands.
