Title       : Quantification of Bacterial Transport Processes in Subsurface Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1998   
File        : a9524544

Award Number: 9524544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roseanne M. Ford rmf3f@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9524544  Ford    In situ bioremediation relies on the ability of bacterial
              populations to biologically transform chemical contaminants such as chlorinated
              hydrocarbons into less toxic substances.  A critical factor in successfully
              implementing this technology is assuring sufficient contact between the
              bacteria and contaminant to allow degradation to proceed.  Therefore,
              mathematical models capable of predicting the dynamic distribution of bacterial
              populations within contaminated aquifers are necessary for determining  the
              changing contaminant levels due to bacterial degradation.  Many soil-inhabiting
              bacteria which degrade chemical contaminants are motile and capable of
              directing their migration in response to chemical concentration gradients
              (chemotaxis)    The goal of this work is to evaluate bacterial transport
              coefficients in terms of fundamental properties which can be measured in simple
              laboratory experiments.  Reliable values for these coefficients are required as
              input for advection-dispersion models which describe bacterial migration in
              subsurface environments.  Current methods for evaluating these coefficients are
              highly empirical and typically not generalizable to a variety of subsurface
              conditions.  Progress toward achieving this goal will be guided by the
              following specific objectives:     1. To develop and experimentally confirm a
              theoretical expression for calculating the effective random motility
              coefficient for bacteria in the absence of advective flow.    2. To develop and
              experimentally confirm a theoretical expression for the bacterial dispersion
              coefficient based on a microscopic-level characterization of the swimming
              behavior of bacteria,  the porous matrix and the fluid flow.  3. To
              quantitatively assess the impact of motility on irreversible attachments to the
              porous matrix and its relationship to collector efficiency as defined by
              colloid filtration theory.    4.  To unify theoretical relationships from
              solute transport, chromatography and colloid filtration currently u sed to
              describe bacterial transport into one consistent theory based on
              microscopic-level characterization.    A combination of mathematical modeling,
              laboratory-scale experiments and computer simulation will be used to study the
              behavior of E. coli, P. putida, and soil isolates (A0500 from the Savannah
              River Deep Subsurface Collection, P. fluorescens Pf0-15 adhesion mutant and
              E1B2 from a field site in Oyster, VA).  The swimming behavior of individual
              bacteria will be analyzed in terms of speed, run length and turn angle
              distribution with a tracking microscope.  Random motility coefficients for the
              bacterial population will be measured in the stopped-flow diffusion chamber
              (SFDC) and compared to theoretical predictions determined from the single cell
              properties.  More complex experimental systems with advection and porous media
              will be studied in sand columns and micromodels with well-defined porous
              patterns to obtain effective random motility, dispersion and irreversible
              adsorption coefficients.  Theoretical relationships for these coefficients
              based on analogies to solute diffusion and transport, colloid filtration
              theory, and cellular dynamics computer simulations will be evaluated in terms
              of bacterial properties, flow characteristics and porous media geometry in an
              effort to unify the various approaches.  Values for these macroscopic transport
              coefficients are required in advection-dispersion models to describe bacterial
              distributions in subsurface environments.  The tracking microscope, SFDC assay
              and cellular dynamics algorithms, capabilities unique to the PI's
              state-of-the-art experimental and computational laboratories, provide an ideal
              environment for the proposed development of mechanistic-based models for
              predicting large-scale migration.  Future studies will apply the same
              combination of mathematical modeling, laboratory experiments, and computer
              simulation to determine apparent velocities and reversible
              adsorption/desorption coefficients used in models for bacterial transport.
