Title       : Regional Model of Carbon, Nitrogen and Water Flows Through Terrestrial
               Ecosystems of the Amazon Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1995 
File        : a9524050

Award Number: 9524050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Nepstad dnepstad@whrc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric A. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher S. Potter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Research Ctr
	      P.O. Box 296
	      Woods Hole, MA  025430296    508/540-9900

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1095,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9524050  Nepstad  Modeling the effects of seasonal and interannual drought on
              the flow of water, carbon and nitrogen through Amazonian forests.  Do trees of
              the Amazon forest experience significant drought stress?  It seems that the
              answer to such a basic question should already be known, but, as is the case
              for many subjects in tropical ecology, our ignorance is vast.  Drought stress
              in Amazonian forests is important because it determines how much water passes
              through the trees and enters the atmosphere.  Knowing how much water the trees
              use will help us determine how cutting the forests and creating cattle pastures
              will affect flows of water in rivers and transfer of water vapor to the
              atmosphere.  Water use is also important because it affects how well the trees
              grow and how much   heat-trapping carbon dioxide the trees remove from the
              atmosphere. Amazonian droughts could become more frequent in the future if
              deforestation leads to a reduction in rainfall, as some climate models predict.
               If trees utilize water stored only in the top one or two meters of soil, as
              most ecologists and hydrologists currently assume, it is easy to calculate that
              water stress must develop during the 3-5 month dry periods that characterize
              most of Amazonia.  However, most of Amazonia is covered by very deep soils that
              can store large quantities of water to several meters depth, and so the soils
              may protect the forest against dry seasons and against unusually dry years.  If
              this is a general phenomenon, then Amazonian forests may experience significant
              drought stress only if a long-term decrease in rainfall occurs as the result of
              a general   change in climate.  In the proposed research, the hypothesis that
              Amazonian forests experience drought only during years of very low rainfall
              will be tested through field measurements of forests at three places where
              drought is more or less severe. The relationship between drought and the
              activity of microbes in the soil will also be examined at these sites.  In
              order to integr ate the effects of drought on plants, microbes, and flows of
              water, and to make predictions about other locations in Amazonia and the
              tropics generally, these field measurements will be used to adapt a computer
              model to Amazon ecosystems.  Through comparison of field measurements with
              model predictions, the effect of rooting depth, soil properties, and plant type
              on estimates of tropical forest water use and forest growth will be determined,
              laying the basis for an improved generation of climate and ecosystem models for
              the tropics.  ??
