Title       : Grassland-Atmosphere Interactions: Analyses Using Coupled Ecophysiological,
               Ecosystem, Micrometeorology, and Mesoscale Atmospheric Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1997    
File        : a9524129

Award Number: 9524129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Coughenour mikec@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger A. Pielke Sr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              De-xing Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1095,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9524129  Coughenour  This research is to develop capabilities for numerically
              assessing the responses of grassland ecosystems to atmospheric changes
              associated with increasing levels of greenhouse gases, particularly carbon
              dioxide (CO2).  Currently, there are at least three major deficiencies in our
              abilities to perform these assessments.  The first is a lack of computer models
              which have been calibrated and tested against field CO2 exposure experiments in
              grasslands.  Accordingly, a focus of this research will be to collaborate with
              scientists working on an ongoing field exposure study in Kansas.  An existing
              model of grassland ecosystem function and plant responses to CO2 and weather
              will be used for this purpose.  Secondly, models that faithfully represent
              current understanding of plant physiology must be coupled with models that
              represent soil processes such as decomposition, nutrient cycling and water
              storage and flows to understand how whole ecosystems respond to atmospheric
              change.  For example, it is possible that nutrient cycling rates will constrain
              otherwise positive plant growth responses to elevated CO2. Linked
              state-of-the-art plant physiological and soil process models will be employed
              in the proposed research.  Thirdly, terrestrial ecosystem processes of water,
              carbon and energy exchange with the atmosphere have potentially significant
              effects on ecosystem responses to atmospheric change but have been poorly
              examined in past modeling research.  This research will link ecological and
              atmospheric models to assess the role of atmospheric processes, particularly
              large-scale fluxes of water vapor and energy.  These results will feedback onto
              plant growth through altered plant water use efficiency, and resultant
              responses of nutrient cycling rates.  Grasslands, climate, and the interactions
              between climate and grasslands will be explored through linking these various
              models.
