Title       : Theoretical Studies of the Quantum Hall Effect and NonlinearMesoscopic Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1995       
File        : a9301433

Award Number: 9301433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Johnson mdj@physics.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Olle G. Heinonen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9301433  Johnson  This theoretical research will study fundamental transport and
               microscopic properties in the integer and fractional quantum Hall  effects
              (IQHE and FQHE).  A novel approach to transport in the IQHE  has been developed
              and will be adapted to nonlinear mesoscopic  transport and applied to the study
              of nonlinear time-independent  and time-dependent effects in devices.  In the
              IQHE this approach  will be used to study current distributions and the
              breakdown of  dissipationless IQHE, fundamental properties which are not 
              presently well understood.  The possibility of developing a novel  tunable
              phonon or photon laser, based on the breakdown, will be  studied.  The FQHE
              research will include a detailed study of the  properties and experimental
              consequences of edge excitations at  complicated fractions, and an
              investigation of the appropriate  description of bulk quasiparticle
              excitations.  These are important  to understand the microscopics of the FQHE. 
              Finally, a method  based on density functional theory will be developed which
              will  provide a powerful numerical tool to study the properties of an 
              inhomogeneous electron gas in a strong magnetic field.  %%%  The research
              conducted on this grant deals with one of the most  important current problems
              in modern condensed matter physics.  The  research focuses on the properties of
              a new state of matter which  is formed in a strong magnetic field at a
              semiconductor interface  under certain conditions.  This "two-dimensional
              electron gas" has  many unusual properties.  Besides being of fundamental
              interest,  these properties may have application to new and novel electronic 
              devices.  The work will concentrate on nonlinear transport  phenomena and a
              density functional formulation of the problem.   These are topics which have
              not received a great deal of attention.  ***
