Title       : Hydrogen Migration Reaction in Reactive Organic and Organometallic Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1998  
File        : a9301025

Award Number: 9301025
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $482445             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. McMahon mcmahon@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9181,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The mechanistic basis underlying intramolecular hydrogen migration             
              reactions in reactive organic and organometallic intermediates will            
              be studied. Low-temperature matrix isolation spectroscopy, low-                
              temperature NMR spectroscopy, and time-resolved absorption                     
              spectroscopy will be used to establish rearrangement pathways and              
              to characterize the reactive species. Organic carbenes, organic                
              nitrenes, and certain coordinately unsaturated 16-electron                     
              organometallic intermediates comprise an isolobal class of                     
              electron-deficient reactive intermediates that will be studied. In             
              the organometallic studies, low-temperature NMR will be used to                
              follow the chemistry of reactive allyl hydride intermediates and               
              the involvement of these species in alkene isomerization processes.            
              Iron, Osmium, and Ruthenium metal atoms will be incorporated in the            
              organometallic intermediates. In particular, studies will be                   
              directed to allylic C-H and beta C-H insertion reactions. In the               
              organic studies, experiments will focus on direct observation of               
              hydrogen migration reactions of carbenes and 1,4-biradicals by                 
              time-resolved spectroscopy.                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the work of              
              Professor Robert J. McMahon at the University of Wisconsin. The                
              details of how hydrogen atoms migrate in reactive electron-                    
              deficient organic and organometallic intermediates by                          
              intramolecular processes will be studied. These elusive                        
              intermediates will be studied at low temperatures by various                   
              spectroscopic methods in order to characterize the intermediates               
              and individual steps in the overall reaction. The reactive                     
              intermediates that will be studied include carbenes (divalent                  
              carbon species), nitrenes (monovalent nitrogen species), and                   
              organometallic intermediates that have 16 electrons rather than the            
              stable 18-electron complement about the metal atom. Iron, Osmium,              
              and Ruthenium metal atoms will be incorporated in the                          
              organometallic intermediates.
