Title       : Mathematical Sciences: 4-Manifolds and Symplectic Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1993      
File        : a9301524

Award Number: 9301524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94795              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Gompf gompf@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The purpose of this project is better to understand smooth                
              and symplectic 4-manifolds.  Smooth 4-manifolds are spaces which               
              are locally diffeomorphic to Euclidean 4-space.  Symplectic                    
              manifolds are endowed with additional structure which keeps track              
              of areas and volumes.  For both types of 4-manifolds, the most                 
              basic questions of existence and uniqueness are still poorly                   
              understood; it is these questions which the project addresses.                 
              Traditionally, these two types of objects have been studied by                 
              rather different methods, but the principal investigator's                     
              research to date shows that much can be gained from a unified                  
              approach.  In fact, he has solved major problems in both fields                
              by simple "cut-and-paste" constructions (log transforms and                    
              connected sums along surfaces). He intends to apply these and                  
              related techniques to produce even better examples (for example,               
              simply connected, irreducible symplectic 4-manifolds with small                
              second betti numbers).  These, and other examples which the                    
              principal investigator has already produced, should be detectable              
              by means of gauge theory.  Other examples which might be produced              
              (such as a simply connected, symplectic, non-Kaehler 6-manifold,               
              or a symplectic 4-manifold which splits as a connected sum of                  
              indefinite pieces) could be detected by elementary means.                      
                   Smooth manifolds of dimension 4 are presently the least                   
              understood manifolds of any dimension.  Only in the last decade                
              has substantial progress been made in understanding the possible               
              shapes of these objects.  This is particularly ironic in that our              
              own universe is an example of a 4-dimensional manifold.                        
              Symplectic manifolds have also come under intense study recently.              
              These objects first appeared in connection with classical                      
              mechanics, the physics of macroscopic objects such as mechanical               
              systems and orbiting satellites.  Subsequently, they have turned               
              out to play a deep role in quantum physics, so they are of great               
              interest to physicists who are attempting to understand the                    
              fundamental forces of nature.  Symplectic manifolds are also of                
              interest to pure mathematicians because of their appearance in                 
              such diverse fields as algebraic geometry, gauge theory and Lie                
              group theory.  It is the principal investigator's belief that                  
              there are deep and largely unexplored connections between the                  
              theories of symplectic manifolds and smooth 4-manifolds.  The                  
              instant research project is to exploit these connections to                    
              illuminate both theories.
