Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Differential Equations And Their Applications
               In Singular-Regular Stochastic Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1993      
File        : a9301516

Award Number: 9301516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Lagnese                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36440              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jin Ma   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The first part of this project is concerned with two types                
              of stochastic differential equations: equations with                           
              discontinuous paths and reflecting boundary conditions, and                    
              forward-backward equations, possibly with discontinuous paths.                 
              Properties of such stochastic differential equations, such as                  
              existence and uniqueness of solutions, solvability properties and              
              continuous, or measurable, dependence of solutions on the data,                
              will be investigated. This study will provide the fundamental                  
              tools for the second part of this project, which is concerned                  
              with singular-regular stochastic control problems for nonlinear                
              diffusions. The singular-regular model is distinguished by                     
              involving both measurable controls and measure-type controls. In               
              some cases, constraints on the state process are imposed, which                
              leads to so-called reflecting type models. The focus of this part              
              of the research is on issues which are of fundamental interest in              
              control theory and applications, such as characterizing the value              
              function and optimal policy and deriving sufficient and/or                     
              necessary conditions on the optimal control.                                   
                    This research project will develop a unified framework for               
              a broad class of stochastic control problems by combining                      
              classical stochastic control theory with the newly developed                   
              singular stochastic control theory. The latter is a rapidly                    
              expanding area of research and poses many challenging theoretical              
              issues related to partial differential equations and stochastic                
              analysis. The principal applications of this research are to                   
              optimal control problems for dissipative dynamical systems under               
              uncertainty. Specific anticipated applications are to                          
              position/speed control policies for an aircraft operating under                
              uncertain weather disturbances; to financial economics problems                
              such as option pricing, consumption/investment optimization with               
              transaction costs, optimal control of storage or inventory type                
              systems, among others.
