Title       : Dissertation Research: Obsidian Procurement and Production at San Martin
               Jilotepeque, Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1993     
File        : a9301152

Award Number: 9301152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11172              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey E. Braswell  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. E. Wyllys Andrews, Mr. Geoffrey Braswell            
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. Mr. Braswell has              
              participated in an archaeological project which has studied the                
              prehistory of the San Martin Jilotepque area of Guatemala. In                  
              during much of this time the region was an important trade center              
              because it contained abundant obsidian resources. Before the                   
              introduction of metal tools, this form of volcanic glass was highly            
              prized because flakes formed and held sharp edges which were used              
              as cutting tools. Studies have indicated that obsidian was widely              
              traded both across and beyond the Mayan area and that this trade               
              may have played an important role in the development of Mayan                  
              civilization.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              To date  Mr. Braswell has located the geological source areas of               
              San Martin Jilotepque obsidian and charactered them by neutron                 
              activation analysis. The results show that different regions have              
              distinct chemical signatures and thus archaeological materials can,            
              in principle, be matched to source of origin. A survey to locate               
              obsidian working areas has been carried out and small scale                    
              excavation conducted. With National Science Foundation support Mr              
              Braswell will now analyze the materials collected. He will conduct             
              additional neutron activation analyses to characterize sources more            
              precisely. Study of ceramics and radiocarbon dating of related                 
              materials will allow the construction of a more precise chronology.            
              Through study of obsidian remains recovered at archaeological sites            
              the process of manufacturing and distribution will then be                     
              ascertained.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Because it was so spatially localized and so widely traded, it is              
              clear that obsidian played a major role in prehistoric economic and            
              social system of the Maya. Just how this production and trade was              
              organized however is not well understood. With his focus on a                  
              limited region with rich obsidian resources Mr. Braswell should                
              gain important insights into this process.                                     
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it will increase our                        
              understanding of how complex societies emerge and are maintained.              
              It will also assist in the training of a promising young scientist.
