Title       : GEM: Global MHD Simulations of Dayside Magnetospheric Processes and Their
               Mapping to the Ionosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1994      
File        : a9301051

Award Number: 9301051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Lyon lyon@tinman.dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1323,1577,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9301051  Lyon  Global MHD simulations of the interaction of the solar wind with 
              the magnetosphere and ionosphere will be performed as an aid to  interpreting
              and analyzing low altitude and ground-based  observations done in conjunction
              with the GEM program.  The  calculations will use solar wind data for the
              actual period of the  GEM observing campaigns to produce as accurate a
              representation of  mangetospheric conditions as possible for those times.  The
              results  from the simulations will be mapped from the mangetopause and cusp 
              regions to near earth space and to the ionosphere where they may be  compared
              with observations.  The primary quanities to be mapped  will be magnetic field
              topology, field-aligned currents and  particle distributions.  Experience and
              theoretical considerations  show that these mappings can provide useful
              information on the  scales seen in the ground-based radar observations, for
              example,  even though the calculation grid is relatively more coarse.  The 
              magnetic field model used for this mapping is determined self-  consistently
              from the MHD solution for the magnetosphere.  This  model will also be used to
              map the ionospheric observations back  out to the region of the magnetopause,
              and the field models will be  provided to GEM participants.  These comparison
              will lead to a  better appreciation for the strengths and weaknesses of the
              global  MHD model and what additional physics must be included.    Studies will
              also be conducted with varying solar wind input data  to cover a wide range of
              possible conditions.  These simulations  will then be used to provide a
              parametric representation of the  normal field and the tangential velocity at
              the magnetopause.  This  representation is an important input to a modular
              magnetospheric  circulation model.  The time varying solar wind cases used for
              the  observational campaigns will also be analyzed in this fashion to  find how
              much of the actual magnetopause tangential eletric field  can be prescribed by
              a static model.   ***
