Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Study of Characteristics of
               Air-Showers Induced by Ultra-High Energy Cosmic Rays Associated with
               Astrophysical Point-Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1993      
File        : a9301776

Award Number: 9301776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Biller BILLER@LAMPF  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gaurang B. Yodh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign centers                                
              of proven excellence.  The program's awards                                    
              provide opportunities for joint research, and                                  
              the use of unique or complementary facilities,                                 
              expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Steven D.                                   
              Biller of the University of California, Irvine                                 
              to work with Professor Alan A. Watson at the                                   
              University of Leeds.                                                           
                                                                                             
              They plan on examining characteristics and                                     
              detection techniques associated with ultra-high                                
              energy (UHE) cosmic ray interactions.  This                                    
              study will have direct application to the next                                 
              generation of cosmic ray detectors being                                       
              designed to examine UHE radiation in terms of                                  
              composition, primary energy spectrum, and                                      
              potential point-sources of astrophysical                                       
              emission.  By doing this project at the                                        
              University of Leeds, Dr. Biller will have                                      
              access to the following:  (1) data from four                                   
              different experiments, spanning over seven                                     
              decades in detected particle energies (i.e. the                                
              Haverah Park Array - formerly located at Leeds;                                
              GREX - located at Leeds; the Whipple Cerenkov                                  
              Telescope - located in Arizona; and SPASE -                                    
              located at the South Pole), (2) two data sets                                  
              containing reported detections of point-sources                                
              (Haverah Park - Cygnus X-3; Whipple - Crab                                     
              Nebula, Markarian 421, and Hercules X-1; (3)                                   
              expertise in computer modeling of air-shower                                   
              interactions (Michael Hillas).                                                 
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel, a stipend for                                      
              twelve months, in-country travel, an excess                                    
              baggage allowance and administrative costs to                                  
              his university.
