Title       : Connections to netILLINOIS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1995       
File        : a9301422

Award Number: 9301422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Patrick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel L. Hartman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Bradley University
	      1501 West Bradley Avenue
	      Peoria, IL  616250001    309/676-7611

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Bradley University with participation and support from major              
              educational institutions and industry, and a strong working                    
              partnership with CICNet, the state of Illinois Central Management              
              Services (CMS), and with considerable networking experience                    
              within its member shop, has developed a communications network                 
              known as netIllinois.                                                          
                   This network in cooperation with sixteen (16) Illinois                    
              colleges and universities (Aurora University, College of Saint                 
              Francis, Illinois Central College, Knox College, Lewis                         
              University, Monmouth College, Moraine Valley Community College,                
              National-Louis University, North Central College, Rockford                     
              College, Roosevelt University, Rosary College, Saint Xavier                    
              College, Southern Illinois University Medical School Library,                  
              University of Health Sciences/ The Chicago Medical School, and                 
              William Rainey Harper College) requests support to connect these               
              institutions to netIllinois.  The requested connections will                   
              support connectivity to netIllinois,m CICNET, NSFNET, and the                  
              greater Internet.  It will also provide access to state,                       
              regional, and national computing resources and databases; and                  
              foster communication and collaboration among teachers, students,               
              scholars, and researchers at these institutions and their peers                
              within the worldwide education and research community.                         
                   The network will provide a consistent statewide architecture              
              for NSFNET access for a broad variety of entities engaged in                   
              education and research.  This cooperative network will provide                 
              gateways to regional, national, and international networks and                 
              will be consistent with their standards.  It will further the                  
              institutions' work in enhancing the state's economic development               
              through a well-educated workforce, accessible training                         
              opportunities, and research and development partnerships.                      
              Another goal of the network is to facilitate collaborative                     
              projects and sharing of resources between institutions, including              
              those outside the state.
