Title       : The Thermal Characteristics of Combustion Waves: Investigation of Field-Assisted
               Combustion Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1995      
File        : a9301924

Award Number: 9301924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zuhair A. Munir zamunir@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Birch Holt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              An investigation of field-assisted combustion is proposed.  The                
              planned research will focus on the role of electromagnetic fields              
              in the mechanism of self-sustaining reactions.  Preliminary                    
              observations have demonstrated that the imposition of electric                 
              fields alters markedly the kinetics of the process as well as the              
              nature of the products of combustion.  The goal of the study is to             
              provide a basis for the inclusion of a field as a processing                   
              parameter in combustion synthesis.  The proposed approach will                 
              focus on the use of thermal as well as material analyses to                    
              ascertain the role of the field.  These include the use of the                 
              Boddington-Laye method temperature profile analysis. Anticipated               
              results will determine the nature of the field effect in terms of              
              thermal or chemical contributions to the combustion wave reaction.             
              Both electric and magnetic field effects will be investigated.                 
                                                                                             
              The proposed work represents a continuation of the already                     
              established collaborative arrangement with FSU scientists in                   
              accordance with the established Memorandum of Understanding between            
              NSF and the FSU Academy of Sciences.  Participants from the FSU                
              will include Professor Shteinberg from the Russian Institute (RISM)            
              of Structural Macro-kinetics, Professor Maximov (RISM), and Dr.                
              Gedevanishili from the Tavadze Inst. of Metallurgy of the Georgia              
              Academy of Science.  The U.S. portion of the research will be                  
              carried out at UCD and the Russian portion conducted at the Tomsk              
              Branch of RISM at the main facility in Chernogolovka, and at the               
              Tavadze Institute if Metallurgy.  A coordinated research plan will             
              be conducted in the US and FSU initially on the same combustion                
              systems and subsequent investigations will assume a different                  
              emphasis depending on the initial results.  It is anticipated that             
              the proposed research will impact both fundamental and applied                 
              aspects of combustion synthesis.
