Title       : A Theoretical Study of Time-Dependent Magnetosphere Ionosphere Coupling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1998     
File        : a9301043

Award Number: 9301043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245720             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Lysak bob@aurora.space.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9301043  Lysak       The primary goals of the first GEM campaign are an 
              understanding of the mapping of dayside magnetopause processes to  the
              ionosphere and a determination of the ionospheric signatures of  such
              processes.  Although previous attempts have been made to  consider the static
              mapping of magnetopause processes to the  ionosphere, the fact that the Alfven
              transit time from the  magnetopause to the ionosphere is comparable to the
              evolution time  of magnetopause processes suggests that the dynamics of this 
              coupling is important.  This proposed work focuses on an  investigation of
              these effects by means of a three-dimensional  model of coupling of the
              magnetosphere and ionosphere by means of  Alfven waves which considers the
              global, linear response of the  magnetosphere and ionosphere to perturbations
              at the magnetopause.   In this model, perturbations representing magnetopause
              processes  such as transient reconnection, Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities or 
              dynamic pressure pulses can be imposed on the magnetopause, and the  resulting
              ionospheric signature can be self-consistently  calculated.  This model will be
              extended to include finite pressure  effects, finite ionospheric conductivity
              and a generalized magnetic  field geometry.  This project will be supported by
              two related  projects, one of which considers a localized model of a diverging 
              auroral flux tube which includes nonlinearities, ionospheric  dynamics and
              parallel electric fields.  The other related project  is an investigation of
              transport processes at the magnetopause and  their role in the generation of
              field-aligned currents.  The  numerical results will be compared with data from
              ground  magnetometer arrays in order to determine the most likely source  for
              the observed magnetic vortices.       ***
