Title       : Learning, Complexity, & Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9301339

Award Number: 9301339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226260             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl H. Smith smith@cs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William Gasarch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Various aspects of machine learning have been under  empirical  investigation
              for quite some time.  And, more  recently, theoretical studies  have become
              popular.  This  research contributes towards the goal of  understanding  how a
              computer can be programmed to learn by isolating  features  of incremental
              learning algorithms that  theoretically enhance their learning  potential.  In
              addition  to pursuing lines of research that have already been  established
              with a firm base, investigations of other topics  in machine  learning are
              initiated; for example,  investigating learning algorithms with  a limited
              ability to  remember observed data and other information.    Inductive 
              inference is in some sense the dual of program  testing. For the inference 
              problem, one must generalize from  a finite set of examples to an entire 
              function or concept.  The testing problem requires the formulation of a finite 
              test set that distinguishes a given function from all the  others in a given 
              class.  The program testing problem is  more difficult than the program 
              equivalence problem, hence  it is highly unsolvable. Consequently,
              practitioners  are  doomed to ad hoc techniques. However, it is possible to 
              discuss testing  strategies that give an indication of how  confident we are
              that the program  being tested is reliable.    In another vein, the complexity
              of certain problems  is studied.  Some of the earlier work in recursive graph
              theory  has now  been applied to the complexity of NP-hard problems.  This work
              is extended  to problems in P.   The complexity of Boolean functions is also 
              investigated.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
