Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Evolutions Equations III
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1993      
File        : a9301351

Award Number: 9301351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustavo Ponce ponce@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Research supported by this award will focus on various                    
              aspects of nonlinear evolution equations: nonlinear partial                    
              differential equations whose solutions evolve in time.  The work               
              combines classical theory of differential equations with harmonic              
              analysis and mathematical physics.  The principal areas of study               
              include nonlinear dispersive systems arising as approximate                    
              models in propagation of nonlinear waves.  Particular interest                 
              will be paid to determining the lower bound of Sobolev exponents               
              which guarantee local well-posedness for the                                   
              generalized Korteweg-deVries equation.  A similar effort will be               
              applied to the study of nonlinear Schrodinger equations.  In both              
              cases preliminary work has already improved known estimates on                 
              the exponents. Higher order equations will also be analyzed.                   
              Here the nonlinear part of the equations will be restricted to                 
              polynomials having no constant term.  This class of evolution                  
              equation models waves in elastic media. Local results have                     
              already been established for the smoothness of solutions, but                  
              long-time behavior is not well understood.  For instance, fifth                
              order systems do not have solitary wave solutions. Additional                  
              work is planned on the Zakharov-Schulman systems which describe                
              interactions of small-amplitude, high frequencey wave with                     
              acoustic type waves. Where the linear part is elliptic, the                    
              equations have been extensively studied, otherwise no results are              
              known.     Partial differential equations form a basis for                     
              mathematical modeling of the physical world.  The role of                      
              mathematical analysis is not so much to create the equations as                
              it is to provide qualitative and quantitative information about                
              the solutions.  This may include answers to questions about                    
              uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In addition, analysis often                
              develops methods for approximation of solutions and estimates on               
              the accuracy of these approximations.
