Title       : Determination of Sources of Atmospheric Organic Acids in Southern California by
               Carbon Isotope Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1995 
File        : a9301767

Award Number: 9301767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181372             (Estimated)
Investigator: M I. Venkatesan indira@ess.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Isaac R. Kaplan  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9301767  Kaplan       Atmospheric organic acids play an important role in 
              acidification of rain and clouds.  They are ubiquitous constituents  of urban
              smog and haze and are present in the atmosphere of rural  and largely
              uninhabited areas (e.g. the Amazon Rain Forest Basin).   Organic acids not only
              contribute to lowering pH, they may  contribute to visibility reduction by
              being adsorbed to "black  carbon" and they may play an important role in
              corrosion due to  their chelating ability.  It has been shown that organic
              acids such  as formic, acetic, and oxalic acids are emitted into the atmosphere
               by automobiles through incomplete combustion.  Additionally,  combustion of
              biomass and industrial products may also generate  organic acids and their
              release from vascular plants may be an  important biogenic source.  Little
              information is, however,  currently available on the emission rates of organic
              acids from  these various anthropogenic and biogenic sources.  This research 
              project will attempt to characterize the sources of atmospheric  organic acids
              in urban and rural areas of southern California by  measurements of their
              carbon isotopic ratios, such as carbon-  14/carbon-12 and carbon-13/carbon-12. 
              The carbon-14/carbon-12  measurements by accelerator mass spectrometry can
              differentiate  fossil fuel-origin carbons form natural biogenic carbons.  The 
              measurements of carbon-13/carbon-12 can identify various  anthropogenic and
              natural sources as well as kinetic processes in  the formation of atmospheric
              organic acids.       To accomplish this project these researchers have
              developed  methodologies using ion exclusion chromatography to extract, 
              separate, and isolate milligram quantities of individual organic  acids form
              atmospheric wet samples.  During Fall 19993 to Winter  1995, atmospheric wet
              samples such as rain, clouds, fog and dew as  well as gas and aerosol simples
              will be collected in Los Angeles  and its surrounding rural vicinity.  Various
              organic acid-emitting  sources will also be  sampled in this study to determine
              their  specific isotopic ratios.  These source-specific isotopic ratio  data
              will be compared to the isotopic data of atmospheric samples,  in order to
              identify the different sources of the organic acids in  there samples.      
              The identification of specific sources for these atmospheric  organic acids
              will contribute to future control strategies for  acidic deposition and air
              pollution problems in Los Angeles and  elsewhere as proposed by the National
              Clean Air Act.
