Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research On Polyphosphate Accumulation in Bloom-forming
               Cyanobacteria:Effects of Irradiance and Cell Carbohydrate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1994   
File        : a9301038

Award Number: 9301038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27330              (Estimated)
Investigator: G-Yull Rhee rhee@wadsworth.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/474-2011

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 5942,9198,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                9301038  Rhee    This award provides funds to permit Dr. G-Yull Rhee, New York
               State Department of Health and School of Public Health, State  University of
              New York at Albany, to pursue with Dr. Jueson  Maeng, Department of Biology,
              Sogang University, Seoul, and Dr.  B.C. Kim, Kangwon University, Choonchun,
              Korea,  for a period of  24 months, research on polyphosphate accumulation in
              bloom-  forming cyanobacteria: effects of irradiance and cell  carbohydrate. 
              Specifically, the project will involve the study  of (1) the effects of
              irradiance and cellular carbohydrates on  polyphosphate accumulation in
              bloom-forming cyanobacteria,  (2) the carbon flow from photosynthesis during
              polyphosphate  accumulation, (3) competition for energy by polyphosphate 
              accumulation and nitrogen fixation, and (4) any temporal and  spatial
              distribution of polyphosphate synthesis in the water  column during vertical
              migration.  This study will include both  laboratory experiments and field
              investigations.    Buoyancy regulation by cyanobacteria is a unique
              physiological  characteristic which contributes to their dominance in eutrophic
               waters.  Although the physiological mechanism of its regulation  appears to be
              complex and not yet completely understood, this  ability can place them at
              depths that may offer optimal photic  and nutritional conditions.  Studies will
              be conducted at Lake  Soyang, Korea, and, in the laboratory, on bloom-forming
              species  from Lake Soyang and other Korean waters.    The PI and his Korean
              collaborators are experienced investigators  in the field of this research. 
              Under their work plan, the PI  will be responsible for tasks number 1 and 2,
              above; the Korean  collaborators will conduct task number 4; and the PI and his
               collaborators will jointly investigate task number 3.  This  project is
              relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea  Cooperative Science Program which
              seeks to increase the level of  cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists
              and engineers  through the exchange of sci entific information, ideas, skills, 
              and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual  interest and
              benefit.  Participation of the Korean collaborators  in the project is
              supported by the Korea Science and Engineering  Foundation (KOSEF).  ***
