Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: In Vitro Study of the Role of
               Vitreoscilla Hemoglobin on the Enhanced Protein Production of Escherichia
               coli(Travel Award)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1993      
File        : a9301183

Award Number: 9301183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Claire F. Komives   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign centers                                
              of proven excellence.  The program's awards                                    
              provide opportunities for joint research, and                                  
              the use of unique or complementary facilities,                                 
              expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Claire                                      
              Komives of the University of Pittsburgh to work                                
              with Professor Dr. J. E. Bailey at the Swiss                                   
              Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich,                                     
              Switzerland.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The objective of this project is to elucidate                                  
              the mechanism of Vitreoscilla Hemoglobin (VHb)                                 
              in vitro, and to study its function in a                                       
              synthetic cell environment.  Two mechanisms for                                
              the protein action have been suggested which                                   
              provide the basis of this study.  The capacity                                 
              of VHb for improving oxygen uptake to the cell,                                
              and its potential role in affecting the                                        
              efficiency of oxygen utilization by specific                                   
              cell components will be explored.  Because VHb                                 
              both associates with the cell membrane and                                     
              resides within the cell, its function cannot be                                
              properly understood by merely studying it in                                   
              solution.  Reversed micelles offer a novel                                     
              approach to creating a cell-like environment                                   
              for carrying out the in vitro mechanistic                                      
              studies.  The surfactant or phospholipid layer                                 
              encapsulating water pools within an apolar                                     
              solvent is analogous to a cell membrane.  Thus,                                
              the action of VHb is to be studied in a well                                   
              characterized medium that mocks some important                                 
              features of cell make-up, but which lacks the                                  
              complexity of interconnected chemical pathways                                 
              necessary to the function of a living cell.                                    
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel to Switzerland and a                                
              stipend for twelve months.
