Title       : Partially Synchronous Shared-Memory Systems and the Study of Real-Time
               Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1994   
File        : a9301454

Award Number: 9301454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. LeBlanc rich@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gil Neiger  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
              9301454  Neiger  Models of distributed systems fall into two main classes: 
              systems using message passing and those using shared  memory. Early research on
              message-passing systems focused  on two system models:  completely asynchronous
              (in which  there is not timing information available about the  system) and
              completely synchronous (in which perfect  timing information is available).
              More recent research has  also considered partially synchronous  systems (in
              which imperfect timing information is  available), and these intermediate
              systems more accurately  capture the properties of many real systems.  In
              contrast,  research on shared-memory systems has been restricted almost 
              exclusively to completely asynchronous systems (completely  synchronous systems
              are not realistic).  While such a  restriction permits the development of very
              general  algorithms, it excludes consideration of more efficient  algorithms
              that would be correct for many real systems. In  many cases, a partially
              synchronous model is more realistic  for shared-memory systems, just as it is
              for message-passing  systems.  Such a model admits a much wider class of 
              algorithms, and these algorithms can be analyzed with  respect to their
              realtime performance.  The objective of  this project is to provide a
              comprehensive study of  partially synchronous shared-memory systems and to
              develop  and analyze a wide range of algorithms for these systems.    The
              project is developing formal models for partially  synchronous shared-memory
              systems, taking into account  timing behavior and failures; an exploration of
              several  paradigms for algorithm design and analysis in these system, 
              including real-time analyses; the study of a variety of  specific problems in
              distributed computing (such as  consensus and atomic snapshot) and the
              development of  algorithms to solve them in these systems; the application  of
              processor knowledge; and the use of translations between  models with different
              types of faulty behavior.  ***
