Title       : Operation of a National Ocean Sciences Accelerator Facility at the Woods Hole
               Oceanographic Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1998     
File        : a9301015

Award Number: 9301015
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Alexander Shor                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6400209            (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn A. Jones  (Principal Investigator former)
              John M. Hayes jhayes@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Robert J. Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5413      OCEANOGRAPHIC INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 0000,1314,1326,1577,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The PI requests funds to operate the National Ocean Sciences                   
              Accelerator Mass Spectrometer (AMS) facility that has recently been            
              built at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.  The facility is                
              automated for the analysis of oceanographic seawater samples that              
              are being collected as part of the Global Change research programs             
              and will provide AMS dates as a service to the scientific                      
              community.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              In the mid-1980s, the ocean sciences community strongly advocated              
              establishing a radiocarbon dating facility dedicated to the                    
              analysis of carbon isotopes and other tracers in samples collected             
              during major Global Change related field programs such as the World            
              Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) and the Joint Global Ocean Flux            
              Study (JGOFS).  The original project solicitation for the Ocean                
              Sciences Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) facility was presented            
              to the NSB as an information item in May 1987 NSB-87-35.  After                
              extensive review of proposals to establish the facility, the NSB               
              approved a 3-year award beginning in 1989 to Woods Hole                        
              Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) NSB-88-164.  In 1992, a management            
              decision was made to extend the original award to complete                     
              developmental testing of the facility as part of the construction              
              phase prior to establishing an operational award.  This                        
              transitional phase was approved by the NSB in August 1992 NSB-92-              
              132.  Construction and testing of the facility are complete, and               
              this award will begin the operational phase of the facility.                   
                                                                                             
              WHOI will establish two advisory committees which will oversee the             
              efforts of the facility.  The National AMS Policy Board (NAPB) will            
              consist of extramural representatives of the AMS and oceanographic             
              community. This committee will meet annually to review progress at             
              the facility and to recommend technical and managerial changes.                
              WHOI has also established an internal advisory committee that will             
              deal with WHOI administrative issues and will supply more frequent             
              oversight.  Liaison members will provide coordination between the              
              two committees.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Woods Hole has successfully created a National AMS facility for the            
              ocean sciences community within budget and with minor delays.  The             
              operational phase for the AMS facility is new to both Woods Hole               
              and the oceanographic research community.  The commitment of                   
              operations support for 5 years is warranted, but until more                    
              experience is gained, the facility's progress will be monitored                
              closely through the use of review panels and advisory boards.                  
              Program recommends a 5 year award with an interim review after Year            
              2. Budgets will be negotiated on an annual basis.                              
                                                                                             
              Program recommends an award via a cooperative agreement which will             
              allow NSF to maintain proper oversight during the initial operating            
              years.  Terms of the cooperative agreement will be negotiated by               
              the Division of Grants and Contracts.//
