Title       : U.S.-China Cooperative Research: The Beijing-Arizona Color Survey of the Sky
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1993       
File        : a9301805

Award Number: 9301805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34154              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Burstein   (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Hester  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Li-Zhi Fang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rogier A. Windhorst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9200,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports initial collaboration on a                                 
              major sky survey between scientists at Arizona                                 
              State University and the University of Arizona,                                
              and at the Beijing Astronomical Observatory, the                               
              Chinese University of Science and Technology, and                              
              the Purple Mountain Observatory.  This project                                 
              draws on resources and capabilities in both China                              
              and the US: the Chinese will provide a dedicated                               
              telescope and data acquisition system and will                                 
              perform the primary image analysis work; the US                                
              group will contribute subsequent follow-up                                     
              spectroscopy of interesting objects found during                               
              the sky survey.  The support requested in this                                 
              proposal is for a "mini-survey" to develop                                     
              procedures and gain experience for the full-scale                              
              survey.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The past century has seen a steady transformation                              
              of astronomy from a largely descriptive science                                
              to a science concerned with understanding the                                  
              physical structures of the universe and the                                    
              processes which shape them.  New technologies now                              
              make it possible to conduct surveys which yield                                
              quantitative information for large samples of                                  
              objects.  Using these new technologies, this                                   
              survey will prepare for a major cooperative                                    
              survey which will provide a large, accurate data                               
              set that can also be applied to studies of                                     
              galactic structure and stellar populations. This                               
              project makes good use of complementary                                        
              facilities and interests; cooperation with                                     
              Chinese astronomers on projects such as this is                                
              essential for the success of the larger survey of                              
              the sky.
