Title       : CRB: Tropical Forest Regeneration: Influence of Animal Seed-dispersers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1997      
File        : a9301961

Award Number: 9301961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy C. Moermond tcmoermo@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9301961  Moermond  This research will investigate the consequences of
              seed-dispersal by different animal fruit-eaters on tree regeneration dynamics
              at two sites within the Nyungwe forest, an African montane tropical forest in
              Rwanda.  The process of natural regeneration of forest trees depends on a basic
              set of processes:  seed production, seed dispersal, seedling establishment, and
              survival of seedlings to reproductive adults.  This research will focus
              particularly on two of these processes:  seed dispersal and seedling
              establishment.  The consequences of differences among disperser species will be
              investigated in terms of tree species replacement patterns.  This will be done
              1) by describing and modeling the pattern of seed dispersion generated by
              selected animal disperser species for a representative series of tree species,
              and 2) by assessing the relative success of seedling establishment of those
              trees among the principal vegetation patch types of the forest(closed forest,
              secondary forest, and openings).  %%%  Comparison of survival and establishment
              of seedlings under the parent tree and away from the parent in different forest
              patch types will be used to evaluate the relative importance of dispersal. 
              Predictions generated by the study at a site with full complement of animal
              dispersers (Uwinka site) will be tested against measures of seed rain and tree
              replacement estimates.  The observed patterns of seed rain, tree replacement
              estimates, and forest composition will then be compared to those at a
              forest-edge with an impoverished suite of dispersers (Kitabi site).  This site
              will not only provide and assessment  of the apparent consequences of loss of
              dispersers, but will provide a critical case in which to test the applicability
              and the power of the predictive model.  The proposed research relates both to
              the theory of conservation biology and its application to tropical forest
              management.   is problematical however, depending upon whose system is being
              used       although Fries (1874) considers the Polyporaceae to be one of two
              families within the order Aphyllophorales (fungi with non lamellate
              hymenophores), more recent workers                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        !    
                  !         !              F                                                 
                                         (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial             
                                 "             h        e   e          !             -       
              Gayle Edmonds Gayle Edmonds                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
