Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Dyamics in Combustion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1994      
File        : a9301635

Award Number: 9301635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67766              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alvin Bayliss a-bayliss@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9301635  Bayliss       The investigator numerically studies the development of 
              complex spatial and temporal patterns in combustion.  These  patterns are
              associated with narrow reaction zones in which rapid  changes in the dependent
              variables occur across narrow spatial  regions.  The solutions are obtained
              using an adaptive  pseudo-spectral method in which coordinate transformations
              are  introduced during the course of the computation to better resolve  the
              reaction zone and the associated patterns.  He considers the  formation of
              modulated traveling waves (MTWs) in cellular flames,  transitions between
              different types of MTWs and transitions  between MTWs and chaotic patterns,
              one-step and multiple reaction  mechanisms, the role of thermal expansion of
              the gas on the  formation and evolution of the patterns, and the formation of 
              spatial and temporal patterns in condensed phase gasless  combustion.  He also
              further develops the numerical method to  account for problems where there are
              multiple regions of rapid  variation.       It has been observed that many
              combustible mixtures do not  necessarily burn in a unifrom pattern.  Rather,
              ripples and other  patterns can occur along the flame.  The formation of such 
              patterns is believed to be an important stage in the transition  from laminar
              combustion (in which the burning occurs in a  regular,  predictable manner) to
              turbulent combustion (in which the burning  occurs in an erratic, seemingly
              random fashion).  An  understanding  of the transition process is an essential
              prerequisite to control  of the transition process to lead to more efficient
              burning.  In  many instances these patterns can not be predicted by analytic 
              means and experiments are much less advanced than for nonreacting  flows.  In
              the project, the investigator studies the problem of  the formation of patterns
              and the transition to turbulence in  combustion.  The project uses
              supercomputer computations to study  the formation of these patterns and the
              physical mechanisms  underly ing them.  The study relates both to gaseous
              combustion,  i.e., the burning of fossil fuels, and gasless combustion, in 
              which a solid burns directly.  The last process is employed in  the  synthesis
              of materials, in particular of advanced ceramics and  metallic alloys.
