Title       : Ecological Implications of Body Size in Deep-Sea Gastropods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1993      
File        : a9301687

Award Number: 9301687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Rex michael.rex@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1650,
Abstract    :
              9301687  REX    The primary objective of this project is to critically evaluate 
              size trends in deep-sea gastropods in the context of an optimality  model of
              body size. The evolution of body size is a problem of  fundamental interest,
              and one that has an important bearing on  community structure and conservation
              of biodiversity. The most  obvious and pervasive characteristic of the deep-sea
              benthos is the  small size of most species. The numerous attempts to document
              and  explain size patterns in the deep sea have focused on variation  among
              species or whole faunal components, and have led to  conflicting and
              contradictory results, In general, there has been  a failure to recognize that
              studying size as an adaptation to the  deep-sea environment must include
              analyses within species using  measures of size that are standardized to common
              growth stages.  Also, most studies have not applied appropriate statistical
              methods  for either demonstrating or comparing size trends. Sebens'  optimality
              model of body size in marine invertebrates provides a  useful conceptual
              framework for exploring the evolution of size in  deep-sea species. It predicts
              that optimal body size should  decrease with depth under circumstances where
              decreased nutrient  input lowers food intake rates and increases costs of
              foraging; but  it also allows for the evolution of size above the optimum when 
              larger size confers a competitive advantage. A preliminary analysis  within
              eight species of deep-sea gastropods reveals a clear trend  for size to
              increase with depth in both larvae and adults. Based on  this preliminary
              analysis and Sebens' optimality model, this  project will test the hypothesis
              that there are within- and among-  species components to size-depth trends.
              Using a single  taxonomically coherent family of ecologically similar species
              (the  Turridae) and the analysis of covariance, this project will test  four
              specific predictions: 1. that size will increase with depth  within species,
              but that the slopes of size-depth  relations will  decrease with depth, 2. that
              size will decrease among species as  they replace one another along a depth
              gradient, 3. that there will  be a latitudinal gradient in size, with larger
              species found at  higher latitudes, and 4. that size-depth regressions in
              regions of  higher production will have higher elevations than those in regions
               of low productions. This project will provide the first accurate  analysis of
              geographic variation in size within deep-sea species,  and will contribute
              significantly to our basic understanding of  size as an adaptive response to
              the deep-sea environment.  ***
