Title       : Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1995       
File        : a9301530

Award Number: 9301530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Grant Norton norton@mme.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Hirth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey J. Hoyt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Hoagland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Antolovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9162,
Abstract    :
              9311739  Norton       This modern, research-grade 200kv transmission electron 
              microscope with scanning and analytical capabilities for Washington  State
              University will be used in an expanding, materials research  and education
              program.  Materials research has been identified as  a high-priority area of
              emphasis at Washington State University.   Two cross-college organizations-The
              Center for Materials Research  and the Materials Science Program-have been
              recently established to  address the interdisciplinary nature of Materials
              Science.  The  Center for Materials Research which consists of 19 senior 
              participants was formed with the purpose of encouraging  collaborative,
              cross-disciplinary research projects in the area of  materials and applied
              condensed mater science.  The Materials  Science Program is the educational arm
              of the materials science  thrust at Washington State University. The Materials
              Science  Program was initiated in the Fall of 1990 and consequently is the 
              most recently created Ph.D. program in the University.  It is one  of the few
              truly interdisciplinary programs in the nation as it  involves active
              participation from both Engineering and Science  departments.  Twenty-two
              faculty members, from 6 departments  participate in the Program.       This
              instrument will permit conventional imaging in both  bright-field and
              dark-field modes, high spatial resolution imaging,  electron diffraction, and
              microanalysis of microstructural features  in TEM specimens.  A heating stage
              and temperature controller are  also requested, which will enable us to perform
              in-situ heating  studies in the electron microscope.  These studies are
              essential  for our research programs in the areas of particle coarsening of 
              metallic alloys and metal induced embrittlement.  Acquisition of a 
              transmission electron microscope is essential for research  activities in a
              number of departments within the University,  including; Mechanical and
              Materials Engineering, Physics,  Chemistry, Geology, Chemical Engineer ing, and
              Electrical  Engineering.  There are a total of 15 graduate students whose 
              research will directly benefit from the acquisition of a  transmission electron
              microscope.  In addition, there are about 14  graduate students involved in the
              other projects whose research  would significantly benefit from microstructural
              studies involving  TEM.  In addition a TEM on campus will provide substantial
              benefit  as an instructional instrument for both graduate and undergraduate 
              students, exposing them to modern analytical instrumentation which  is not
              presently available to them.  ***
