Title       : Applications of Distance Geometry to Structural Elucidation by NMR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1995  
File        : a9301120

Award Number: 9301120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Hayden   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9183,9216,BIOT,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Thomas Hayden is jointly funded by a grant from the                  
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program, the                           
              Computational Biology Program, the Biophysics Program, and the                 
              Computational Mathematics Program to continue his theoretical                  
              research in the application of distance geometry to the                        
              interpretation of NMR spectra.  Data from NMR experiments                      
              provide lower and upper bounds on the values of interactomic                   
              distances allowed by the ensemble of conformations of a                        
              molecule.  Distance geometry can be used to improve these                      
              bounds by methods known as bound smoothing.  New applications                  
              of distance geometry to bound smoothing are being investigated.                
               Specific geometric structures and their relationship to                       
              certain classes of distance matrices are being carried out.                    
              One goal of understanding this relationship is to suggest                      
              possible conformations that can serve as a template for the                    
              design by a pharmaceutical chemist of rigid drug analogues                     
              which are active at a specific receptor site.                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) techniques are rapidly                        
              evolving which will enable chemists to determine the                           
              3-dimensional structures of large protein and nucleic acids in                 
              solution.  These techniques provide an important complement to                 
              the more well-established X-ray crystallographic methods.  The                 
              primary results which are obtained from such NMR experiments                   
              are internuclear distances between selected hydrogen atoms in                  
              the backbone of the protein molecule.  Distance geometry                       
              methods, such as those being developed by Hayden, provide the                  
              primary mathematical tools which are used to determine the                     
              3-dimensional geometry from these distance constraints.
