Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: The Study of Metal-Ceramic
               Interfaces by Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1993      
File        : a9301705

Award Number: 9301705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith C. Yang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Travel Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research abroad at research                                
              centers of proven excellence.  The program's                                   
              awards provide opportunities for joint                                         
              research, and the use of unique or                                             
              complementary facilities, expertise and                                        
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Judith C.                                   
              Yang to work with Dr. Manfred Ruhle at the Max                                 
              Planck Institute for Metals Research in                                        
              Stuttgart, Germany.                                                            
                                                                                             
              Dr. Yang proposes to do two experiments for the                                
              fundamental study of the atomic structure,                                     
              chemistry and electronic structure of two                                      
              similar model metal-ceramic systems, Pt-NiO and                                
              Ni-NiO, by electron microscopy techniques.  For                                
              the NiO-Pt system, an intermetallic interlayer,                                
              NiPt, is expected to form at the interface by                                  
              heat treatment at suitable temperature, time                                   
              and oxygen activity as suggested by phase                                      
              diagrams and previous work.  The chemistry and                                 
              the electronic structure due to formation of                                   
              the intermetallic compound will be studied                                     
              using electron energy loss spectroscopy.  For a                                
              more fundamental study of fine changes in the                                  
              electronic structure due to the presence of an                                 
              interface, a simpler system, Ni-NiO, will be                                   
              studied with energy loss near edge                                             
              spectroscopy.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel and a stipend for                                   
              twelve months.
