Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Strategies for Bayesian Data Analysiswith Application to
               Quantal Bioassay and Geographic Disease Occurrence Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1995  
File        : a9301316

Award Number: 9301316
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan E. Gelfand alan@stat.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Recently there have been major advances in the development                
              of monte carlo strategies to obtain samples from high dimensional              
              nonnormalized joint densities.  These techniques have proved                   
              especially valuable in fitting structured random effects models.               
              In such settings,  Analytic examination of the posterior                       
              distribution is infeasible but sampling enables arbitrarily                    
              accurate estimation of any features of the posterior with the                  
              promise of fitting an enormous range of previously inaccessible                
              models attention must now turn to the development of tools for                 
              bayesian data analysis.  Consistent with the informality of the                
              art of model development we propose to develop informal tools                  
              with an eda flavor to mesh naturally with the sampling based                   
              approaches used to fit the model.  Application will be in two                  
              Biometric areas, quantal bioassay and geographic disease mapping.              
                   CONTEMPORARY STATISTICAL WORK IS DRIVEN BY SERIOUS                        
              Applications.  Realistic Models in such applications will                      
              necessarily be complex incorporating many unknowns.  Indeed,                   
              there may be several plausible models with collected data, the                 
              question arises of how to fit such models with several choices                 
              of models we might ask if any of them are good and which one we                
              prefer.  The role of the data analyst is to provide answers to                 
              these questions.  The proposed research is intended to help the                
              data analyst by providing a unifying strategy for carrying out                 
              the fitting and an associated set of tools for studying adequacy               
              of and choice of models at the heart of the entire approach is                 
              the most elementary of statistical ideas - drawing samples to                  
              learn about model unknowns.  We propose to utilize this approach               
              in two biometric areas of application.  One considers geographic               
              patterns of disease occurrence.  The other involves the change in              
              toxicity to a population due to change in exposure to a toxin.
