Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Robust Estimation of Multivariate Location and Shape in
               High Dimension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1993       
File        : a9301344

Award Number: 9301344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Rocke dmrocke@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Woodruff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project will develop computationally efficient, robust,              
              affine-equivariant estimators of multivariate location and shape               
              for use in multivariate analysis and for identification of high                
              leverage points in robust regression.  This problem has proved to              
              be computationally quite challenging---reliable solutions were                 
              possible with previous methods only for small samples and low                  
              dimension.  We have developed methods that greatly increase the                
              effectiveness of these procedures and propose to develop these                 
              methods further, including the adaptation to massively parallel                
              architectures.  The goal, which seems to be in reach, is to                    
              obtain reliable, estimates in a few seconds, compared to the many              
              hours of computation time now required.                                        
                   The detection of unusual observations and clusters of                     
              observations is an important part of any effective statistical                 
              analysis.  Such observations may be mistakes or may represent                  
              important new phenomena.  For data that consists of many                       
              simultaneous measurements, this goal has to date been out of                   
              reach of the best statistical methods.  We have developed                      
              techniques that make this goal practical, and, under this                      
              project, we will further develop them, together with their                     
              computer implementations.
