Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Validation and Expansion of a Human
               Computer System Design Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1995   
File        : a9301720

Award Number: 9301720
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49377              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane H. Sonnenwald   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign centers                                
              of proven excellence.  The program's awards                                    
              provide opportunities for joint research, and                                  
              the use of unique or complementary facilities,                                 
              expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Diane H.                                    
              Sonnenwald of Rutgers University to work with                                  
              Dr. Annelise Mark Pejtersen at Risoe National                                  
              Laboratory in Roskilde, Denmark for ten months                                 
              and with Dr. Heinz-Dieter Boecker at GMD-IPSI                                  
              in Darmstadt, Germany for two months.                                          
                                                                                             
              Their research project proposes to validate a                                  
              descriptive human computer system design model                                 
              (Sonnenwald, 1992) that characterizes                                          
              communication among users, designers, and                                      
              developers and expand it to include strategies                                 
              which may help design participants interact                                    
              more effectively while creating human computer                                 
              systems.  The model, developed through a                                       
              qualitative analysis of an expert system design                                
              project and telecommunications network                                         
              management system design project, describes                                    
              design roles, themes, and intra- and intergroup                                
              communication networks and their evolution                                     
              during the design process.  Hypotheses, based                                  
              on the model, will be generated to predict                                     
              participants' interactions in design                                           
              situations.  An empirical test strategy, using                                 
              multiple groups in real design projects, will                                  
              be used to determine the validity of the                                       
              predictions.  The result will be a proposed                                    
              predictive design model that may ultimately                                    
              improve the quality of design outcomes and lead                                
              to the development of a more comprehensive                                     
              design curriculum.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel, a stipend for                                      
              twelve months, a dependent allowance for Dr.                                   
              Sonnenwald's family, and an allowance for                                      
              travel within country to meet with study                                       
              participants.
