Title       : Postdoctoral Fellowship Program with the Former Soviet Unionand Eastern Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1994 
File        : a9301279

Award Number: 9301279
Award Instr.: Contract                                     
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary E. Dwoskin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,5915,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In response to NSF REP No. SEE 92-008, the Office for                          
              Central Europe and Eurasia (OCEE) of the National Academy                      
              of Sciences (NAS) will continue a postdoctoral fellowship                      
              program which supports collaborative research between                          
              American scientists and their colleagues from the former                       
              Soviet Union (FSU) and Eastern Europe (EE) for the period                      
              of January 1, 1993 through December 31, 1994.                                  
                                                                                             
              The funding from the National Science Foundation (NSF)                         
              will support primarily individual American scientists to                       
              either travel to or host colleagues from the former                            
              Soviet Union and Eastern Europe for one to six months.                         
              Up to 40 percent of the fellowships will be provided for                       
              two-week project development visits which allow                                
              participants to develop plans for long-term cooperative                        
              research projects, with special emphasis on developing                         
              concrete proposals for submission to NSF's FSU/EE                              
              cooperative science programs.  The project development                         
              visits are also intended to provide support for                                
              scientists to respond, with relatively short lead time,                        
              to unusual scientific opportunities of exceptional merit                       
              and potential benefit to U.S. science.                                         
                                                                                             
              Young investigators will be given special consideration                        
              in the selection.  At least 25 percent of the                                  
              fellowships, both in long-term research and project                            
              development visits, will be awarded to young                                   
              investigators as an encouragement to and investment in                         
              long-term collaboration.  In the absence of a U.S.                             
              government science and technology agreement with Romania,                      
              the Romania twinning program will continue to foster                           
              interaction between American scientists and their                              
              Romanian colleagues, who remain largely isolated from the                      
              international scientific community.                                            
                                                                                             
              A small portion of the requested funds will support                            
              compilations of information about science and technology                       
              development in the region obtained through these                               
              individual visits and other OCEE activities.                                   
                                                                                             
              This project fulfills the program objective of advancing                       
              scientific knowledge by enabling leading researchers in                        
              the United States and Eastern Europe, including the                            
              former Soviet Union, to combine complementary efforts and                      
              capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and                            
              competence in the field of basic scientific research on                        
              the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of                           
              benefit.
