Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Singular Integrals and Fourier Integrals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1993      
File        : a9301064

Award Number: 9301064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan T. Greenleaf allan@math.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Certain Fourier integral operators which are not associated               
              with local canonical graphs arise naturally in harmonic analysis,              
              integral geometry and partial differential equations.  This                    
              project will formulate classes of canonical relations and find                 
              composition calculi and sharp estimates for Fourier integral                   
              operators associated with these classes.  The simplest example                 
              arises when one seeks to determine whether the composition of                  
              operators is again a Fourier integral operator without the                     
              transverse intersection hypothesis of Hormander or the clean                   
              intersection calculus developed by Duistermaat and Guillemin.  In              
              particular work will be done on the case of degenerate operators.              
              Emphasis will be placed on those modelled on oscillatory                       
              integrals with cubic degeneracies in the phase with the goal of                
              obtaining estimates and composition properties.  Applications                  
              include estimates and nonlocal inversion formulae for restricted               
              two-plane (and, possibly, k-plane) transforms.  In connection                  
              with classes of generalized Fourier integral distributions                     
              associated with singular Lagrangians, the backscattering by a                  
              singular conformal metric on real n-dimensional space will be                  
              analyzed.                                                                      
                   The underlying objectives of this research are                            
              to understand complex differential and integral operators through              
              fundamental techniques of inversion plus decomposition.  The                   
              work combines powerful abstract methods in analysis and geometry               
              to develop underlying structures within which properties of                    
              the operator scan be established.
