Title       : FAW: Activity-Regulated Trophic Factor Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1996     
File        : a9024143

Award Number: 9024143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine M. Gall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1192,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With a Faculty Award for Women Scientists and Engineers from the               
              National Science Foundation, Dr. Christine Gall will continue to               
              elucidate the role of activity-dependent neuronal gene expression              
              in shaping the functional properties of neuronal circuities in                 
              response to experience.  By using a combination of sophisticated               
              neuroanatomical and molecular biological techniques, Dr. Gall                  
              discovered that high frequency electrical stimulation in defined               
              neuronal pathways alter the expression of genes encoding specific              
              neuropeptides and neurotransmitters.  For example, she has found               
              that this activity induces changes in the genomic expression of a              
              major subclass of glutamate receptors within the hippocampus, an               
              area critical for the formation of memories.  She is now                       
              beginning to unravel the clues about the mechanisms of                         
              neuropeptide regulation by examining more rapid, transcriptional               
              events.  With this award, she will concentrate on understanding                
              how this physiological activity alters the regulation of                       
              immediate-early genes which then encode the proteins that mediate              
              neuropeptide regulation.  Moreover, she extend the anatomical                  
              work by developing electrophysiological approaches which enable                
              her to examine the functional consequences of the change in gene               
              expression within specific neuronal circuitry for neuropeptides,               
              neurotransmitters and, more recently, neurotropic factors.                     
              Indeed this Award will permit her to explore the significance of               
              her seminal finding that nerve growth factor is modulated in                   
              adult mammalian brain.  This work leads to a more thorough                     
              understanding of the functional organization and the plasticity                
              of the nervous system.
