Title       : Reactive Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1993   
File        : a9024996

Award Number: 9024996
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maitland Jones mjjr@chemvax.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Investigations in the general area of reactive intermediate                    
              chemistry will be pursued. Properties of carbenes, twisted pi-                 
              systems, and boron-containing reactive intermediates will be                   
              studied. Ring expansion rearrangement of carbenes will be used to              
              generate twisted pi-systems, that is, bridgehead double bonds.                 
              Methanol or deutero-methanol will be used to trap these reactive               
              intermediates, and to thereby determine the relative amounts of                
              carbene to bridgehead double bond. The mechanism of the reaction               
              of carbenes with carboranes will be studied, and the role of a 13-             
              vertex intermediate will be determined. Intramolecular reactions               
              of carbenes with carboranes will also be investigated and this can             
              lead to the preparation of carboranophanes, the carborane analog               
              of a cyclophane. Preparation and trapping of ortho-and meta-                   
              benzyne analogs in the carboranes series will be pursued. The                  
              ortho-benzyne analog will lead to the carborane version of                     
              benzocyclobutadiene.                                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              continuing work of Professor Maitland Jones at Princeton                       
              University. Carbenes and twisted double bonds are two reactive                 
              species that will be studied. A carbon atom to which there are                 
              only two bonds, rather than the normal four bonds, is called a                 
              carbene. Since two bonds to carbon are missing in a carbene they               
              are reactive species, and Dr. Jones will employ them to generate               
              another reactive species, a twisted double bond. These studies                 
              will be pursued with compounds that contain only carbon and                    
              hydrogen (hydrocarbons), and with carboranes (compounds that                   
              contain a spherical array of carbon and boron atoms).
