Title       : Ericaceae: Flora of Ecuador
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1993     
File        : a9024221

Award Number: 9024221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180891             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Luteyn jluteyn@nybg.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Andean cloud forest is the most devastated and threatened area            
              within Ecuador.  Consequently, studies of cloud forest plants must             
              be undertaken before their genetic diversity is lost to extinction             
              through habitat conversion.                                                    
                   The Ericaceae family (blueberries, cranberries, rhododendrons,            
              and azaleas) is a prominent feature of tropical cloud forest in                
              Ecuador and often dominates a major vegetation type.  Fifty percent            
              of the Ericaceae (92 species) growing in cloud forest in Ecuador               
              maybe be considered endangered.  Ericaceae also has great economic             
              potential in Ecuador for food, horticulture, and floriculture which            
              have not yet been exploited.                                                   
                   This project, culminating in a taxonomic treatment of the                 
              family Ericaceae for the international project Flora of Ecuador,               
              will enhance the capabilities of institutions in Ecuador to conduct            
              research related to biological diversity and economic potential.               
              It will provide basic information on species richness (i.e.                    
              biodiversity); it will provide a picture of the distribution of                
              plants thus pinpointing centers of diversity (for local                        
              conservation); it will provide a reference for purposes of                     
              comparing areas and help Ecuadoreans in locating and designing new             
              areas for protection and in preparing master plans for these areas;            
              and finally it will provide training for local scientists and                  
              students in survey and collecting techniques, herbarium management,            
              and botanical publication.
