Title       : Airborne Doppler Radar Investigation of Atmospheric Convection in TOGA COARE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1992      
File        : a9024431

Award Number: 9024431
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205027             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Houze houze@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   This grant supports a program of airborne Doppler-radar                   
              measurements to study the atmospheric sensible heat and momentum               
              budgets in the Tropical Ocean Global Atmosphere Program's Coupled              
              Ocean Atmosphere Response Experiment (TOGA COARE).  The primary                
              objective of the research is to obtain better estimates of the                 
              magnitudes and vertical profiles of all the terms in the                       
              atmospheric sensible heat budget in convectively disturbed                     
              regions over the western Pacific warm pool.  To achieve this                   
              objective, the PIs will take advantage of the fact that the two                
              NOAA P3 aircraft and the NCAR Electra aircraft will be                         
              instrumented to obtain dual-doppler radar measurements by means                
              of dual-beam antennas.  The aircraft will also be equipped with                
              boundary-layer instruments, cloud microphysical sensors, and                   
              radiometers.  The PI will use the three aircraft, in conjunction               
              with a ship/island network of sounding systems and surface-based               
              radars, to obtain key information for calculating the terms in                 
              the heat and momentum budgets.  Terms associated with the                      
              synopticscale flow can be estimated from the sounding-system                   
              data. Radiation measurements aboard the aircraft will be used to               
              estimate the terms associated with radiative transfer in and out               
              of cloud.  Precipitation and boundary-layer measurements made                  
              both by the aircraft and by the surface network will provide                   
              important constraints and boundary conditions for the                          
              calculations.  The airborne dual-Doppler radar data will provide               
              key information for calculating the terms in the budgets                       
              associated with in-cloud air motions.                                          
                   This research is important because it has the potential to                
              increase understanding of how convection and clouds influence                  
              climate on interannual time scales.  This project is part of the               
              interagency TOGA COARE program.
