Title       : Annular-Mist Flow Transport With Phase Change in Complex Fin-Matrix Passages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1991      
File        : a9024862

Award Number: 9024862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274939             (Estimated)
Investigator: Van P. Carey vcarey@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The present capability to understand and predict two-phase                     
              transport for annular flow in complex fin-matrix passages is                   
              clearly limited by the current lack of information regarding                   
              the shedding, entrainment and deposition mechanisms in such                    
              flows.  These studies address this problem specifically by                     
              examining the manner in which liquid is shed from fin                          
              structures and the way in which the liquid breaks-up into                      
              droplets and is dispersed into the core flow.  Microprobe                      
              instrumentation is being developed to obtain quantitative                      
              information about local droplet density and size distribution                  
              downstream of fin structures, and this instrumentation will                    
              also augment the general capabilities of researchers working                   
              on multiphase flow transport.  Detailed quantitative                           
              measurements of the entrainment downstream of fin-type                         
              structures and lateral transport of liquid between fins and                    
              prime surface areas, as well as in situ measurements in                        
              vaporizing and condensing flows in fin matrix passages are                     
              being made.  These experiments include simultaneous                            
              measurement of entrainment characteristics and overall heat                    
              transfer for convective vaporization and condensation of pure                  
              coolants and binary mixtures over wide ranges of flow                          
              conditions.  The final stage of the study will use data                        
              obtained in the experiments to assess and improve existing                     
              models of shedding, deposition and lateral film transport.                     
              These improved models will be incorporated into improved                       
              computational schemes for predicting the overall transport to                  
              evaluate the impact of these mechanisms on heat and mass                       
              transfer in the matrix.  The information regarding liquid                      
              transport mechanisms obtained in the proposed research will                    
              serve to enhance the capabilities for predicting two-phase                     
              transport in compact evaporators and condensers, cooling                       
              towers, and other equipment in which the flow passages are                     
              complex and/or contain interrupted surfaces.
