Title       : U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Science: Acoustic Models of Consonant Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1991    
File        : a9024713

Award Number: 9024713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10770              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth N. Stevens stevens@speech.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5937      SWEDEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 1311,
Abstract    :
              This two-year award in linguistics will support collaborative                  
              research between Dr. Kenneth N. Stevens of the Massachusetts                   
              Institute of Technology (M.I.T) and Dr. Gunnar Fant of the                     
              Royal Institute of Technology (R.I.T) in Stockholm, Sweden.                    
              The objective of the proposed project is to advance scientific                 
              understanding of the acoustic processes of speech sounds,                      
              specifically consonant production.                                             
                                                                                             
              The M.I.T and R.I.T speech groups have had a long-standing                     
              collaboration in theoretical studies of acoustics and                          
              perception of consonants.  Recently, the R.I.T group has                       
              been active in the development of computer-based vocal                         
              tract-models of consonant production; whereas, the MIT group                   
              has focused on acoustic analysis and synthesis of consonants                   
              and the application of acoustic studies to theories of                         
              phonetics and phonology.  The proposed collaboration will                      
              link the recent work of American and Swedish speech groups                     
              in problematic areas in consonant production.  These                           
              include:  (1) sound generation at the larynx at vowel-                         
              consonant and consonant-vowel boundaries, (2) mechanisms of                    
              sound production at the release of stop consonants; and (3)                    
              acoustic changes at the implosion and release of nasal                         
              consonants.  Dr. Stevens proposes to use the computer-based                    
              model at R.I.T to extensively test the M.I.T theories and to                   
              understand the model so it can be implemented on computers                     
              at M.I.T. for future research work.  The field will benefit                    
              from the complementary expertise of both groups and advance                    
              our understanding of consonant production and processes.  This                 
              research has important applications in the development of                      
              machine-made (electronic) speech synthesis and recognition.                    
              It also has relevance for the diagnosis and treatment of                       
              communication disorders and in second language learning.
