Title       : U.S.- UK Cooperative Research: Robust Control of Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1995        
File        : a9024869

Award Number: 9024869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tryphon T. Georgiou georgiou@ee.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1467,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in systems                      
              engineering between Dr. Tryphon Georghiou, University of                       
              Minnesota, and Dr. Malcolm Smith, University of Cambridge,                     
              England.  The objective of the project is to develop novel                     
              theoretical tools and techniques for the analysis and                          
              design of control systems.                                                     
                                                                                             
              Specifically, the goal of the research is to develop an                        
              integrated approach to identification, modeling and control                    
              for linear dynamical systems.  The approach is based on the                    
              notion of a graph of dynamical systems.  Uncertainty,                          
              perturbations and modeling error are measured by the gap                       
              metric.  The gap metric is a notion of distance between                        
              systems suitable for use in the context of robust stabiliza-                   
              tion and control.  This notion of distance is independent of                   
              any particular representation (e.g. state-space, transfer                      
              function, or any special system of coordinates) and applies                    
              equally well to the most general class of infinite-dimensional                 
              distributed parameter systems (e.g. flexible structures).                      
              The proposed research will focus on quantitative estimates                     
              of modeling/identification error/uncertainty measured by the                   
              gap metric and their effect on stability/performance of                        
              feedback systems.  The immediate impact of this research is                    
              expected to be in the development of new control design                        
              methodologies. The development of the gap metric, as a tool                    
              for analysis and design of robust control systems, has been                    
              the main theme of recent work of the two investigators. The                    
              project will benefit from the complementary expertise of the                   
              investigators in control theory and their history of past                      
              successful collaboration.
