Title       : The Transformation of the Large Law Firm in England: A Comparative Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1991       
File        : a9024662

Award Number: 9024662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60709              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc Galanter   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Palay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Over the past several decades, large law firms have experienced                
              substantial growth.  Recent theory grounded in economic models                 
              attributes exponential growth rates to the existence of tournaments            
              in the large firm.  Essentially the theory postulates an internal              
              labor market in the large law firm where partners create                       
              appropriate incentives for associates through the organization of              
              tournaments.  Growth is seen as a consequence of the need to                   
              promote some junior members, and recruitment is seen as a                      
              consequence of the need to replace those who are and are not                   
              promoted.  Thus, the ratio of associates to partners does not                  
              decrease over time, and a constant promotion rate is hypothesized.             
              While there is evidence of this pattern in the United States, its              
              generalizability must be examined in a broader context.                        
                                                                                             
              An apt comparison to the U.S. case is the English experience.  The             
              large solicitors' firms in the United Kingdom have shown similar               
              patterns of growth despite differences in legal practice and in the            
              character and function of law.  This study systematically analyzes             
              the recent transformations of both American and English law firms              
              in order to understand what has made them grow and change and how              
              these developments affect the future of these firms and the legal              
              system in which they are set.  The project consists of three                   
              interrelated parts:  (1) an account of the contemporary growth and             
              transformation of one echelon of English solicitors' firms; (2) a              
              theory that portrays this transformation as a manifestation of the             
              underlying structure of the firm growing exponentially, and a test             
              of the theory; and (3) a comparison of the transformation of the               
              English firms with that of large American law firms.  A data set               
              will be constructed on the growth and hierarchical structure of                
              approximately 100 English firms for a period of 75 years.  The data            
              will include analysis of archival materials and interviews with                
              informants.  Comparable American data has been obtained by the                 
              investigators in prior research.                                               
                                                                                             
              This study provides a unique opportunity to account for                        
              organizational development within contrasting legal settings.  The             
              research will have both practical and theoretical importance in                
              setting forth issues arising from the kinds of services law firms              
              are providing and the conflicts they are having with the business              
              world.  Analyzing the patterns of similarity and differences in the            
              development of the law firm in the United States and England will              
              illuminate the relationship between the structural characteristics             
              of law firms and the changing consumption of legal services in a               
              globalized economy.
