Title       : CCD-Scanning for Comets and Asteroids, U.S.-India Cooperative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1991 
File        : a9024634

Award Number: 9024634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7450               (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom Gehrels tgehrels@1p1.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5919      INDIA (COOPERATIVE SCIENCE)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 5919,
Abstract    :
              Technical Description:  This proposal seeks funding for a small                
              portion of an Indo-U.S. collaborative effort that has begun                    
              building a capability of astronomical observation of comets and                
              asteroids at the Kavalur Observatory, Indian Institute of                      
              Astrophysics in Bangalore.  This  program has been undertaken in               
              consultation with  Dr. Tom Gehrels and staff at the University of              
              Arizona, Tucson.  The proposed Indian system will emulate the                  
              Spacewatch system for astroid exploration that Dr. Gehrels has                 
              pioneered at the Steward observatory.  This proposal will allow                
              for closer collaboration with the Indian participants and in                   
              addition to their annual visits to Tuscon will provide them with               
              the necessary computer software, hardware, and procedures for for              
              their own Spacewatch System.  The system requires continuous                   
              updates and immediate communication with India particularly for                
              discoveries of near-Earth asteroids.  The study of asteroids has               
              become a well established discipline, important for the                        
              understanding of our origins as well as for the dynamical                      
              evolution of near-Earth objects.  The relationship between                     
              asteroids, comets and meteorites is an area of major scientific                
              interest that has become enhanced through the use of charge-                   
              coupled devices (CCD) for scanning rather than photographic                    
              scanning.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Scope:  A program of asteroid exploration is important not only                
              for the interesting scientific information but also as a base of               
              knowledge to begin the exploitation of non-terrestrial resources.              
              These may provide sources of water and metals or even such                     
              economically important resources such as cobalt and platinum.  An              
              increase in the number of telescopes in the world that can do                  
              this kind of work can lead to important discoveries.  The                      
              facility in India will be world-class and the capability will be               
              there for making a significant contribution.  This program will                
              facilitate the transfer of knowledge from other countries to                   
              India, because the India Institute for Astrophysics (IIA) will                 
              have very capable hardware and software, which will attract                    
              scientists throughout the world.
