Title       : Oceanographic Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1991      
File        : a9024940

Award Number: 9024940
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Hutchinson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Findley  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 5413      OCEANOGRAPHIC INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Rosensteil School of Marine Science at the University of                   
              Miami will acquire several items of oceanographic                              
              instrumentation to be placed in a pool of shared use                           
              equipment.  This equipment is maintained for use on or in                      
              association with the two research vessels operated by the                      
              university.  A substantial part of the ships' operating                        
              schedule during 1991 is in support of NSF-sponsored research                   
              projects.  The instrumentation will also increase the                          
              capabilities of the ship and of the University to support                      
              research and engineering activities.  The instrumentation                      
              includes:                                                                      
                                                                                             
              -Newly developed Rosette water sampler to improve the                          
               collection of discrete seawater samples at specific water                     
               depths,                                                                       
              -Water sampler bottles for the new Rosette system, -                           
              Microcomputer system upgrade and other peripheral equipment                    
               for increasing shared-use, sea-going computing capabilities,                  
              -precision temperature sensors for the CTD,                                    
              -Precision acoustic altimeter for use in determining the                       
               precise position of a scientific instrument package relative                  
               to the seafloor, and                                                          
              -Terminal server for enhancing scientific data transfer and                    
               communications amongst scientific users of the ship,                          
              -Salinity bottles for storing seawater samples,                                
              -A precision salinometer for determining the salinity of                       
               seawater,                                                                     
              -Electronic reversing thermometers for calibrating deep sea                    
               temperature measurements,                                                     
              -Electronic analytical balance, and                                            
              -Piston corer barrels for collecting profiles of seafloor                      
               sediments.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The instrumentation described above will increase the                          
              capability of the University to support NSF-sponsored                          
              research and engineering projects.
