Title       : International Commercial Arbitration in the Emerging Global Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1993     
File        : a9024498

Award Number: 9024498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112751             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryant G. Garth b-garth@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yves Dezalay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Bar Foundation
	      750 North Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606114403    312/988-6589

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0303000   Conflict Resolution                     
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              International commercial arbitration has become a vital institution            
              in the emerging global economy and has displaced litigation in many            
              instances.  Business entities and governments for various reasons              
              have turned increasingly to international commercial arbitration               
              in order to process the transnational disputes that inevitably                 
              arise with increased trade and commerce.  The disputes are part of             
              a competitive process which involves arbitration centers, legal                
              professionals, and sets of governing norms.  Understanding the                 
              patterns of this disputing is crucial to understanding how business            
              transactions will be regulated within the new global order.                    
                                                                                             
              This project explores the development of and variations in                     
              international commercial arbitration.  The research draws generally            
              on four bodies of theoretical literature:  private governance, the             
              role of multinational enterprises in the global economy, disputing             
              processes, and the internationalization of the legal profession.               
              Approximately 100-150 lawyers and arbitrators in six international             
              cities will be identified and interviewed to create the primary                
              data set.  Additional data will include historical, descriptive                
              data and statistical data from several arbitration centers in order            
              to document changes in this practice in recent years.                          
                                                                                             
              This study of international commercial arbitration provides a                  
              unique opportunity to bring a rich body of research to a neglected             
              aspect of business disputing and therefore to explore the emerging             
              system of private and public governance in the field of                        
              international commerce.   The research promises to add                         
              substantially to our understanding of the development of private               
              sector dispute resolution and its relationship both to the public              
              courts and the private agendas of professional groups and                      
              corporations.  In addition, private governance and global business             
              will be related to the question of what lawyers have to offer in               
              a regime beyond nation states.
