Title       : PRISM: A Laboratory for Research in Future High-Performance Parallel Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1995     
File        : a9024618

Award Number: 9024618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2007232            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary K. Vernon vernon@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barton P. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Carey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This infrastructure award is for the acquisition of a SIMD and            
              a MIMD parallel computer for the support of research in the areas              
              of parallel programming tools, programming languages, databases,               
              parallel optimization algorithms, scientific computing, computer               
              architecture, artificial intelligence, and models of parallel                  
              computation.  The research will involve both the development of                
              algorithms specific to the SIMD and MIMD architectures and the use             
              of these computers as compute servers over the departmental                    
              network.                                                                       
                   The next development in high performance computing will be                
              high speed parallel processors.  There are currently two main                  
              classifications of these processors-Single Instruction Multiple                
              Data (SIMD) and Multiple Instruction Multiple Data (MIMD)                      
              processors.  SIMD computers execute a single sequence of                       
              instructions on all of its processing elements.  Each processing               
              element may have different data that it is processing.  A MIMD                 
              computer may have a different program running on each of its                   
              processing elements that may have their own data.  In order to                 
              develop the software necessary to utilize these computers it is                
              necessary to have in place software tools that support                         
              instrumentation, program development, and resource allocation.  The            
              development of such tools is supported by this infrastructure.  It             
              is also important to determine which problems run best on which                
              type of processor.  Thus these computers will be used in research              
              in artificial intelligence, databases, and computer architecture in            
              determining efficient algorithms for these problem domains.                    
              Finally, these computers are efficient numeric processors and will             
              be used for both scientific computing and numeric optimization                 
              problems.
