Title       : Neuro-Controllers for Motion Control Systems with MechanicalDistributed
               Flexibility (SGER)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  1991    
File        : a9024266

Award Number: 9024266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elbert L. Marsh                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47739              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sabri Cetinkunt scetin@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              This research examines the use of neural networks in the                       
              motion control of systems involving distributed mechanical                     
              flexibility, a characteristic of large space structures                        
              systems and of high speed, high precision, light weight                        
              manipulation devices.  The major problems encountered in                       
              controlling such systems are associated with dynamic                           
              nonlinearities and coupling between degrees of freedom, and                    
              with the large dynamic order of the system due to                              
              mechanical flexibility.  Current control techniques, i.e.,                     
              model reference adaptive control and self tuning adaptive                      
              control are based on linear systems theory.  An advantage                      
              of neural networks is their ability to directly identify                       
              nonlinear dynamics and use it in the determination of the                      
              control action.  A second advantage is that they are                           
              particularly suitable for systems of large dynamic order.                      
              Other useful characteristics include their learning ability                    
              and fault tolerance.  In this project, the mechanical                          
              system to be controlled will be modeled in sufficient                          
              detail to provide a reasonable representation of its                           
              dynamics.  The neuro-controller for the system will be                         
              trained off line to an acceptable level.  It will then be                      
              installed on the actual mechanical system whose                                
              characteristics may not perfectly match those of the system                    
              on which it was trained.  The control performance is                           
              expected to continuously improve by learning more and more                     
              about the system on line.  The relative merits of neuro-                       
              controllers, model reference controllers, and self tuning                      
              controllers will be compared.
