Title       : Systematics and Biogeography of the Rainforest Herpetofauna of Madagascar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1993       
File        : a9024505

Award Number: 9024505
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald A. Nussbaum nuss@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Raxworthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is to (1) determine the herpetofaunal                    
              diversity of the remnant rainforests of Madagascar; (2) determine              
              the distribution and relative abundance of the component species;              
              (3) estimate the systematic relationships of species and genera                
              based on cladistic and phenetric analyses of morphological,                    
              genetic, chromosomal, behavioral, and life history data; (4) use               
              cladistic methods to analyze biogeographic patterns within                     
              Madagascar; (5) determine the ex-Madagascan sister groups of the               
              endemic rainforest genera in conjunction with an analysis of the               
              origin of the herpetofauna; (6) produce monographs, keys, and field            
              guides that will be useful to land managers charged with                       
              conservation of the Madagascan fauna; (7) compile a data base of               
              distribution records to identify conservation priorities; and (8)              
              train Malagasy students in the disciplines of herpetology and field            
              biology.  Some collateral objectives are to initiate a study of                
              sexual selection, speciation, and vocalization in the two most                 
              diverse frog genera Boohis and Mantidactylus; study antipredator               
              mechanisms in microhylid toads; compile ecological and life history            
              data for all rainforest species; help to establish a well-curated              
              collection of amphibians and reptiles at Madagascar's National Zoo             
              and National University; and provide information and                           
              recommendations to Malagasy officials regarding conservation of the            
              Madagascan herpetofauna.  There are 280 currently recognized                   
              species of rainforest amphibians and reptiles in Madagascar.  This             
              represents 70 percent of the total Madagascan herpetofauna and at              
              least 50 percent of Madagascar's endemic species of terrestrial                
              vertebrates.  Thus, the rainforest herpetofauna is an extremely                
              important component of the endemic vertebrate fauna of Madagascar.             
              It is crucial that herpetofaunal survey be done now, because it is             
              well documented that the Madagascan rainforest is disappearing                 
              (even in reserves) at a rate of about 111,000 hectares annually.               
              The proposed research would have a major impact on rainforest                  
              conservation initiatives.
