Title       : Adaptive Sensory-Motor Planning by Humans and Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1991      
File        : a9024877

Award Number: 9024877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323380             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Grossberg steve@cns.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Bullock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This is a renewal of grant IRI-9045939.  This project aims at the              
              development of neural network architectures to explain how                     
              behaving individuals adapt successfully in real-time to                        
              constraints imposed by changing environments.  These                           
              architectures are capable of automatically adjusting in such a                 
              way that high level goals and plans continue to be realized                    
              despite changing circumstances.  Projects include an analysis of               
              how representations of 3-D space are autonomously learned in                   
              real-time.  It will address how such spatial representations can               
              be used in a larger system capable of learning to perform skilled              
              arm movement sequences, such as handwriting and visually-guided                
              object manipulation.  The project will examine how planned action              
              sequences can be performed with a tool of variable length and                  
              mass, such as a pen or hook, without any further learning.  It                 
              will also study how a working memory can accomplish variable-                  
              rate, real-time short term memory storage of temporal order                    
              codes, such as codes for rapid speech, typewriting, and eye                    
              movement sequences.  This project will examine how a self-                     
              organizing hierarchy of temporal planning networks can compress                
              the control of complex action sequences.  This will lead into how              
              a neural network architecture can learn to control approach                    
              toward a valued goal.  Finally, the research will address how                  
              complementary designs for sensory-cognitive learning systems and               
              cognitive-motor learning systems can be combined into a neural                 
              architecture that achieves the benefits of each type of design,                
              without their individual limitations.  All of the projects will                
              test the biological relevance of their neural architectures by                 
              computer simulations involving large behavioral and neural data                
              bases.  They will also provide mathematical and computational                  
              analyses of these architectures to characterize circuit designs                
              for adaptive, intelligent machines with new real-time processing               
              capabilities.  This project will provide basic insights into                   
              various levels of modeling of a user during human-computer                     
              interactions.
