Title       : U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on the Design of Earthquake Resistant
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1991    
File        : a9024699

Award Number: 9024699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip L. Gould pgoul@seas.wust1.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 5955      AUSTRIA
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1497,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Phillip L. Gould and a graduate                  
              student at Washington University, St. Louis, to collaborate in                 
              civil engineering research with Professor Gerhart I. Schueller of              
              the Institute of Mechanics, University of Innsbruck, Austria.                  
              They share an interest in the response of structures to the                    
              strong ground motions of earthquakes.  Professor Gould is                      
              currently supported by the Earthquake Engineering Section of NSF               
              for a study of the interaction effects on pile-supported structures            
              subject to severe ground motion during the Loma Prieta earthquake              
              of 1989.  One particular structure near San Francisco is the main              
              focus of that study.  Through collaboration with Professor                     
              Schueller and his colleagues, it will be possible to introduce                 
              probabilistic and simulation techniques to extend this research                
              and generalize the results.  This will significantly increase the              
              interpretation and application of the anticipated results of the               
              ongoing study.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The structure under study by Professor Gould and colleagues is                 
              located in a region that sustained locally heavy damage during                 
              the 1989 earthquake; however, it survived with only minor                      
              cracking.  It is suspected that the flexible pile foundation                   
              interacting with the surrounding soft soil played a major role in              
              this outcome.  The contribution of the Austrian investigators,                 
              who are expert in statistical methods, will enable the results to              
              be applied to the effects of other earthquakes which may take                  
              place at many places in the world.  This generalization would                  
              facilitate the design of structures to take advantage of the                   
              energy dissipation provided by soil-pile-structure interaction,                
              and thereby improve the survivability of the structure and the                 
              safety of the occupants.
