Title       : U.S.-UK Cooperative Research: Accurate Semiclassical Methods for Redistribution
               of Polarized Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1991      
File        : a9024694

Award Number: 9024694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19062              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald J. Bieniek bieniek@physics.umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1250,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in theoretical                  
              physics between Dr. Ronald Bieniek, University of Missouri at                  
              Rolla, and two British scientists:  Dr. Keith Burnett,                         
              Clarendon Laboratory, Oxford University and Dr. Mark Child,                    
              Theoretical Chemistry Department, Oxford University.  The                      
              proposed study is aimed at developing accurate semiclassical                   
              models and methods of describing and analyzing collisional                     
              and half-collisional redistribution of polarized radiation.                    
                                                                                             
              When polarized light is absorbed during a close atomic/molec-                  
              ular full- or half-collision, the fragments will flouresce                     
              light after they separate.  The degree of polarization                         
              remaining in the light, as a function of laser detuning,                       
              contains much information about intermolecular potentials and                  
              the fundamental transition from molecular to atomic domains.                   
              The analysis of experimental information about properties is                   
              greatly facilitated if accurate and tractable theoretical                      
              tools are available with which investigators can visualize                     
              the phenomena and describe the underlying physics.  Semiclassi-                
              cal techniques, which treat some aspects in a classical way                    
              and others in a quantum mechanical manner, can offer                           
              considerable insight.  However, current semiclassical methods                  
              for redistribution are, in many ways, unsatisfactory.  This                    
              project is designed to improve this situation by enhancing                     
              the popular locking/decoupling model, and developing new                       
              techniques to deal with phase interference effects between                     
              excitation events, Coriolis braking of orbital rotation, and                   
              the vagaries of the boundary between the atomic and the                        
              molecular coupling of angular momenta.  The British collabora-                 
              tors involved are at the forefront of redistribution research                  
              and the US investigator Dr. Bieniek will benefit greatly from                  
              the opportunity to carry out this long term research visit.
