Title       : A Faunal Study of the Native Bees of Mexico (Hymenoptera: Apoidea)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1994      
File        : a9024723

Award Number: 9024723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204774             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wallace E. LaBerge   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald J. McGinley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Funds are requested for two years to inventory the native (non-                
              Apis) bee fauna of Mexico.  Specimens will be pinned or layered in             
              the field, shipped to a processing center for labeling, sorting,               
              etc., and then sent to experts for identification.  Data from                  
              specimens will be computerized after determination, and specimens              
              will be deposited in major collections equally in the United States            
              and in Mexico.  Mexican scientists and students will be used in                
              field work and some trained in bee systematics.  Checklists, field             
              guides, descriptions, and keys to the bees of Mexico will be                   
              produced and published in Spanish and/or in English.  Other                    
              systematic and evolutionary work stimulated by this inventory will             
              be completed and published at the convenience of various experts               
              involved.  The large and extraordinary bee fauna of Mexico will                
              become well represented in collections available to scientists in              
              ecology, plant biology, evolution, zoogeography and other                      
              disciplines.  A well curated and determined collection of native               
              bees will be established in Mexico and Mexican personnel will be               
              trained to curate this collection and to make scientific use of                
              it.  This inventory will be of great scientific value to                       
              systematics, as well as being timely because of current destruction            
              of natural habitats in Mexico and the recent introduction of the               
              Africanized honey bee into Mexico.
