Title       : Influence of Waves and Other Fluid Oscillations on the Stability of Grand Canyon
               Sand Bars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1992    
File        : a9024685

Award Number: 9024685
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13908              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard O. Bauer bbauer@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The formation of sand bars and other types of depositional                
              landforms along stream channels is a function of many factors,                 
              especially the amount and nature of sediments carried by the stream and        
              the volume and velocity of stream water.  A factor often overlooked in         
              the analysis of depositional dynamics is the fluctuation of water              
              flows.  The Colorado River flowing through the Grand Canyon of Arizona         
              offers a unique setting for the analysis of changes in depositional            
              dynamics resulting from changing fluctuations in stream flows.  Prior          
              to construction of the Glen Canyon Dam above the canyon in the early           
              1960s, the Colorado's flow tended to follow annual cycles, with large          
              floods in spring followed by long periods of minimal flow.  The dam now        
              intercepts all upstream sediments, however, and discharges usually made        
              on a regular basis for power generation and flood control now produce          
              tidal-like daily pulses of water.  The lower-level but more frequent           
              fluctuations have had an adverse impact on the number and size of sand         
              bars along the canyon floor.  This project will examine the stability          
              of sand bars in the Grand Canyon under the current water discharge             
              regime, focusing special attention on the erosive effects of waves             
              below major rapids.  Research methods used in this project will                
              include a number of approaches and measurement techniques commonly             
              employed in coastal studies but rarely used to study fluvial systems.          
              Sensitive instruments that measure water pressures and current speeds          
              and directions will gather data to test beach equilibrium models that          
              relate sediment erosion and accretion to wave parameters.  NSF funding         
              will complement support for this project provided by the U.S.                  
              Geological Survey.                                                             
                   This project will provide valuable data and new insights into the         
              dynamics of sand bar development in the Grand Canyon, a topic of great         
              practical importance because of the critical role of sand bars as              
              wildlife habitat and as recreational sites for people on float trips           
              down the Colorado.  The data collected in this project and the refined         
              models will have broad scientific significance, too.  They will expand         
              understandings of the complex dynamics of depositional features in             
              stream channels under different flow regimes and will provide the first        
              detailed examination of backwash wave impacts on sand bars in major            
              streams.
