Title       : Faculty Award for Women - Observational Cosmology in the Infrared
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9024018

Award Number: 9024018
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia J. Rieke mrieke@as.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1217,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This Faculty Award for Women Scientists and Engineers is made to               
              Dr. Marcia J. Rieke of the Steward Observatory, University of                  
              Arizona.  The NSF Faculty Award for Women Scientists and                       
              Engineers recognizes the high quality of the awardee's record in               
              teaching and scholarship as well as the potential for continued                
              significant contributions to scientific research, the academic                 
              profession, and the education of future scientists.                            
                                                                                             
              A period of rapid technological growth in infrared detectors for               
              use in astronomy is allowing astronomers to address problems that              
              could only be dreamed about five years ago.  Dr. Rieke will be                 
              carrying out studies aimed at understanding the formation and                  
              evolution of galaxies.  This is now possible because of the                    
              availability of infrared (IR) cameras which operate at                         
              sensitivity levels far beyond the simple photometry of the past                
              decade.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The utility of studying high-redshift galaxies at infrared                     
              wavelengths stems from the fact that the energy distribution of                
              the electromagnetic emissions from galaxies peaks in the infrared              
              part of the spectrum and hence galaxies appear brightest in the                
              infrared at all redshifts.  The infrared emission is sensitive to              
              the bulk of the stellar population.  Early infrared data on high               
              redshift galaxies confirms expectations about the nature of the                
              stars in these galaxies which of necessity were selected mainly                
              from lists of radio galaxies.                                                  
                                                                                             
              A new, more sensitive IR camera is being prepared for use, and                 
              will allow many issues associated with high redshift galaxies to               
              be addressed.  The long-standing question of whether radio                     
              galaxies are typical elliptical galaxies and hence suitable for                
              use in cosmological work will be the primary study.  Other                     
              research centering on understanding the nature of galaxies                     
              observed in deep infrared surveys will be carried out.//
