Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Topology to Biology and Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1993 
File        : a9024995

Award Number: 9024995
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81840              (Estimated)
Investigator: De Witt L. Sumners sumners@math.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project continues earlier studies of applications of                 
              topology to problems in biology and chemistry. There are three                 
              main areas of effort. The first is the application of                          
              classification and quantification techniques in knot theory to                 
              the analysis of enzyme-DNA three-dimensional structure and enzyme              
              mechanism. Mathematical models, such as the tangle model, will be              
              developed and perfected, the aim being to produce a mathematical               
              tool of use to the experimental molecular biologist. The                       
              mathematics used here is recent work in the theory of                          
              3-manifolds, and the biological input is experimental results                  
              obtained from the topological approach to enzymology. The second               
              area is the study of the topological entanglement of random                    
              chains in 3-space.  Random chain entanglement statistics are                   
              related to the conformational entropy of a polymer system in                   
              dilute solution.  Asymptotic entanglement (as the length goes to               
              infinity) is reasonably well understood; the fundamental problem               
              of scientific interest is the description and computation of                   
              entanglement at finite lengths.  Both rigorous mathematics and                 
              simulation techniques will be employed.   The third area is the                
              topological description of spiral wave patterns in excitable                   
              media.     The methods of differential topology and obstruction                
              theory will be used to provide necessary and sufficient                        
              conditions for the existence and time evolution of patterns on                 
              bounded orientable 3-manifolds.                                                
                   A central problem in molecular biology is to deal with                    
              long-chain DNA molecules. The way they fold, replicate, and                    
              recombine is intimately bound up with their functions. The                     
              behavior of long-chain polymers in solution is a more general                  
              form of the same questions. Important applications arise in                    
              genetic engineering, the design of drugs, and the development of               
              long-chain polymers for industrial and technological uses.  Knot               
              theory is a part of topology that studies exactly these kinds of               
              questions: how structures fold and recombine and replicate.
