Title       : Prehistoric Maya Wetland Agriculture and Political Develop- ment in Northern
               Belize, Central America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1993       
File        : a9024414

Award Number: 9024414
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174896             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary D. Pohl MPOHL@mailer.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin O. Pope  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Mary Pohl               
              and her colleagues will conduct two field seasons of                           
              multidisciplinary research on Albion Island, Belize.  The goal of              
              the work is to understand the development of Mayan civilization                
              in this area.  Previous work has demonstrated that in several                  
              regions of Middle America, prehistoric peoples have used a form                
              of wet field agriculture.  This involved building systems of                   
              raised fields with intervening canals which provided the right                 
              amount of water for crop production.  Such fields are known to                 
              exist in the Albion region.  Dr. Pohl and her collaborators will               
              use aerial data to delineate such features.  This will be                      
              combined with research on the ground to provide ground truth.                  
              Soil cores will also be collected to trace changing landforms                  
              over time and archaeological excavations conducted.  On this                   
              basis, it should be possible to determine how environment changed              
              over time, how agricultural practices were altered accordingly,                
              and how this affected Mayan social organization.                               
                                                                                             
              The Mayan Indians of Middle America developed complex societies                
              with writing, monumental architecture and centralized political                
              hierarchy.  They were able to subsist in tropical areas which can              
              today support only very small populations.  Archaeologists wish                
              to understand both how these groups subsisted and what processes               
              led to the emergence of such complex civilizations.  Evidence of               
              such a development can be observed on Albion Island.  The                      
              exceptional preservation of remains from ancient agriculture in                
              water-logged conditions there, together with a wealth of previous              
              archaeological research, makes this an ideal place to examine                  
              such issues.  Pohl believes that fluctuations in sea level were                
              responsible for changes in which farmers were forced to invest                 
              additional labor in their fields.  This, in turn, made them much               
              less mobile and ultimately dependent on elite military strength                
              for protection of these improved lands.  This research will allow              
              her to evaluate this hypothesis.                                               
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will increase              
              our understanding of how complex societies develop and provide                 
              data of interest to Mayan archaeologists.  It is also                          
              technologically innovative since it makes archaeological use of                
              an advanced Geographic Information System.  Hopefully, it will                 
              serve as a model for future work in other areas.  Finally, the                 
              insights gained into Mayan raised field agriculture may prove of               
              use in developing new agricultural techniques third world areas.
