Title       : Computer Aided Prototyping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1996    
File        : a9024721

Award Number: 9024721
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tse-yun Feng                            
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1880280            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Henderson tch@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kent Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Lindstrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen C. Jacobsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard F. Riesenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : Z571      ARPA-IMAGE UNDERSTANDING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This Institutional Infrastructure award is to support research            
              in the general area of Computer Aided Manufacturing Engineering.               
              The approach taken by the Utah group is computer aided prototyping             
              of objects to be manufactured.  The process is broken down into                
              three separate areas of research:  design, prototyping, and                    
              validation.  The design aspect of the research involves enhancing              
              the Alpha 1 computer aided geometric design system.  This system is            
              able to mathematically describe objects to be manufactured.  It is             
              enhanced by incorporating some commonly occurring manufacturing                
              steps into the model as special elements (e.g., this hole is to be             
              counterbored).  The proto-typing aspect is to take the mathematical            
              description of the object (say a gear) and generate the NC codes               
              and the tooling sequences necessary to actually produce the item on            
              a machine center.  The University of Utah already possesses a five             
              axis machine center, a CNC turning center, 3-D polymer equipment,              
              and robotics equipment and so can experimentally validate their                
              research.  A long term goal is to optimize the tooling sequences               
              and other necessary manufacturing activities in order to have the              
              factory operate without human supervision.  This prototyping                   
              facility would also be used in collaborative work with Dr.                     
              Jacobsen's Center for Engineering Design.  This center designs and             
              manufactures many prototype items.                                             
                   The use of computers to aid and guide manufacturing is more               
              common in Japan and the European countries than in the United                  
              States.  This Institutional Infrastructure award is for the support            
              of an automated manufacturing laboratory that will allow the quick             
              design and prototyping of manufactured items.  Once the prototype              
              is deemed acceptable, methods of improving the manufacturing of the            
              item, particularly in small batch numbers, can be explored.  The               
              University of Utah has a long history of successful industrial                 
              collaborations and it is expected that the results of this research            
              will be widely disseminated to the United States manufacturing                 
              industry.
