Title       : The Political Economy of the Local Market for Public Goods: The Role of
               Entrepreneurs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1993   
File        : a9024116

Award Number: 9024116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127776             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Schneider mark.schneider@stonybrook.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul E. Teske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Standard theories of the provision of municipal services hold that             
              market forces operate to ensure the efficient provision of these               
              public goods.  The argument is that a market is created as citizens            
              "shop around" among different municipalities deciding to settle                
              down and live in the municipality that provides the best                       
              combination of high services/low taxes for the individual citizen.             
              Underlying this theory, however, are contrary to evidence                      
              assumptions that most citizens are well informed about municipal               
              services and taxes and that it is relatively easy for individuals              
              to move from one community to another in search of the optimal                 
              combination.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This award supports an ambitious program of research to test and               
              refine the standard Tiebout model of urban political economy and               
              the assumptions underlying it.  The investigators will conduct a               
              series of surveys to determine the role of individuals, businesses,            
              and governments in the creation of efficient local markets for                 
              public goods. In particular, they will examine the possibility that            
              a subsample of the public exists which is much better informed and             
              more mobile than the norm and whose members serve, in effect, as               
              mobility entrepreneurs, creating markets by their actions which                
              benefit automatically other residents of the community.  The                   
              project also considers the possibility that politicians play active            
              roles in creating markets by competing both for certain kinds of               
              business and certain kinds of citizens as well.                                
                                                                                             
              When completed this research should provide a better understanding             
              of the dynamics that underlie the provision of municipal services              
              in the United States.  It should thereby establish a more rigorous,            
              empirical basis for judging the efficiency and effectiveness of the            
              provision of public goods by local governments.
