Title       : Negotiating the Institutions of Democracy: Contingent Choices and Strategic
               Interactions in the Hungarian and Polish Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1991      
File        : a9024575

Award Number: 9024575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79984              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Stark   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 1371,5916,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The fall of communist regimes throughout eastern europe and the                
              transition to democracy and private enterprise, there, rank among              
              the most dramatic and important political and economic developments            
              of recent decades.  In addition to their obvious international                 
              significance, these efforts at developing democratic institutions              
              and market mechanisms offer unique opportunities to better                     
              understand how democracies and markets arise, how they survive or              
              why they fail, and how they are related.  This award supports                  
              innovative research designed to better understand the transition               
              from authoritarian and socialist regimes to democracy and private              
              enterprise through controlled comparisons of the ongoing                       
              transitions in Hungary and Poland.                                             
                                                                                             
              Specifically, this project tests two theories of the development               
              of democracy.  The traditional or structural determinist theory                
              holds that the development of democracy invariably requires the                
              existence of a variety of social and economic preconditions such               
              as relatively high levels of economic development and an                       
              established middle class.  An alternative and more recent theory               
              holds that there are many different types of democracy and many                
              different paths to their achievement.  This social interactionist              
              view agrees that social structure is important but believes that               
              the effects of social structure are contingent upon the types of               
              political institutions that develop and the types of strategic                 
              choices which political actors make during the period of                       
              transition.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              To test these alternatives, the transitions to democracy in Hungary            
              and Poland will be compared.  Hungary and Poland represent two                 
              nations with very different social structures which have followed              
              similar processes of negotiated rather than revolutionary change               
              but producing very different institutional and policy outcomes.                
              Thus they provide an unusual opportunity to assess the effects of              
              social structure on the development of democratic institutions and             
              market mechanisms.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The Principal Investigator for this project is a highly talented               
              young scholar whose previous work in Hungary has provided a rich               
              data set that will greatly facilitate completion of this important             
              research.
