Title       : U.S.-Western Europe Cooperative Research on Single-Nucleon Wave Functions and
               Reaction Mechanisms for Single-Nucleon Knockouts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1993      
File        : a9024674

Award Number: 9024674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10850              (Estimated)
Investigator: R S. Hicks   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rory A. Miskimen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald A. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5914      WESTERN EUROPE, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1230,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Dr. R. S. Hicks and others of the Medium Energy            
              Nuclear Physics Group of the University of Massachusetts to                    
              collaborate with physicists from Sweden, the Netherlands and the               
              United Kingdom in an experiment to be carried out using the                    
              continuous photon beam produced by the University of Lund                      
              accelerator facility.  Comparable beams of known-energy photons                
              are currently not available in the United States.  The main                    
              European collaborators are Dr. G. van der Steenhoven, principal                
              spokesperson of a Dutch group primarily from the National Institute            
              for Nuclear and High Energy Physics, D. Branford and  D.G. Ireland             
              of Edinburgh University, and B. Schroeder of the Photonuclear                  
              Reactions Group, University of Lund.                                           
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this nuclear physics experiment is to                 
              improve the understanding of mechanisms by which nucleons are                  
              ejected from the nucleus as a result of an electromagnetic                     
              interaction with an incident electron or gamma ray.  Specifically,             
              the cooperating scientists will measure the momentum vectors of                
              protons ejected from the nucleus as a result of the absorption by              
              the nucleus of photons of known energy.                                        
                                                                                             
              This study should give fresh insights into reaction mechanisms for             
              single-nucleon knockout in the kinematic region where meson                    
              exchange currents and short-range interactions are important.                  
              Such an understanding is required in order to correctly interpret              
              certain reactions to obtain comprehensive and detailed information             
              on the distributions of single nucleons inside nuclei.
