Title       : U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research: Hydrogen Evolution by Actinorhizal Root
               Nodules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1991     
File        : a9024726

Award Number: 9024726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Winship ljwNS@hamp.hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 5937      SWEDEN
Fld Applictn: 0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1142,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in cellular                     
              biochemistry between Dr. Lawrence Winship, Hampshire                           
              College and Dr. Kerstin Huss-Danell, Department of Plant                       
              Physiology, University of Umea, Sweden.  The objective of                      
              the proposed research is to examine hydrogen evolution by                      
              actinorhizal root nodules.                                                     
                                                                                             
              Nitrogen fixation (acetylene reduction) by actinorhizal                        
              root nodules is sensitive to changes in temperature, oxygen                    
              concentration and photosynthate supply. Each of these                          
              parameters alters the balance between oxygen diffusion into                    
              and consumption by nodules.  A mechanism to protect                            
              nitrogenase from inactivation by excess oxygen as the                          
              environment changes must exist, so that the supply of fixed                    
              nitrogen to the plant can continue.  Adaptive mechanisms                       
              include a variable nodule diffusion barrier and conforma-                      
              tional protection of nitrogenase.  The investigators will                      
              use a unique HUP- alder symbiosis and a continuous-flow,                       
              open gas exchange system to follow in vivo nitrogenase                         
              activity and respiration. The environmental variables to be                    
              tested include oxygen concentration and temperature;                           
              measurements will include estimations of nodule gas diffusion                  
              properties, assays of nitrogenase in vitro, and immunoassays                   
              of the levels of the protein components of the nitrogenase                     
              systems. The project will benefit from the mutual expertise                    
              of the two investigators:  Dr. Winship has extensive                           
              experience in conducting measurements of environmental                         
              effects on nitrogenase activity in intact plants, while Dr.                    
              Huss-Danell is well known for her studies on the physio-                       
              logical factors that affect reduction in root nodules. The                     
              results of this research will contribute to the understanding                  
              of the physiology of nitrogen-fixing actinorhizal plants.
