Title       : CRB: Predictability of Inbreeding Depression in Insular and Mainland Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1996      
File        : a9024950

Award Number: 9024950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182683             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Lacy rlacy@ix.netcom.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chicago Zoological Soc
	      3300 Golf Road
	      Brookfield, IL  605131060    312/485-0263

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9285,
Abstract    :
                   In natural populations, inbreeding commonly results in                    
              offspring with more frequent birth defects, higher mortality,                  
              slower growth, lower fertility, lesser disease resistance, and/or              
              other aspects of reduced fitness.  This phenomenon, termed                     
              "inbreeding depression", is almost universal, but the severity of              
              inbreeding depression varies widely among species and the causes               
              of inbreeding depression are still poorly understood.  As                      
              increasingly many natural populations are reduced to small,                    
              isolated fragments, inbreeding may become common in remnant                    
              populations.  Whether populations can adapt to such conditions                 
              and recover or will suffer an inevitable decline in fitness will               
              be determined by the still unknown number and nature of genes                  
              that contribute to inbreeding depression.                                      
                   Populations that have long been small and isolated may be                 
              affected less by inbreeding than are large, central populations,               
              because natural selection could have removed deleterious,                      
              recessive genes during past episodes of inbreeding in the small                
              populations.  However, an earlier study of Peromyscus mice failed              
              to find an association between the severity of inbreeding                      
              depression and the historical size of populations.  Dr. Lacy                   
              proposes to determine whether responses to inbreeding by                       
              populations are repeatable, and to test further whether the                    
              response of a population to inbreeding can be predicted from                   
              knowledge of the population size and amount of genetic diversity               
              it  harbors.  Genetic variability has been examined in samples of              
              island, peripheral, and central populations of Peromyscus                      
              polionotus mice; island populations have much less genetic                     
              variability, as would be expected if those populations have been               
              occasionally forced to inbreed in the past.  Dr. Lacy will                     
              collect mice from three populations (one on an island, one at the              
              range margin, and one in the central part of the range), and                   
              create three replicate laboratory stocks from each.  Reproductive              
              success, growth rate, juvenile survival, and asymmetry of limb                 
              bones (a sensitive measure of developmental abnormalities during               
              growth)  will be monitored in experimental inbred and non-inbred               
              matings.                                                                       
                   Preliminary study demonstrated surprising variation among                 
              populations derived from closely related populations in response               
              to inbreeding.  By statistically analyzing responses to                        
              inbreeding in replicated stocks of three different populations,                
              Dr. Lacy will  determine whether the between-stock variation                   
              derived from differences in inbreeding depression among wild                   
              populations (of importance to all managers of small populations),              
              or from differences arising from sampling possibly much more                   
              homogenous natural populations (of importance in establishment of              
              captive stocks and in translocation and reintroduction efforts).
