Title       : CRB: Potential Effects of Ultraviolet Radiation on Amphibian Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1991      
File        : a9024880

Award Number: 9024880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew R. Blaustein blaustea@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Hays  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank L. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9285,
Abstract    :
                   An unprecedented loss of the variety and numbers of plant                 
              and animals species around the world is occurring.  Habitat                    
              destruction, over-harvesting, chemical pollution, introduced                   
              exotic species, and climatic change are among the major threats                
              to living species.  In particular, many species of amphibians are              
              undergoing drastic  population declines and range reductions.                  
              The amphibian declines are especially perplexing because many                  
              species are disappearing in pristine habitats.  Atmospheric                    
              factors, perhaps acting with other agents, may be contributing                 
              to the declines.                                                               
                   Using amphibians, Dr. Blaustein and his colleagues propose                
              to investigate one potential atmospheric source of biological                  
              trauma, ultraviolet radiation (UV), that may have significant                  
              biological effects ultimately contributing to population                       
              declines.  Amphibians are excellent "bioindicators" of                         
              environmental change, due in part to their relatively thin,                    
              permeable and unprotected skin.  The decline in amphibians may be              
              an early warning signal and ultimately, other organisms,                       
              including humans, may be in peril.  Results should yield                       
              information with broad implications regarding the potential for                
              atmospheric effects on other organisms.                                        
                     The investigation will be focused at several levels of                  
              biological organization including molecular, individual, and                   
              population levels.  Laboratory and field experiments will examine              
              the effects of natural levels of UV on developing tadpoles and on              
              the reproductive physiology of adult frogs.  How UV-damaged DNA                
              is repaired will also be examined.  An ecological survey of                    
              declining species will be conducted to document their overall                  
              population status.                                                             
                   This is one of the first studies to incorporate field                     
              experiments to investigate the effects of UV on development in                 
              wild vertebrates.  Since conditions likely to promote increased                
              UV are becoming manifest, it is important to examine whether                   
              natural levels of UV have begun to affect the more sensitive                   
              animals, like amphibians, so that steps can be taken to reduce a               
              potentially serious environmental threat.
