Title       : Social Constructions of Activists and Constituents in Collective Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1990 
File        : a9010528

Award Number: 9010528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45044              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela E. Oliver oliver@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Marwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Activists seeking to persuade government officials to                     
              implement particular policies often try to mobilize public                     
              opinion and widespread public displays of support.  Their ability              
              to do so is affected not only by their own skills, but by the                  
              extent and nature of their linkages with a larger constituency,                
              and by their relations to other political actors.  In European                 
              democracies, this especially includes political parties.  Public               
              support for an issue which is initially popular may actually                   
              decline as the issue becomes politicized.  Activists cannot                    
              control public opinion, and must instead change their own ideas                
              in response to these shifting definitions of an issue.                         
                   For this project, longitudinal survey data on a Dutch "peace              
              movement" campaign are analyzed statistically to provide input                 
              for theorizing.  The data were collected in the Netherlands                    
              before and after a massive campaign in which millions of citizens              
              sent the government postcards opposing deployment of Cruise                    
              missiles.  The campaign ultimately failed when the government                  
              approved deployment.  Surveys have been completed for samples of               
              the general public in four communities, as well as for all                     
              activists in those same four and six additional communities.                   
              Theory developed in light of the data will show how the costs and              
              benefits that underlie collective action are themselves                        
              constructed in light of political allegiances and identities.
