Title       : Research Initiation Awards: Spherically-Symmetrical Combustion of Unsupported
               Droplets Under Normal-Gravity Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1990        
File        : a9010947

Award Number: 9010947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : September 1,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25142              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin D. Shaw   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A unique drop-tube experimental apparatus to promote                           
              spherically-symmetric evaporation and combustion of freely-                    
              falling droplets will be developed and constructed.  The                       
              design of the apparatus is based upon the principle that                       
              gravitationally-induced pressure gradients in gases may be                     
              significantly reduced by accelerating the gases with properly                  
              contoured tubes.  Droplets traveling with the gases will                       
              experience greatly reduced buoyancy and forced convection                      
              environments, thereby promoting spherical symmetry.  The                       
              apparatus will be used to study nearly spherically-symmetrical                 
              droplet evaporation and combustion under conditions that have                  
              heretofore not been experimentally achieved (i.e., combustion                  
              of droplets initially = 100 um in diameter at atmospheric                      
              pressure).  Experimental studies will focus on  1. combustion                  
              and extinction of hydrocarbon droplets,  2. measurements of                    
              transient droplet and flame diameters, and  3. combustion and                  
              disruption of droplets with strong sooting tendencies.                         
                                                                                             
              The proposed facility will allow many fundamental and                          
              practical droplet combustion and evaporation phenomena to be                   
              studied under conditions previously unattained.  The data                      
              obtained will be useful for testing existing theories, and                     
              will provide fundamental information on phenomena such as                      
              extinction conditions, transient vaporization rates, and                       
              transient flame growth.  Results from the work will be useful                  
              to the scientific community (from the fundamental information                  
              gained), and also to the combustion and spray communities in                   
              general, possibly allowing improved practical combustion                       
              devices to be developed.
