Title       : Volunteer Labor in Models of Altruism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1990    
File        : a9010584

Award Number: 9010584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela J. Smith                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eleanor P. Brown ebrown@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexader Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    714/621-8131

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              The economics literature includes several distinct strands of                  
              inquiry into philanthropic behavior. This project expands the                  
              literature from  focus solely on monetary giving to include the                
              role of volunteer labor.                                                       
                                                                                             
              Although dollar estimates of the value of volunteer effort in the              
              U.S. exceed estimates if the value of monetary giving, research                
              into volunteer labor supply has been scarce, hampered by a lack                
              of data. Recent results have given information on the                          
              substitutability of time for money in the utility function of                  
              givers, allowing the possibility of extending the literature on                
              crowding out to include volunteer labor.  Charitable                           
              organizations use paid and unpaid labor and cash donations as                  
              inputs in producing charity. For various specifications of the                 
              productions function, the interrelatedness of gifts of money and               
              gifts of time have implications for the degree of crowding out                 
              experienced in the economy as government varies its levels of                  
              spending for similar causes.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Another direction of the research lies in the parallel between                 
              models of strategic altruism and the possibility of a strategic                
              motive for giving through volunteer labor. The strategic altruism              
              literature shows instances in which gifts made contingent on                   
              behavior can elicit efficient behavior from agents who would                   
              otherwise "misbehave". Many charitable organizations produce                   
              services which are difficult to measure, not in quantity and                   
              quality. If managers if nonprofits have incentives to deviate                  
              from the behavior desired by their donors, and if volunteer                    
              labor has, through proximity, a superior opportunity to monitor                
              the actions of a firm than do more distant donors of cash, there               
              may be a strategic motive for giving time rather than money.                   
              Furthermore, charitable organizations have a strategic motive for              
              employing volunteers as a signal that they are truly behaving in               
              accordance with the goals of their donor population.
