Title       : The Dynamics and Impact of Criminal Law Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1991     
File        : a9010826

Award Number: 9010826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cassia C. Spohn spohn@unomaha.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julie Horney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska Omaha
	      60th and Dodge Street
	      Omaha, NE  68182    402/554-2200

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Since the early 1970's there has been growing concern with the                 
              response of the criminal justice system to the crime of rape.  Many            
              people have questioned the special status of rape as an offense                
              where the victim, as well as the defendant, is put on trial.  Some             
              have suggested that the laws and the rules of evidence relevant to             
              rape have resulted in pervasive skepticism among police,                       
              prosecutors, judges, and jurors about rape victims' claims.  In                
              response to these concerns, most states have reformed their rape               
              laws but these statutes vary in range of reform and                            
              comprehensiveness.  Reformers expected that the new laws would                 
              reduce both the skepticism of criminal justice officials toward                
              rape victims and their reliance on extralegal considerations in                
              decisionmaking.  They anticipated that the reforms ultimately would            
              lead to an increase in the number of reports of rape, and would                
              make arrest, prosecution, and conviction for rape more likely.                 
                                                                                             
              For the last few years, Drs. Spohn and Horney have been embarked               
              on a research program studying the impact of rape reform                       
              legislation.  In an earlier NSF-funded study, they collected data              
              on the outcomes of more than 24,000 sexual assault cases indicted              
              from 1970 to 1985 in six jurisdictions.  They found that the legal             
              changes produced significant effects only in the jurisdiction                  
              (Detroit) with the strongest and most comprehensive reforms.  The              
              present project builds on the earlier study by: (1) specifying more            
              precisely the nature of the impact in Detroit; (2) determining                 
              whether more subtle effects may have occurred in Detroit and in a              
              second jurisdiction (Chicago) where strong reforms did not affect              
              overall case outcomes; and (3) assessing the role of legal and                 
              extralegal variables in the processing of sexual assault cases.                
              Detailed data will be collected on a sample of cases in Detroit and            
              Chicago and will be analyzed to determine the relative influence               
              of victim, defendant, and case characteristics on the disposition              
              of these cases in the pre-and post-reform periods.                             
                                                                                             
              The results of this research will advance understanding of the ways            
              in which rape reform legislation affects policy change and the                 
              subsequent processing of rape cases by the legal system.  It has               
              both theoretical and practical relevance in that it will contribute            
              to scientific knowledge more generally on the effects of                       
              legislative change on reform and to our ability to improve the                 
              manner in which the criminal justice system handles offenses.
