Title       : Research Initiation: Scheduling, Control and Rescheduling Methodologies for
               Uncertain Manufacturing Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1991     
File        : a9010033

Award Number: 9010033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Office Automation Assistant             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: S. David Wu david.wu@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The objective of this research is to develop methodologies for            
              sequencing and scheduling in uncertain manufacturing environments.             
              The methodology involves an off-line optimization strategy, an on-             
              line control scheme, and a "rescheduling" procedure.  The off-line             
              strategy utilizes a graph-theoretic formulation of the scheduling              
              problem to generate a priori static schedules which take into                  
              account the presence of foreseeable system disruptions.  A measure             
              of schedule robustness will be developed for the off-line schedule.            
              The on-line control structure is modeled as a discrete event                   
              dynamic system (DEDS).  The research control structure incorporates            
              the dynamic information about future disturbances to stabilize the             
              operations schedule.  The novelty of the approach is that it                   
              decomposes the overall control problem into non-myopic local                   
              problems which require minimum computation while retaining a global            
              view of the system.  The rescheduling procedure updates the static             
              schedule after a major system disruption.  The procedure generates             
              an updated schedule which minimizes the scheduling delay and at the            
              same time adheres closely to the off-line schedule.  In contrast               
              to the previous work on match-up scheduling, the research method               
              has no need to determine the match-up time.  The robustness and the            
              applicability of the research methodology will be tested by                    
              experiments.
