Title       : Empirical and Theoretical Models of Earnings and Employment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1991       
File        : a9010759

Award Number: 9010759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127664             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Gibbons   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence F. Katz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project consists of several studies in the area of labor                  
              economics: (1) the return to job seniority; (2) compensating wage              
              differentials; (3) the cyclical behavior of unemployment                       
              durations; (4) arbitration and mediation; and (5) changes in the               
              structure of wages. An important theme linking the first three                 
              projects is that the failure to account for the causes and                     
              effects of labor market mobility leads many conventional estimate              
              of the determinants of earnings and employment to be at least                  
              difficult to interpret and probably biased.                                    
                                                                                             
              In the first project, a systematic empirical investigation of the              
              transferability of the OLS return to tenure will be conducted. In              
              contrast with the existing research, data from a variety of                    
              samples will be used. A distinction will be made between those                 
              workers displaced by layoffs and those displaced by plant                      
              closings. At least two theoretical models will be developed that               
              emphasize different possible sources of transferable return. The               
              theoretical and empirical work will be integrated by testing the               
              predictions of the mover-stayer and match-quality models.                      
                                                                                             
              For the second project, a sample of workers displaced by plant                 
              closings will be used to study compensating wage differentials.                
              This will allow an approximate solution to the problem of                      
              endogenous job  change in estimating differentials.                            
                                                                                             
              The third project will involve two sets of tests of the                        
              hypothesis that the increase in temporary layoffs during a                     
              recession is responsible for the finding that an increase in the               
              aggregate unemployment rate is associated with an increase in the              
              escape rate from unemployment. These tests will involve both a                 
              sample of displaced workers and a sample from the Panel Survey on              
              Income Dynamics.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The fourth project will extend the existing literature on dispute              
              resolution to incorporate mediation and allow the possibility                  
              that the mediator may be a self-interested agent. The theoretical              
              part of the project will involve modeling the learning process                 
              with particular attention to the timing of mediation relative to               
              other aspects of the dispute resolution mechanism and the                      
              potential for learning at various stages of the process. The                   
              empirical part of the project will involve investigating                       
              settlement rates and characteristics of agreements reached with                
              and without mediation at different stages of the process.                      
                                                                                             
              The final project will examine changes in the structure of wages               
              in the U.S. and selected other OECD economies. One part will                   
              examine how the wage structure in the U.S. public sector has                   
              responded to changes in the wage structure in the private sector               
              during the 1970s and 1980s. The second part will compare changes               
              in wage differential by skill in the U.S. and other OECD                       
              countries.
