Title       : Comparison of the Behavior of Human and Robot Traders in a Computerized Double
               Auction Market
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1991   
File        : a9010046

Award Number: 9010046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Rust   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vernon L. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Fe Institute
	      1399 Hyde Park Road
	      Santa Fe, NM  875016188    505/984-8800

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project conducts a series of human double auction market                  
              experiments to generate a matching data set for a tournament of                
              "robot traders" who compete in an artificial double auction market.            
              The double auction market is a simplified version of the AURORA                
              electronic double auction market recently developed by the Chicago             
              Board of Trade.  Precise comparisons will be made of the behavior              
              of human and robot traders.  Existing experimental data on human               
              double auction markets are not directly comparable to the                      
              computerized market because the latter divides time into discrete              
              bid-offer and buy-sell steps, and adopts a new institutional                   
              design, Chicago Rules, that allows only holders of the highest                 
              outstanding bid or lowest outstanding offer to execute                         
              transactions.  The project uses the experiments to study the impact            
              of Chicago rules, the effects of variations in period length in a              
              market with discrete trading intervals, and the consequences of                
              restrictions on the messages that can be transmitted and received              
              by traders.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The results of this research will improve experimental methods and             
              our understanding of widely used market institutions.  By matching             
              human experimental data with the results from the tournament of                
              computerized robot traders, the project will be able to provide                
              strong tests of the ability of "artificially intelligent" agents               
              to mimic the behavior of human traders in Double-Auction markets.              
              If computer simulations could complement human experiments, this               
              would dramatically increase the number and type of experiments that            
              investigators could use to study the effects of institutional                  
              changes.  The results of the experiments should also provide new               
              insights into the performance of double auctions.  This is                     
              important because the double auction is the type of trading                    
              institution used by the Chicago Board of Trade, the New York Stock             
              Exchange, and many other securities and commodities exchanges                  
              throughout the world.
