Title       : Structure and Function of Photoreceptor Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1993       
File        : a9010245

Award Number: 9010245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65384              (Estimated)
Investigator: Meredithe L. Applebury   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5939,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A joint research project is to be undertaken by Soviet and                     
              American scientists in the field of vision as a cooperative                    
              exchange effort.  The common goal is to elucidate the                          
              molecular basis of visual signaling.  The experimental objectives              
              are to identify, isolate and characterize the molecular                        
              components that detect light and achieve neural signaling and rod              
              and cone photoreceptor cells and to clone the genes that encode                
              these protein components.  The plan is to adapt the recent                     
              techniques of micro-protein chemistry, molecular cloning, gene                 
              expression, and patch-clamp physiological studies to provide new               
              experimental tools and approaches for studying photoreceptor                   
              cells.  Working with the most current techniques of molecular                  
              biology, these scientists seek to establish the mechanisms                     
              underlying the triggering of visual information.                               
                                                                                             
              This joint venture draws on the strengths of research in the USSR              
              and US in vision.  The Soviet scientists provide particular                    
              expertise in protein chemistry and electrophysiological                        
              techniques.  The American scientists provide expertise in                      
              molecular cloning techniques and biochemical purification.                     
              Monies awarded for this project provide a stipend for living                   
              expenses to Soviet scientists during their research visit to the               
              University of Chicago and United States; the airfare for travel                
              to the Soviet Union is covered for the American investigators                  
              visiting the Soviet Union.  By establishing a formal mechanism                 
              for joint research they hope to facilitate the exchange of ideas,              
              support exchange of ideas, support exchange of materials, and                  
              accelerate their goal of defining the basis of visual triggering.
