Title       : U.S.-U.S.S.R. Workshop on Soviet-American Cooperation in Arctic/Northern Social
               Sciences (Moscow: September 1990)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1990      
File        : a9010049

Award Number: 9010049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerson Sher                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherburne B. Abbott   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 5939      US/USSR ACTIVITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 5201,5939,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Recent events in both the United States and the Soviet Union                   
              have created a productive environment for, and strong                          
              interest in, scientific cooperation in the field of Arctic                     
              social science research.  In the United States, the Arctic                     
              Policy Research Act of 1984, together with reports of the                      
              National Academy of Sciences (NAS) and other bodies, have                      
              focused attention on this field; as a result the National                      
              Science Foundation (NSF) has recently established a new                        
              program in Arctic Social Science Research.  In the U.S.S.R.,                   
              intense public debate has emerged over the socioeconomic and                   
              ecological impacts of northern development has led to                          
              significant interest in social science research on these                       
              areas on the part of the Soviet scientific community.  The                     
              primary objective of this workshop is to take advantage of                     
              the rising interest in both countries in this field by                         
              giving leading U.S. and Soviet specialists an opportunity to                   
              exchange information on current work and to develop plans for                  
              long-term cooperative research, with particular emphasis on                    
              the relationships between human communities and the biological                 
              and physical systems that make up the natural environment of                   
              the Arctic.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The workshop is being organized jointly by the U.S. National                   
              Academy of Sciences (NAS) and the Academy of Sciences of the                   
              U.S.S.R. (ASUSSR).  The NAS participation is being managed by                  
              the NAS/National Research Council Polar Research Board and                     
              the delegation will be led by Dr. Oran Young of Dartmouth                      
              College.  The Soviet delegation, under the auspices of the                     
              ASUSSR Commission for Arctic Research, will be chaired by                      
              Academician V.M. Kotlyakov, Director of the ASUSSR Institute                   
              of Geography.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This project fulfills the program objective of advancing                       
              scientific knowledge by enabling leading researchers in the                    
              United States and the U.S.S.R. to combine complementary                        
              efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest                    
              and competence in the field of basic scientific research on                    
              the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.
