Title       : Collaborative Research: Asymmetrical Gene Flow Between European and African
               Honey Bee Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1991       
File        : a9010228

Award Number: 9010228
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : July 1,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31353              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah R. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   One of the most sensational biological phenomena of this                  
              century has been the rapid spread of the so called "Africanized"               
              or "Killer bees" in the Americas.  In the 33 years since their                 
              establishment as a feral population in southern Brazil, African                
              derived bees have colonized all the tropical and subtropical                   
              regions of South and Central America.  Tropical North America                  
              (Mexico) is now being colonized and this expanding population                  
              will reach the United States in 1990.  Arrival of African honey                
              bees is followed by rapid build-up of a feral population,                      
              numerous stinging incidents involving people and animals,                      
              "Africanization" of apiaries with eventual disappearance of                    
              beeswith traits characteristic of "native" European subspecies,                
              and a decline in beekeeping and honey production.                              
                   Movement of feral African bees into areas previously                      
              dominated by European bees provides a unique opportunity to                    
              obtain quantitative data on the changes that occur as these two                
              genetically distinct populations interact.  This research will                 
              focus on the population level and within colony processes that                 
              contribute to genetic changes in managed European and feral                    
              African populations.  The investigators combine analytical and                 
              experimental approaches to assess "Europeanization" and                        
              "Africanization" by measuring the rates of genetic change with                 
              the use of nuclear and mitochondrial genetic markers.  These two               
              types of genetic information will allow them to establish the                  
              relative contributions of maternal and paternal gene flow to                   
              these processes and to determine where selection is acting most                
              intensely in the system.  The results of this study will provide               
              a comprehensive view of the genetic interactions between feral                 
              and managed honey bee populations.  Information obtained in this               
              study also will be valuable to decision makers charged with                    
              development of public policies and methodologies to control                    
              African bees.
