Title       : Local Synthesis in the Mauthner Axon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1992      
File        : a9010251

Award Number: 9010251
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221874             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Koenig ekoenig@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Axoplasm, located in the axons of nerve cells, is composed of                  
              cytoskeletal and cytosolic proteins which are supplied to the                  
              axon by a poorly understood process of slow transport.  Since all              
              proteins exhibit a characteristic of half-life, it is likely that              
              during slow transport in the axon, proteins undergo significant                
              biological decay through degradation.  In order to maintain the                
              steady state of protein composition and mass of the axon due to                
              significant losses through biological decay, local mechanisms for              
              the replenishment of proteins are necessary.  This research                    
              project will examine the localization and distribution of                      
              selected cytoskeletal protein manufacturing systems and ascertain              
              what proteins are synthesized locally in the axon.  Although the               
              evidence available indicates that myelinated axons have a limited              
              capacity for local synthesis and that local requirements for                   
              newly synthesized proteins in a short half-life period are                     
              probably modest, the amount of synthesis occurring over the whole              
              axon is probably significant.   Experiments will be conducted at               
              the cellular level on the Mauthner neuron, the M-axon, an                      
              identifiable cell in the CNS of the goldfish with a large                      
              myelinated axon extending the length of the spinal cord.  A major              
              advantage in using the M-axon preparation is that the myelin                   
              sheath is separated from glial cell bodies, making it possible to              
              separate the axon from the myelin sheath uncontaminated for the                
              analysis of the cell body and the axon.  Specialized methods,                  
              designed and developed in Dr. Koenig's laboratory, for studying                
              ultrapure microscopic samples will be used.  The investigator                  
              will utilize in situ hybridization techniques to localize                      
              ribosomal RNA in the M-axon and to assess its density and                      
              distribution.  Messenger RNAs will be localized in the M-axon for              
              actin and/or tubulin, important cytoskeletal proteins that are                 
              supplied to the axon from the cell body by slow transport.                     
              Analysis of axonal polypeptides synthesized in the M-axon, in an               
              in vitro preparation, will be performed in order to characterize               
              which proteins are synthesized locally in the short half-life                  
              period and to establish that labeled proteins are due to de novo               
              synthesis.  Proteins synthesized in the M-cell axon in vivo will               
              be compared with those synthesized in vitro in order to identify               
              proteins synthesized under physiological conditions, and proteins              
              with a longer half-life.  The results of this study will address               
              an important unresolved issue of how the mature axon compensates               
              for biological decay of its exogenously supplied proteins.
