Title       : Family Behavior, Human Capital, and the Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9010748

Award Number: 9010748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100870             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Becker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In this accomplishment-based renewal project, Gary Becker will                 
              continue his research that links the family to investments in                  
              human capital, bequests and other types of physical capital                    
              accumulation, economic inequality, and economic growth.                        
                                                                                             
              One study will be an expansion of A Treatise on the Family. It                 
              will include a response to some of the criticisms and discuss                  
              several additional issues. Particular attention will be paid to                
              the so-called "Rotten-Kid Theorem", which states that, under                   
              certain conditions, beneficiaries of altruists have incentives to              
              behave altruistically to their benefactors, even when                          
              beneficiaries are selfish. One defect is that the Treatise does                
              not interact parental altruism with other attitudes of parents                 
              towards children. That is, the degree of parental altruism is                  
              not fixed. The new work will show that such links between the                  
              behavior of children and the degree if parental altruism help                  
              overcome various inefficiencies that can result from altruism,                 
              such as the so-called "prodigal son" issue.                                    
                                                                                             
              Other work will continue on the relationship between family                    
              behavior and economic growth by incorporating endogenous                       
              fertility into a neoclassical growth model. In a related study,                
              endogenous fertility is combined with physical capital as well                 
              investment in human capital. Two states tend to emerge - one with              
              low human and physical capital, low income, and high fertility -               
              and another with low fertility and high human and physical                     
              capital and income. The research will attempt to explain why                   
              human capital increases relative to physical capital when                      
              countries grow, why fertility declines when countries get richer               
              and why luck and other temporary events may have an effect on                  
              whether a country grows or stagnates.                                          
                                                                                             
              Another line of research will be on how the division of labor and              
              specialization with regard to human capital varies with economic               
              growth and other variables. Stressed here will be importance of                
              coordination costs and the extent of general knowledge (since                  
              increased accumulation of general knowledge raises the growth                  
              rate partly by inducing greater specialization).
