Title       : Computed 3D Reconstruction of Brain Microvasculature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1990     
File        : a9010153

Award Number: 9010153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lyndon S. Hibbard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction is the re-creation of               
              an object from images of serial sections, for the purpose of                   
              examining the interrelationships of its parts.  Dr. Hibbard will               
              use this technique to investigate the structure-function of the                
              median eminence of the hypothalamus.  By reconstructing the                    
              microvasculature within this distinctive but complex brain                     
              region, he will help understand how the hypothalamus and the                   
              pituitary regulate the flow of hormones into the blood stream.                 
              Moreover, the microarchitecture of this system may elucidate                   
              systems of communication as of yet unrecognized, and may uncover               
              mechanisms that may contribute greatly to our understanding of                 
              blood flow in the brain.  Within the context of studying this                  
              major biological question, Dr. Hibbard will continue to develop                
              specific methods that will advance the technology of 3D                        
              reconstruction.  Specifically, he is working on the procedures to              
              compute image alignment and feature extraction required for                    
              reconstructions without manual tracing.  This would allow the                  
              objectivity and analytic flexibility unattainable with                         
              conventional methods which opens major opportunities for                       
              important investigations in all areas of anatomy as well as                    
              spatially based problems in other fields of physical science and               
              engineering.   As problems addressed in the neurosciences are                  
              expanded and rely more on computational methods, the development               
              and the implementation of these methods for the analysis of brain              
              using 3D reconstruction will be of great benefit to science and                
              engineering and to education.  Indeed the effectiveness of 3D                  
              visual images in teaching anatomy has already been demonstrated                
              within the classroom.
