Title       : Research Initiation: Displaying Three-Dimensional Computer Aided Design Models
               Using Stereoscopic and Monocular DisplayCoding Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1990      
File        : a9010284

Award Number: 9010284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Office Automation Assistant             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68269              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennie J. Gallimore jgalli@matrix.wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1464,
Abstract    :
                   Providing three-dimensional models of complex objects is                  
              important for many applications.  Unfortunately, the two-                      
              dimensional nature of displays makes visualization of complex                  
              three-dimensional objects difficult.  Observers are required to                
              develop mental models of three-dimensional objects by integrating              
              visual information received from two-dimensional views which used              
              monocular depth cues as coding techniques.  A new display                      
              technology is currently available that provides the binocular depth            
              cue of stereopsis.  This cue may be advantageous when few monocular            
              cues are available in the image.                                               
                                                                                             
              The objective of the research is to investigate the relative merits            
              of monoscopic versus stereoscopic display techniques for presenting            
              visual representations of three-dimensional objects.  It is                    
              hypothesized that the effectiveness of both techniques will depend             
              upon object complexity and the number of monocular cues available.             
              The research will attempt to determine if a trade-off exists for               
              using stereoscopic versus monoscopic coding techniques using a                 
              mental  rotation paradigm.  Images will be created using the                   
              stereoscopic cue and a variety of monocular coding techniques                  
              including hidden line removal, shading, texture and rotation.  The             
              number of monocular cues available in an image will be varied.                 
              This empirical research will provide needed data on the use of                 
              stereoscopic displays as a tool for providing three-dimensional                
              representations of objects, and provide insight as to whether                  
              stereoscopic displays are feasible alternatives to high cost                   
              graphic processing techniques.
