Title       : Integration of Text Across Interword Saccades in Reading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1991       
File        : a9010067

Award Number: 9010067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120287             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albrecht Inhoff inhoff@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will examine the integration of visual and                       
              cognitive information across eye movements in reading.  During                 
              each eye fixation in reading, skilled readers acquire effective                
              information from the word directly fixated and the next word in                
              the text.  In general, the word directly fixated is fully                      
              identified; the next word in the text, usually referred to as the              
              parafoveal word, is "pre-viewed" but not  identified.  These                   
              experiments will examine the nature of this word preview process.              
              One group of experiments will examine whether skilled readers use              
              parafoveal word previews to acquire useful word length                         
              information and effective orthographic/lexical information.  A                 
              second group of experiments will examine whether the usefulness                
              of parafoveal word previews is a function of the sentential                    
              context within which these words occur.  In each experiment,                   
              skilled readers' eye movements will be recorded while they read                
              single sentences.  During sentence reading, a stimulus available               
              parafoveally will be replaced with a target word after completion              
              of the eye movement from the fixated word to the parafoveal                    
              stimulus.  The linguistic relationship between the stimulus                    
              available paravfoveally and the target word subsequently fixated               
              will be varied to determine which type of effective visual and                 
              cognitive information was obtained from the parafoveal stimulus                
              preview.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The outcome of this research will reveal how learned perceptual                
              and cognitive skills contribute to the effective "pre-viewing" of              
              parafoveally available words in skilled reading.  This may assist              
              the development of remedial reading programs for people who lack               
              sufficient development of these skills.
