Title       : The Impact of Law on the Development of Transnational Markets in the Islamic
               World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  1993    
File        : a9010816

Award Number: 9010816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1990  
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41364              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellis Goldberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Throughout history, the legitimacy of the state has been generally             
              thought to be tied to territoriality and familiar concepts of                  
              voting and voice.  Law has been considered to play a supportive                
              role in the political and economic systems in the state.  This                 
              project promises a radical revision of the concept of society                  
              organizing politics around territoriality and "voice" and suggests             
              conceptualizing a society organized around movement or "exit," with            
              the legal system playing a major role.                                         
                                                                                             
              To demonstrate this new concept, the investigator will conduct a               
              comparative history of state-building in medieval Europe and the               
              Islamic world.  The study will trace the role of law in the                    
              medieval Islamic world order as the crucial institution that                   
              allowed free movement of goods, people, and capital.  It is argued             
              that the coherence of the medieval world order was structured by               
              movement or exit.  Critical to the working of exit as a device for             
              ordering transnational markets is the role of law as a system of               
              establishing property rights and resolving disputes.  Primary                  
              Arabic source material and secondary social history documents will             
              be examined to test the thesis that merchants, artisans, and                   
              intellectuals moved freely in the Middle East during the medieval              
              Islamic world and that movement was related to the tax policies of             
              the local kings.  Thus, instead of belonging to a particular polity            
              or powerful state, they participated in the structuring of a                   
              translocal market in the southern Mediterranean region.  This                  
              created a system of economic and political relations which                     
              minimized the costs of movement (exit) and enhanced competition                
              between would-be monarchs, thus limiting the attempts of potential             
              aggrandizers to create territorial dynasties.  In Europe, by                   
              contrast, the legitimacy of the state was tied to territoriality,              
              voting, and voice.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This study offers a new perspective for understanding medieval                 
              history and for shedding light on why the political structure of               
              Islam was so different from the political structure of Europe.  In             
              addition, the open and fluid character of the market in medieval               
              Islam also bears certain structural resemblances to the                        
              transnational character of global markets in the present world                 
              order.  Thus, this project should advance our comparative                      
              understanding of the way in which markets are formed and                       
              structured.  The possibilities for exiting a political system (made            
              possible by the presence of Islamic law across the domains of Islam            
              and the weakness of individual Islamic states) helps to understand             
              the world of increasing interdependence.  The part that Islamic law            
              played in the process has important implications for the sociolegal            
              aspects of contemporary global change.
