Title       : Dynamics of International Environmental Cooperation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1990    
File        : a9010101

Award Number: 9010101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Haas haas@polsci.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The resolution of international environmental conflict is currently an         
              important topic in international relations and on the foreign policy           
              agenda.  This project aims at analyzing trends in the actual ways in           
              which such problems are managed, with an aim toward generating policy          
              relevant conclusions for improving the process and theoretical and             
              analytic insights into the dynamics of international environmental             
              diplomacy to contribute to our broader understanding of contemporary           
              international relations.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The research will consist of a focussed, comparative study of six              
              different cases of environmental cooperation.  The analysis will weigh         
              the role of the balance of state power and availability of expertise           
              and knowledge in explaining the substantive content and preconditions          
              for cooperation for environmental protection.  It will use interviews          
              and archival research to identify the major dynamics in these cases.           
              The substantive coverage will include efforts to control European acid         
              rain, the protection of the North Sea, Mediterranean, Baltic Sea, the          
              protection of the stratospheric ozone layer, and the Regional Seas             
              Programme of the United Nations Environment Programme which includes 10        
              separate regions.  Taken together these cases represent the entire             
              universe of contemporary international environmental problems:  those          
              which confront all countries relatively equally (such as ozone), and           
              those which are regionally based.  Moreover it focuses on a variety of         
              cases in which there are strong countries willing to lead negotiations         
              (such as the United States in ozone), where there is a large number of         
              relatively equally powerful countries all reluctant to lead, in which          
              case alternative strategies for cooperation have to be uncovered (such         
              as the Regional Seas Program and the North Sea).  Finally, it covers           
              cases in which scientific understanding is fairly complete                     
              and demonstrates the need for action (such as the Baltic and North Sea)        
              contrasted with cases where the scientific basis for policy was absent         
              (such as the early years of European acid rain and ozone).  By                 
              considering all these dimensions of cases, the research effort will            
              seek to offer general statements about the role of state power and             
              generalized knowledge in shaping and driving international                     
              environmental cooperation.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The project will identify the major dynamics by which collective               
              environmental problems are resolved, along with policy relevant advice         
              on how to improve the process through a more sophisticated recognition         
              of types of diplomacy and international process appropriate to the             
              management of environmental problems with different analytic                   
              properties.
