Title       : U.S. Japan Long-Term Research Visit: Membrane Protein Interactions and Their
               Application to Pilot Scale Jojobin Isolation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1990  
File        : a9010339

Award Number: 9010339
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Janice Cassidy                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Abbott   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dept Agr-Northn Reg Res C
	      
	      Peoria, IL  61600    /   -

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 5959,
Abstract    :
              This is a one-year collaborative project between Thomas P. Abbott              
              of the USDA-ARS-Northern Regional Research Laboratory and Atsuo                
              Watanabe of the National Food Research Institute, Ministry of                  
              Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Japan.                                    
                                                                                             
              The objectives of the study are to determine the influence of                  
              additives on the membrane separation of proteins, especially                   
              protein-membrane interactions. Membrane separation is an integral              
              part of scaling up of biological processes, the challenge of the               
              1990s.  Scientists in the Japanese food industry, largely trained              
              in Dr. Watanabe's laboratory, are expert in the membrane separation            
              of proteins.  Through this collaborative project, they will share              
              their expertise with scientists from the USDA's Northern Regional              
              Research Center, a major center of American agricultural research.             
              The project will focus on the isolation of proteins from jojoba.               
              A commercial use for jojoba protein isolates exists if they can be             
              isolated economically, but more important, a better understanding              
              of protein isolation of membranes and the effect of agents that                
              prevent protein-membrane clogging will result from this project.
