Title       : Dietary Reconstruction with Stable Isotopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1990      
File        : a9010937

Award Number: 9010937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202119             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley H. Ambrose Ambrose@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Because a relationship exists between diet and the chemical                    
              composition of the consumer's tissue, paleoanthropologists have                
              focussed attention on the chemical analysis of human skeletal                  
              remains.  Through study of trace elements such as strontium and                
              the isotopic ratios of carbon and nitrogen, it is often possible               
              to gain insight into foods consumed during an individual's                     
              lifetime.  In most archaeological excavations food remains -                   
              especially plant foods - are absent because of poor preservation,              
              and, therefore, skeletal analysis provides the only means to                   
              reconstruct subsistence.  While, in practice, these techniques                 
              seem to work well, the exact mechanisms by which elements are                  
              incorporated into tissue such as bone are poorly understood, and               
              without such knowledge, it is difficult to place a high degree of              
              reliance on the results of such studies.                                       
                                                                                             
              Dr. Stanley Ambrose and his colleagues will continue their work                
              to elucidate these mechanisms.  They will conduct an integrated                
              program of research comprising a series of experiments.  These                 
              include eleven controlled diet experiments using small mammals                 
              fed naturally labeled carbohydrates and proteins in different                  
              combinations under different simulated environmental conditions.               
              This will define the relationship between the stable isotopic                  
              composition of diet, biochemical fractions of diet, and consumer               
              tissues.  It will also provide insight into the effects of                     
              protein nutrition on collagen and apatite turnover rate.  The                  
              team will also analyze the isotopic composition of hair of six                 
              human populations in natural environments whose diets have been                
              accurately quantified in longitudinal nutrition study.  These                  
              will provide a practical situation in which to evaluate the                    
              results of the laboratory experiments.  If time is available,                  
              bone samples from prehistoric populations will also be examined.               
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it will increase our basic                  
              understanding of the nutritional process.  It will yield analytic              
              approaches of use in a wide variety of archaeological situations.
