Title       : Consumption Over the Life Cycle: A Distributional Study of Theory vs. Evidence.
               ROW Planning Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1990      
File        : a9010308

Award Number: 9010308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11112              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane Rogers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              Many researchers have found that the life cycle/permanent income               
              theory of consumption fails to explain movements of aggregate                  
              consumption and savings. What does determine savings remains                   
              unclear, especially given that the motives behind savings are not              
              the same for all individuals. In particular, such motives are                  
              likely to differ significantly across groups of individuals with               
              different levels of lifetime incomes and/or different profiles of              
              lifetime incomes.                                                              
                                                                                             
              In this project, a data set is developed on lifetime incomes and               
              consumption paths using data from the Panel Study on Income                    
              Dynamics and the Consumer Expenditure Survey. The lifetime data                
              will then be used to ascertain to what extent the life cycle                   
              theory explains observed patterns for different types of                       
              consumers. For each consumer category, observed patterns of total              
              consumption will be compared with those predicted by the life-                 
              cycle theory and those predicted by alternative explanations.                  
              These alternatives include "rules of thumb", the "behavioral"                  
              life-cycle hypothesis, the presence of liquidity constraints, and              
              myopia.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The final stage of the research is to go beyond casual                         
              empiricism and develop more appropriate econometric tests for the              
              alternative explanations. Consumption function and Euler equation              
              approaches will be among those considered; however, more powerful              
              tests may be possible given the wealth of information that will                
              be available in the lifetime data set. The result of this                      
              research will be a better understanding of what determines                     
              savings.
