Title       : Judgmental Characteristics of Negotiators and the Structure of Negotiation Tasks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1990     
File        : a9010359

Award Number: 9010359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72466              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeryl L. Mumpower jeryl.mumpower@albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This proposal offers new insights into the relationship between                
              task characteristics and negotiation behavior.  Negotiations                   
              frequently result in suboptimal, inefficient agreements;                       
              negotiators could have reach other settlements that all would have             
              preferred.  Unlike prior research, the focus in this proposal is               
              on the impact of perceptual and judgmental factors on the process              
              and outcome of negotiations.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The research investigates how the structure of negotiation tasks               
              is determined by negotiator's cognitive characteristics.                       
              Relatively slight differences in how negotiators evaluate the                  
              desirability of potential settlements may result in distinctly                 
              different feasible settlement spaces and efficient frontiers.                  
              Research will be conducted to asses the behavioral implications of             
              these different task structures.  The research will make use of                
              both empirical and simulation studies, combining elements of                   
              psychological, decision theoretic, and game theoretic approaches               
              to the study of negotiation.  The objective of the proposal is to              
              lead to greater understanding of the structure of negotiation tasks            
              and their impacts on negotiation processes and outcomes.  The                  
              results of this research will help guide the development of                    
              computer-based negotiation support systems.
