Title       : RIA: Some Novel Power Control Strategies for Static Power Converters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1990       
File        : a9010530

Award Number: 9010530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Vittal                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Prasad Enjeti   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Increased automation in the manufacturing process has spurred                  
              considerable research interest in the next generation of solid state           
              power converters.  These converters are expected to be rugged, cheap           
              and compact.  These requirements cannot be satisfied by existing               
              converters because of bulky L-C components and their inability to              
              operate under all operating conditions.                                        
                                                                                             
              Recent research on Matrix Converters, PWM inverters and PWM rectifiers         
              has shown the following advantages:  complete absence of dc link               
              components (for matrix type); compact, light in weight, and the                
              ability to integrate along with heat sink; the possibility of bi-              
              directional power flow and low distortion input current.                       
                                                                                             
              In spite of the enormous application potential of these converters,            
              and the availability of new power semiconductor devices such as MCT's,         
              further development and application has been relatively stalled.  This         
              is due to the following reasons:  high converter performance claims            
              are valid only for ideal operating conditions such as when the input           
              supply is balanced and the output load is linear and balanced.  An             
              important list of unknowns for the converters are:  Matrix and ac to           
              dc converter input output behavior is very sensitive for the                   
              unbalances in input supply and their effects are unknown; PWM inverter         
              behavior in the presence of dc-link voltage ripple is also unknown.            
              Therefore, for the next generation converters to be rugged, small in           
              size and high in performance the effects of unbalances must be first           
              evaluated and some novel power control strategies to guard against             
              these imperfections must be explored.                                          
                                                                                             
              The aim of this research is to address these issues and systematically         
              evaluate the converter behavior via mathematical modeling and provide          
              answers to the above listed unknowns.  Some novel power control                
              strategies to correct for unbalanced operation and methods to reject           
              dc-link voltage ripple are proposed.  Finally, design guides for               
              practical realization of the proposed strategies via digital signal            
              processing hardware are examined.  The success of this research will           
              be a major contribution towards a full scale practical realization of          
              next generation static power converters.
