Title       : Oral Traditions as Memory Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1993      
File        : a9010074

Award Number: 9010074
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164994             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Rubin rubin@psych.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research approaches the study of human memory through the                 
              study of materials that are not distorted or changed in memory;                
              it asks what properties afford these stimuli their stability.                  
              Such knowledge will not only advance theory, but will also                     
              provide guidance on how to prepare materials to be recalled more               
              accurately, especially for use in situations where written memory              
              aids cannot be used.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The research will focus on oral traditions which have been handed              
              down for generations without the aid of writing or other external              
              memory aids.  For instance, ballads currently sung on the coast                
              and in the mountains of North Carolina differ only in minor ways               
              from the ballads folklorists collected in the British Isles                    
              hundreds of years ago.  This research will test singers who do                 
              not maintain the stability of their tradition by writing down the              
              old ballads and referring to them; rather, these singers keep the              
              ballads in memory and transmit them by word of mouth.  The                     
              singers do not learn the ballads in a rote tedious fashion, but                
              rather use the rules and limitations of a good ballad to ease                  
              their memory load.  In sum, this research will study memory in a               
              natural context where it appears to be working in a near-optimal               
              fashion.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The research will employ several methods.  One is analysis of                  
              ballads and folktales from existing North Carolina collections                 
              and those collected in previous research in terms of the meaning,              
              poetic, and musical constraints operating on the songs.  These                 
              constraints will be used to study the location and kind of                     
              changes that occur over historical time as well as within a                    
              single singer or story teller.  The research will investigate the              
              contribution to the overall stability of memory of each                        
              constraint, taken individually or in combination with other                    
              constraints.  Undergraduates who know little or nothing of the                 
              tradition will be asked to learn several ballads to see how their              
              skills at learning imporve with experience.  In this way, the                  
              development of expertise in learning new, highly structured                    
              material will be studied.                                                      
                                                                                             
              The research will explore differences that are due to the                      
              material being produced orally as opposed to in writing, both for              
              their theoretical and practical importance.  Undergraduates will               
              be asked to explain a complex situation either in speech or in                 
              writing under various conditions, and the research will analyze                
              differences in the syntax, word choice, and overall organization               
              in these two situations.  Differences in production caused by the              
              mode of production have been demonstrated to be substantial.  The              
              research project will begin to look at mechanisms for these                    
              differences.
