Title       : PGE: PLN Girls' Career-Relevant Interests in Science, Mathematics, Engineering,
               and Technology: Examining Outcome Expectations, Perceived Barriers, and
               Perceived Supports
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0114516

Award Number: 0114516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29665              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie Shoffner mfshoffn@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Newsome  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn M. Callahan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The purpose of this research is to increase our understanding of the early
              career
development of girls as they form opinions, develop belief structures,
              and make 
decisions about career options in science, mathematics, engineering,
              and/or technology 
careers by expanding our theoretical framework and
              empirical base to include a more
direct focus on the influence of outcome
              expectations, perceived barriers, and 
perceived support.
The need to conduct
              inquiry into the role of outcome beliefs in the development, stability,
 and
              change in career interests, and to examine contextual factors that
 impact the
              eventual entry of young girls and women into the pipeline toward pursuing
              
scientific and technical careers provides the framework for the
              research.
This planning grant involves the recruitment and commitment of
              several 
collaborating researchers, research institutions, and school systems.
              Collaborative
 researchers will provide the expertise across the disciplines
              of counseling, 
educational psychology , and science. Collaboration across
              institutions will provide 
the opportunity for multiple sites to bring
              existing resources to bear on the problem
 and allow for research across
              widely varying demographics and locations. Multiple
 school systems will
              contribute to the opportunity to generalize to populations of rural,
              
suburban, and urban youth, as well as varying socioeconomic groups.
The
              planning year will include the identification of a sufficiently large and
              diverse
 sample of girls, and the design and pilot testing of both qualitative
              and quantitative
 instrumentation. This study will use a multimethod approach
              to examine the outcome 
expectations and perceived barriers and supports
              ofgirls, ages 10-14, the impact of
 these expectations on career-related
              interests, and, if funded through a future grant,
the development of these
              interestS and outcome expectations over time. Focus groups
will be used to
              identify factors to be used in the development of items for several 
Q-sorts
              and to be incorporated into assessment tools. Quantitative instruments
              that
will measure the constructs of interest will be  designed, when necessary
              , revised
when appropriate, and then pilot tested with middle school youth. 
