Title       : IGERT: Program In Cellular Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0114264

Award Number: 0114264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2494649            (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry V. McIntire mcintire@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer L. West  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George N. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick B. Rudolph  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This IGERT award supports the establishment of an interdisciplinary research
              training program in the emerging field of cellular engineering.  The program
              focuses on metabolic and tissue engineering and provides science and
              engineering students with rigorous educational and research training in the
              fields of bioengineering, biochemistry, and cell biology.  A co-supervision
              system is created in which students will have an advisor from the Department of
              Bioengineering and an advisor from the Department of Biochemistry and Cell
              Biology for guidance of mechanistic and design aspects of research projects. 
              The fundamental curriculum for IGERT trainees includes coverage of scientific
              ethics, advanced laboratory skills, basic biosciences (biochemistry and cell
              biology) and engineering systems analysis.  Student participants work in
              cooperative environments including team design projects and an industrial
              internship program with companies engaged in cellular engineering.  This
              program is coordinated with a pre- and post internship seminar program to
              maximize the impact of the students' industrial experiences.  The establishment
              of a visiting scientist position and a focused seminar series having different
              annual themes provides in depth exposure to new areas.  A key component of the
              program will be continued expansion of our successful undergraduate recruitment
              program for underrepresented minorities to this specialized area of graduate
              education. Building upon established strengths in interdisciplinary research
              and education, this training program creates a center of excellence in cellular
              engineering that will train researchers who can utilize advances in biological
              sciences to produce innovative and cost- effective biotechnological products in
              the 21st century.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
              challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new,
              innovative models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment
              for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.
              In the fourth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-two
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award
              reside in the Directorates for Engineering; Biological Sciences; and Education
              and Human Resources.

