Title       : Collaborative Research: Micro/Meso-Scale Machine Tool Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0114717

Award Number: 0114717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. DeVor r-devor@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shiv G. Kapoor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative research project is directed towards a new technology for the
              production of micro/meso-scale components by methods whose efficiency
              approaches that of mass production.  Key to achieving this capability will be
              the creation of "miniaturized" machine tool systems (referred to as
              meso-Machine Tools, mMTs) whose volume is on the order of 1 dm3.  These systems
              are required to meet the rapidly growing demand  for 3D parts and part features
              at the micro/meso-level (0.01 - 10.00 mm range) in materials that include
              stainless steel, titanium, aluminum, platinum, iridium and others is currently
              being met by using ultra-precision CNC machine tools. It is common to have
              machine-to-workpiece volume ratios of 106 or higher at best, a situation that
              adversely affects accuracy, precision and overall efficiency. The prevalent
              microelectronic fabrication techniques and their spin-offs used for
              micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) are, in turn, are limited by their
              inability to produce arbitrary 3D features in a wide range of materials and by
              their limited relative accuracy. However, to their advantage, MEMS-based
              technologies are batch type, leading to cheap mass production, while
              ultra-precision CNC processes are serial, inherently expensive and not easily
              adaptable to mass production.

The goal is to meet productivity requirements
              by applying these mMT in a massively parallel fashion. It is envisioned that
              the mMTs, in analogy to a computer system, will be equivalent to plug-and-play
              boards and treated as replaceable entities. To facilitate an integration of
              such machines into a system, resource and information distribution mechanisms
              will be established by an architecture, similar in concept to the "bus" of a
              computer, that supplies energy, control/feedback information, and materials and
              tools to/from the individual machines. It is anticipated that the project will
              demonstrate that it is possible to build mMT systems for costs two or three
              orders of magnitude below existing systems.

