Title       : Multi-Scale Mechanics Issues in Ferroelectric Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0114801

Award Number: 0114801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Weng weng@jove.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              0114801
Weng
Ferroelectric ceramics are an important class of engineering
              materials that have wide applications as sensors, actuators, transducers, and
              ultrasonic medical imaging. This class of materials can exist or can be
              fabricated in several scales: single crystals, polycrystals, composites, and
              thin films, but their distinctive properties are not clearly known. In order to
              explore the full potential for each of them and to provide a guideline for
              material design and selection, a research project  will be undertaken to study
              their properties, and to develop for each of them the unique constitutive
              models for their nonlinear, coupled electromechanical behaviors. In this
              process, the change of crystal structures from the high temperature
              paraelectric to the low temperature ferroelectric state will be considered, and
              domain switch from one poled state to another under application of an electric
              field and/or mechanical stress will be investigated. This will be carried out
              by consideration of the mechanics, physics, and irreversible thermodynamics
              involved during phase transformation and domain switch. In particular, the
              thermodynamics driving force arising from the change in Gibbs free energy of a
              heterogeneous system and the resistance force associated with the domain wall
              movement will be used to construct the kinetic equations. On the single crystal
              level, domains with lamellar structures for all potential variants will be
              identified under a given electromechanical field, while on the polycrystal
              level it will be addressed for the constituent grains considering grain
              interactions. For ferroelectric composites actuated with
              ferroelectric/piezoelectric particles or rods, or spheroidal inclusions in
              general, the effect of microstructural features, such as particle shape, volume
              concentration, and distribution, will be examined. For the thin films whose
              thickness direction usually contains columnar grains with some preferred
              texture, their distinctive characteristics from the bulks will be emphasized.
              The theory will be checked with experimental data, some from open literature
              and others from work of two collaborators. The outcome of the proposed study
              will be a set of physically based, experimentally verified constitutive models
              that reveal the unique features of the electromechanical behavior for each
              scale.  

	The proposed problems touch upon several novel aspects not
              commonly encountered simultaneously: micromechanics of heterogeneous materials,
              electric-mechanical coupling, nonlinear response, evolution of microstructures,
              irreversible thermodynamics, physics of phase transformation and domain switch,
              and scale-transition. As such, it will contribute to the basic advancement of
              scientific knowledge in this important field. The research program will be
              integrated into both graduate and undergraduate teaching at Rutgers. At the
              graduate level a new focus on the coupled phenomena in solids will be
              initiated. This will include the electromechanical coupling in piezoelectricity
              and ferroelectricity as proposed, and electrostriction, ferromagnetic behavior,
              magnetostriction, and shape-memory alloys. At the undergraduate level a project
              for the seniors with an interest in both mechanics and electronic materials
              will be offered through Rutgers' J. J. Slade Scholars program. Participants of
              this project will have the unique opportunity to learn both, and gain
              experience to write a thesis on this interdisciplinary topic. In this process,
              minority and under-privileged students will be actively sought to participate. 
              
*** 
