Title       : IGERT: Ecosystem Management in Tropical and Temperate Regions: Integrating
               Education in Sustainable Production and Biodiversity conservation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0114304

Award Number: 0114304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2689340            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nilsa Bosque-Perez nbosque@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisette P. Waits  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. McDaniel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jo Ellen Force  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sanford D. Eigenbrode  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This IGERT award will establish an interdisciplinary, multi-institution graduate
              research and education program in conservation biology and sustainability of
              agricultural and forest systems.  The need is acute for better disciplinary
              integration to achieve biodiversity conservation and sustainable productivity
              in anthropogenically fragmented landscapes.  To achieve this, a new generation
              of professionals must be educated in a holistic fashion.  Students in this
              program will work in interdisciplinary teams to study aspects of biodiversity
              conservation and sustainable productivity in three distinct geographic regions
              characterized by habitat fragmentation.  A highly productive group of educators
              and researchers from three Colleges and seven Departments at the University of
              Idaho and four Research Areas at the Tropical Agricultural Research and Higher
              Education Center (CATIE), an international institution headquartered in Costa
              Rica, will participate in the project.  These faculty will provide mentoring in
              agricultural ecology, forest ecology and management, conservation biology and
              biodiversity assessment, ecological genetics, soil science, watershed sciences,
              ethics, rural sociology, policy, social impact assessment, and environmental
              economics.  The IGERT program will differ from traditional doctoral programs at
              UI in five major ways.  First, graduate education will be multi-institutional
              with course work conducted at UI and CATIE, and dual-institution graduate
              committee membership.  Second, student teams will address similar research
              questions in temperate and tropical ecosystems and will complete a research
              internship with their teammates in the country that is not their primary field
              site.  Third, students working in interdisciplinary teams will produce
              dissertation sets that will include some co-authored chapters.  Fourth,
              students will complete an interdisciplinary graduate curriculum including
              biophysical and social sciences.  Fifth, students will participate in
              professional development activities including joint annual research symposia
              and interdisciplinary training workshops.  Special efforts are planned to
              recruit Hispanic, Native American, and African American students. 
              Professionals educated through this program will have the expertise to work
              effectively in interdisciplinary teams addressing the pressing scientific
              problems concerning management of the biosphere.  Students will gain
              cross-cultural experience and geographic exposure to enhance their
              international perspective.  These professionals will be uniquely prepared to
              pursue careers in academia, government agencies, and international research and
              development institutions.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
              challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new,
              innovative models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment
              for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.
              In the fourth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-two
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award
              reside in the Directorates for Biological Sciences; Social, Behavioral, and
              Economic Sciences; and Education and Human Resources.

