Title       : Acquisition of a Deep Ultraviolet/Infrared Mask Aligner for Microscale/Nanoscale
               Device Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0114252

Award Number: 0114252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127890             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda J. Olafsen lolafsen@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judy Z. Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Siyuan Han  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan M. Lunte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen J. Nordheden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will allow
              the University of Kansas (UK) to acquire a deep ultraviolet/infrared (UV/IR)
              mask aligner. This instrument will support the research of five different
              groups for fabrication of micron-scale and nano-scale devices. These devices
              include superconducting thin films and tunnel junctions, semiconductor lasers
              and detectors, III-N devices, and microchip-based electrophoresis devices. This
              acquisition will enhance existing materials research infrastructure at KU and
              will greatly improve KU's nanoscience and technology and materials research
              competitiveness. In addition, the instrument will be an excellent education and
              training platform providing a unique opportunity to learn thin film device and
              integrated circuit fabrication technologies. Deep UV and IR lamps are critical
              features of the proposed acquisition. The acquisition of a deep UV/IR mask
              aligner is essential to research programs that span the Physics and Astronomy,
              Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, and Pharmaceutical Chemistry departments.
              These studies will have direct impact on the development of the next-generation
              of information, computing, semiconductors and pharmaceutical
              technology.

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research
              program will allow the University of Kansas (UK) to acquire a deep
              ultraviolet/infrared (UV/IR) mask aligner. This instrument will support the
              research of five different groups for fabrication of micron-scale and
              nano-scale devices. These devices include superconducting thin films and tunnel
              junctions, semiconductor lasers and detectors, III-N devices, and
              microchip-based electrophoresis devices. This acquisition will enhance existing
              materials research infrastructure at KU and will greatly improve KU's
              nanoscience and technology and materials research competitiveness. In addition,
              the instrument will be an excellent education and training platform providing a
              unique opportunity to learn thin film device and integrated circuit fabrication
              technologies. Deep UV and IR lamps are critical features of the proposed
              acquisition. The acquisition of a deep UV/IR mask aligner is essential to
              research programs that span the Physics and Astronomy, Chemical and Petroleum
              Engineering, and Pharmaceutical Chemistry departments. These studies will have
              direct impact on the development of the next-generation of information,
              computing, semiconductors and pharmaceutical technology..


