Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Expression Profiling of Plant Disease Resistance Pathways
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0114783

Award Number: 0114783
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3765723            (Estimated)
Investigator: Xinnian Dong xdong@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick M. Ausubel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shauna C. Somerville  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1136,1182,1305,1684,9109,9183,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              

Plants respond to pathogen attack through a variety of signaling pathways
              consisting of a large number of regulatory as well as effector genes.  During
              the past several years, many defense-related genes have been identified through
              genetic analysis conducted in Arabidopsis thaliana.  Importantly, Arabidopsis
              exhibits all of the major kinds of defense responses present in other plants. 
              Although a relatively large number of Arabidopsis defense-related genes have
              been identified, progress in developing overall explanatory models of
              plant-pathogen interactions is currently limited by two major experimental
              roadblocks. First, most of the phenotypic tests that have been used to
              characterize pathogen-host interactions do not have sufficient discriminatory
              power to assign defense-related genes to specific signal response pathways.  To
              circumvent this limitation, large-scale transcript profiling analyses will be
              carried out on appropriately selected Arabidopsis defense-related mutants,
              including double and triple mutants.  Combining genetic epistasis analysis with
              genomic technologies should lead to the development of a much more detailed
              model of how the various defense-related genes function and interact in
              combating pathogen attack.  The second factor limiting the understanding of the
              plant defense response is that it is simply not possible to analyze the
              overwhelming volume of current data using conventional methods.  The large
              volume of microarray data that will be generated in the near future compounds
              this problem.  Moreover, data from different laboratories are not directly
              comparable because standardized experimental conditions are not employed.  To
              help mitigate the problems associated with the analysis of large data sets, a
              sophisticated web-accessible plant-microbe interaction database (PMIDB) will be
              created to provide a common repository and standardized format for experimental
              data.  The specific aims of the project are to:

1) Use transcript-profiling
              analysis to identify Arabidopsis defense-related genes and construct a 
custom
              microarray (pathoarray) enriched for defense-related genes (A list the genes
              identified so far can be found at
              http://genetics.mgh.harvard.edu/ausubelweb/nsf2010/NSF_2010.html). These custom
              pathoarrays will be made available to the Arabidopsis community at a nominal
              cost with the expectation that the experimental results generated using these
              pathoarrays will be deposited in PMIDB.

2) Use the pathoarrays from Aim 1
              and Arabidopsis defense-related mutants to define the expression signatures
              resulting from the activation of defense pathways.  

3) Create a
              web-accessible plant-microbe interaction database (PMIDB). This database, which
              will be accessible at
              http://genetics.mgh.harvard.edu/ausubelweb/nsf2010/NSF_2010.html, will be
              developed during the next four years and will contain standardized experimental
              procedures for analyzing host defense responses, a list of all the
              pathogenesis-related mutants and their phenotypes, a list of defense-related
              genes with links to various sequence databases, and expression profiles of
              different plant-pathogen interactions and different defense-related mutants. 
              

This 2010 Project provides a unique opportunity for applying genomic
              approaches to genetic analysis of plant defense mechanisms.  Understanding the
              mechanisms of plant defense is of interest not only to basic science but also
              to development of agriculture and protection of the environment.  


