Title       : US-Ghana Cooperative Research: Assessment of Groundwater Vulnerability to
               Pesticides Contamination in Farmlands Within Nsawam District, Ghana: An
               Integrated Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0114767

Award Number: 0114767
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred K. Boadu boadu@akoto.egr.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 5928,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0114767
Boadu


This award supports a three-year cooperative research
              project between Professor Fred K. Boadu, with the Department of Civil and
              Environmental Engineering at Duke University, and Mr. Emmanuel A. Owusu, with
              the Department of Geological Engineering at Kwame Nkrumah University of Science
              and Technology, in Kumasi, Ghana.  The investigators will conduct a study to
              investigate and assess the potential vulnerability of groundwater in a
              fractured terrain that is subject to indiscriminate use of pesticides.  The
              study area is located in a farming community in the Nsawam district.

In many
              developing countries the heavy and routine use of pesticides is a common
              practice, but for many areas the impact on groundwater resources is unknown. 
              Fractures in crystalline rock serve as the main hydraulic conduits for flow of
              groundwater and transport of contaminants in the earth's subsurface.  In Ghana
              farmers routinely use pesticides such as DDT, and these can easily end up in
              the groundwater that is used for domestic purposes, thus posing potential
              health risks to inhabitants in surrounding communities.  The investigators will
              use an innovative approach that combines artificial neural networks with
              standard field mapping techniques and geophysical survey methods to map
              subsurface fractures in order to predict and map the potential flow directions
              of contaminated groundwater.  The project will utilize Dr. Boadu's expertise in
              the development and use of geophysical models to predict subsurface transport
              properties of fractured terrain and Mr. Owusu's background in field structural
              mapping.  Both will collaborate on the analysis and interpretation of the
              structural information obtained from the field.  Results of this project are
              expected to advance current theoretical knowledge in environmental and
              engineering geophysics, as will as provide new information on variations in
              fracture parameters and orientations during past tectonic deformation. 
              Additionally, the project will result in a valuable database of geological and
              geophysical information for this part of Ghana and similar environments.
              

This project is being jointly supported by the Division of International
              Programs and the Division of Earth Sciences. 

