Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: International: Bayesian Inventory Management
               under Censored Demand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0114738

Award Number: 0114738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18560              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Levine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
Program Ref : 5940,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0114738
Levine

Description:  This award is for support of a collaborative
              research project involving Dr. Richard Levine, Department of Statistics,
              University of California at Davis, Davis, California, Dr. Emre Berk, Department
              of Management, and Dr. Ulku Gurler, Department of Industrial Engineering, both
              at Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey.   These scientists will study the
              development of Bayesian updating methods to draw statistical inferences and
              derive optimal solutions in periodic review inventory problems.  The goal is to
              develop realistic Bayesian models for decision-making in inventory management
              applications when1) inventory demands are unobservable or partially observed
              (lost sales); 2) customers differ in their attitudes toward immediate and
              delayed inventories; 3) demand processes evolve over time.  In the context of
              inventory management, the goal is to be achieved by utilizing advanced
              statistical methods for modeling the uncertainty in demand processes and
              incorporating Bayesian methods to update available information dynamically
              during the course of operation as data accumulates. 

Scope:  This award will
              allow an Assistant Professor at UC Davis to collaborate with two Turkish
              scientists, one of whom is also a recent Ph.D.  This project is likely to
              enhance the potential for long-term productive collaboration.  The topic is of
              scientific interest.  The purpose is to bridge the gap between the purely
              industrial engineering/operations research approach that focuses on
              optimization of a given system and the common statistical approach that
              provides a one time solution for the estimation of system parameters from a
              given data set.  The collaboration brings experts with needed complementary
              expertise to deal with this complex problem. The project brings active
              researchers in these areas in the United States and Turkey.  The project meets
              the INT criteria for support of collaborative research of mutual benefit.
