Title       : Phenomenology and the Mind Sciences: 'Hybrid Intellectuals' in German and
               American Culture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0114950

Award Number: 0114950
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred I. Tauber atauber@bu.edu  (Project Director current)
              Susan Lanzoni  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SES 01214950
Alfred Tauber/Susan Lanzoni, Boston University
Phenomenology and
              the Mind Sciences: "Hybrid Intellectuals" in German and
American
              Culture

This is a postdoctoral fellowship that focuses on the
              phenomenological psychiatrist and psychologist, "hybrid intellectuals" native
              to German-speaking lands in the early twentieth century who became influential
              in the United States in the middle of the century.  Phenomenological philosophy
              is the study of consciousness, with roots in Franz Brentano's path breaking
              work on empirical psychology, but most fully identified with the work of Edmund
              Husserl, and then given an existential flavor by Martin Heidegger. As an
              approach that gave precedence to the analysis of conscious experience, it was
              not only an extremely influential philosophy in early twentieth century Europe,
              but one that a number of contemporary psychiatrists and psychologists found
              could be applied in scientific domains.  

The postdoctoral fellow explored
              the meeting of these two worlds in a dissertation that is a case study of
              Ludwig Binswanger (1881-1966), the Swiss psychiatrist who turned to
              phenomenology to explicate psychotic experience.  Under the sponsorship of  Dr.
              Alfred I. Tauber at the Center for Philosophy and History of Science at Boston
              University, the co-PI  will strengthen her philosophical understanding of
              phenomenology, while conducting research on the history of phenomenological
              psychiatry in Germany.  Further training in philosophy should assist her in
              comprehending the intricacies of different variants of phenomenological
              philosophy.  The research focuses on three other hybrid intellectuals of the
              period, Erwin Straus, V.E. von Gebsattel and Eugene Minkowski, all of whom
              found merit in using phenomenological methods in psychology and psychiatry. The
              fact that Binswanger was not alone in creating this interdisciplinary approach
              demonstrates that there were specific intellectual and cultural resources in
              the German-speaking world that enabled such projects to flourish. While
              examining the uses of phenomenology for these other practitioners, the PI sets
              their work within the larger intellectual currents of the period.

A second
              part of the research project tracks the influence of these practitioners and
              their ideas in the United States. The co-PI follows both the movement of German
              emigrants to the US in the 1930s and the influence of newly translated European
              texts in the 1950s. The ways in which these European ideas were received on
              American soil demonstrates the critical importance of cultural and
              institutional factors in promoting different forms of interdisciplinarity. The
              American setting was quite different from the German: disciplinary lines
              between philosophy and psychology had grown more rigid, and American
              psychologists and psychiatrists were oriented to practical outcomes and
              therapeutic solutions. Therefore, American phenomenological psychiatrists and
              psychologists had distinct agendas, and encountered different obstacles in
              comparison to their earlier European counterparts. This project track these
              "hybrid intellectuals" along an historical and cultural trajectory in order to
              illuminate the shifting possibilities of interdisciplinarity as an historically
              mediated phenomenon.

