Title       : Acquisition of a Vector High Field Magnet System for Magnetic Nanostructure
               Research and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a0114142

Award Number: 0114142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96708              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew D. Kent andy.kent@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc Walters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program, the
              Department of Physics at New York University will acquire an automated vector
              high field superconducting magnet system. This system will be used to study
              magnetic nanostructures and, in particular, quantum tunneling of the magnetic
              moment (QTM). Understanding such characteristics of magnetic nanostructures is
              a major scientific challenge with important implications for the
              miniaturization of magnetic storage technology. This system will be used with
              high sensitivity Hall-effect magnetometers, that have sensitivities many orders
              of magnitude better than commercially available magnetometers. This
              sensitivity, coupled with a wide operating temperature, 0.3 K to 300 K, and the
              new ability to vary the field magnitude and orientation rapidly, will permit
              unique and advanced characterization of the magnetic properties of materials.
              In particular, it will greatly enhance interdisciplinary projects focused on
              understanding QTM in chemically synthesized nanometer-sized magnets. The
              equipment will also enhance the research and educational opportunities at NYU
              and the research capabilities available to a multi-university interdisciplinary
              scientific collaboration. Graduate students will use this instrument in their
              research. Undergraduates will also participate in the synthesis of magnetic
              nanostructures and their characterization at this advanced experimental
              facility. 
%%%

With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials
              Research Program, the Department of Physics at New York University will acquire
              an automated vector high field superconducting magnet system. This system will
              be used to study magnetic nanostructures. The miniaturization of magnetic
              devices to this size is critical to advances in magnetic information storage,
              which is an important industry in the United States. For instance, nanoscale
              magnets exhibit quantum tunneling of the magnetic moment (QTM), that may
              seriously limit their usefulness in conventional magnetic information storage,
              but at the same time, could provide a medium for a much faster type of
              information processing known as quantum computing. This system will be used to
              conduct high sensitivity magnetic measurements over a wide range of magnetic
              fields and temperatures, not possible with commercially available instruments.
              In particular, it will greatly enhance interdisciplinary projects focused on
              understanding QTM in chemically synthesized nanometer-sized magnets. The
              equipment will also enhance the research and educational opportunities at NYU
              and the research capabilities available to a multi-university interdisciplinary
              scientific collaboration. 


