Title       : IGERT: Integrative Graduate Education in Urban Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0114351

Award Number: 0114351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2699998            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon A. Bradley gbradley@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clare M. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Marzluff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marina Alberti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig ZumBrunnen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,1397,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Most of today's scientific and social problems lie at the interface of many
              disciplines. Urban ecology is an emerging field that addresses one of the most
              challenging problems humanity is facing world wide: how to manage metropolitan
              growth by simultaneously maximizing human wellbeing and minimizing impacts on
              ecosystems. These problems require interdisciplinary approaches that current
              disciplinary doctoral education cannot teach. The vision of this IGERT program
              is to change the culture of graduate education from a traditional enterprise
              focused on an individual's discipline to one clearly emphasizing
              interdisciplinary teams. This will increase student retention and prepare
              students for leadership within and beyond academia. Team members' dissertations
              will include a common, co-authored section based on a real-world research
              problem addressed by the team, plus an individually-written disciplinary
              section.  Students will be immersed immediately into interdisciplinary research
              questions, using real-world problems presented to them by outside clients. 
              Students from widely varied backgrounds will collectively analyze, evaluate,
              and propose strategies to address those problems. Rather than provide a set
              course of instruction before students begin research, the intent is to help
              teams decide what information and background they need as their analyses
              progress, then arrange for the extended faculty to provide that background
              (just-in-time education). The core curriculum assures that all students,
              regardless of the projects they work on, receive essential skills and
              informational training. This requires team-taught courses where Urban Ecology
              faculty members are in the classroom with the students at lectures and
              discussion sessions, and where everyone participates. The program centers on
              five broad research themes: (i) What socioeconomic factors drive urban
              development, (ii) How landscape ecology can be used to quantify urban
              development patterns, (iii) How urban development patterns affect biodiversity
              and ecosystem function, (iv) How changes in ecosystems affect human preferences
              and decisions, and (v) How policies influence human settlement and its effects.
               By integrating research and education the IGERT program will build a
              theoretical framework and a series of empirical studies that increase
              understanding of the complex mechanisms that mediate the interactions between
              natural and human processes in urban ecosystems.  This will produce students
              experienced in solving real-world problems, improve working relationships
              between academia and business, regulatory, and urban communities, and
              strengthen the foundation of Urban Ecology as a field.

IGERT is an NSF-wide
              program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and
              engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
              professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
              The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
              establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and training in a
              fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
              disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards are being
              made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span all areas
              of science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this
              specific award reside in the Directorates for Biological Sciences; Social,
              Behavioral, and Economic Sciences; and Education and Human Resources.

