Title       : Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
               (PGE): Girls Re-designing and Excelling in Advanced Technology (GREAT!)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2002   
File        : a0114669

Award Number: 0114669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899960             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy A. Brown jbrown@miamisci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Museum of Science In
	      3280 South Miami Avenue
	      Miami, FL  331292832    305/854-4247

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Miami Museum of Science proposes to design and implement an innovative model
              
program to increase the confidence, interest and preparedness of girls to
              pursue 
academic and employment opportunities related to high end careers in
              the field of 
information technology (IT). Titled GREAT! (Girls Redesigning
              and Excelling in 
Advanced Technology), the project will build on the body of
              research related to girls
and IT to develop and model effective methodologies
              for engaging girls as designers -
- as opposed to simply users -- of IT
              applications. The overall goal of GREAT! is to 
raise interest and skills in
              advanced technology applications among middle school 
girls, particularly
              girls of color, resulting in increased representation of females in
academic
              programs and employment opportunities leading to high end IT careers.
              
Specific objectives of GREAT! are to build girls' confidence and expertise
              with 
advanced technology applications; to engage them in the use of advanced
              technology to 
solve real world problems; to strengthen girls' communication
              and presentation skills; 
to contribute to and inform the field through a
              comprehensive evaluation of project
outcomes, and to disseminate project
              methodologies and findings among informal 
science education institutions and
              other interested parties. 

The Museum will collaborate with Miami Dade
              County Public School's Urban Systemic
Program to recruit 40 middle school
              girls each year, for a total of 120 girls over the
duration of the project.
              Over the course of a two year period, participants will assume 
the roles of
              IT designers, acquiring progressively complex technology skills 
culminating
              in the creation of a fully interactive 3 D virtual Museum exhibit
              experience.
Girls will begin by participating in a 12 week Saturday Technology
              Workshop which will 
take place over the course of the academic year.
              Following completion of the Technology 
Workshop series, girls will take part
              in a 4 week intensive summer Design Studio in 
which they will use state of
              the art virtual reality (VR) technology to create a VR
production showcasing
              an invention of their own design. Girls will work in teams of four, 
with each
              team assigned a mentor (a female college student majoring in
              computer
technology or a related field) who will provide technical guidance
              and serve as a role
model. Upon completing their productions, girls will
              strengthen their presentation skills
and increase self esteem and self
              confidence through Family Night presentations and by 
exhibiting and
              interpreting their work to visitors in the Museum galleries for a one month
              
period during the subsequent academic year. 

The Museum will contract with
              VR Visions and the Center for Children and Technology
to provide design
              support. Kathleen Tyner of Media Analysis & Practice will serve 
as the
              project's external evaluator, responsible for formative and summative
              evaluation 
of project activities.
