Title       : Dissertation Research: Signal Content and Function in Wild Male Orangutan Long
               Calls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2001   
File        : a0114390

Award Number: 0114390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9390               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carel P. van Schaik vschaik@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Despite previous long-term behavioral studies, a full understanding of the
              social organization and reproductive strategies of orangutans has been
              difficult to achieve due to their extended life histories, large home ranges,
              predominantly arboreal lifestyles and semi-solitary natures.  Because adult
              individuals are normally dispersed and visibility is limited within their
              rainforest habitats, long distance vocalizations are likely to play an
              important role in regulating individual relationships and social interactions,
              including reproduction.  There is already strong and consistent behavioral and
              experimental evidence for an intra-sexual spacing function, but additional
              hypotheses such as mate attraction or protection against sexual coercion have
              not been tested rigorously.  It is also not yet clear if reliable assessment
              cues are encoded in acoustic features and calling patterns or if listeners can
              recognize individual males and associate a signaler's identity with past
              performance.  
This research aims to test predictions for the signal content
              of male long calls, examine potential functions and assess possible
              determinants of variation in calling behavior among Bornean and Sumatran
              populations.  Using field recordings, focal animal sampling and carefully
              controlled playback experiments, this study intends to examine acoustic
              variation in male long calls, the patterns of calling behavior by males and
              behavioral responses in relation to the listener's social context, reproductive
              status and familiarity with the calling male.  The signal content of male
              orangutan long calls has important repercussions for understanding female mate
              choice and the nature of inter-individual relationships in this endangered
              species.

