Title       : Structure/Function Investigation of Gamma-Carboxyglutamic Acid-Containing
               Conotoxins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0114184

Award Number: 0114184
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319595             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan C. Rigby   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Marine snails of the genus Conus produce conotoxins that target voltage- or
              ligand-gated ion channels in addition to G-protein coupled receptor subtypes
              with unprecedented selectivity and specificity. This project is a
              structure/function investigation of two novel g-carboxyglutamic acid
              (Gla)-containing conotoxins, isolated from Conus textile. Gla is a metal-ion
              binding amino acid that plays a critical structural role in defining the
              membrane binding properties of mammalian vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation
              proteins. This phylogenic preservation of the enzymatic machinery necessary to
              synthesize Gla suggests an important role for Gla within the animal kingdom.
              Initially, potentiometry and fluorescence spectroscopy will be used to
              determine the metal-ion binding constants and number of binding sites possessed
              by these conotoxins. Simultaneously, metal-ion induced structural perturbations
              of the peptide backbone and Gla residue side chain will be monitored using
              circular dichroism and 1H NMR spectroscopy. The three-dimensional structure of
              these conotoxins in their calcium-induced conformation will be determined with
              NMR spectroscopy. Finally, the project will examine the structure/function
              significance conferred upon these peptides by the disulfide bond scaffold and
              other post-translationally modified amino acids including; brominated
              tryptophan and glycosylated threonine. The current paucity of
              structure/function information pertaining to Gla and other post-translationally
              modified amino acids within the genus Conus has prevented neuroscientists,
              pharmacologists and structural biologists from understanding the refined
              mechanism of protein-receptor recognition that is innate to conotoxins. Insight
              into the structural and functional implications of post-translational
              modifications has become increasingly important in this post-genomic era, as
              scientists attempt to understand if "function follows form".
