Title       : Acquisition of a Micro-Thermal Analysis Microscope for Studying Novel Materials
               and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0114208

Award Number: 0114208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yue Wu yuewu@physics.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Tsui  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will provide
              support to the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill for the acquisition of
              a micro-thermal analysis (mTA) system which is an atomic force microscope with
              the capabilities of thermal and thermal mechanical analysis.  The local heating
              and local measurements of thermal properties are two critical features for the
              research of bulk metallic glass (BMG)-based films produced by combinatorial
              synthesis.  In addition, local processing and manipulation of nanostructures
              can also be accomplished.  Spatial patterning of magnetic properties could
              arise from locally induced nanocrystallization of magnetic BMG and patterning
              of carbon nanotubes can be accomplished by nano-welding on BMG substrate.  In
              addition to graduate and undergraduate research, the mTA system will be used
              for outreach activities with local school systems providing a unique platform
              for hands-on experiences in nanoscale thermal properties.


This award from
              the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will provide support to the
              University of North Carolina Chapel Hill for the acquisition of a micro-thermal
              analysis (mTA) system which is an atomic force microscope with the capabilities
              of thermal and thermal mechanical analysis.  The local heating and local
              measurements of thermal properties are two critical features for the research
              of bulk metallic glass (BMG)-based films produced by combinatorial synthesis. 
              In addition, local processing and manipulation of nanostructures can also be
              accomplished.  Spatial patterning of magnetic properties could arise from
              locally induced nanocrystallization of magnetic BMG and patterning of carbon
              nanotubes can be accomplished by nano-welding on BMG substrate.  In addition to
              graduate and undergraduate research, the mTA system will be used for outreach
              activities with local school systems providing a unique platform for hands-on
              experiences in nanoscale thermal properties.


