Title       : SGER: Light and Enlightenment, A Digital Variorum Edition of Newton's Opticks --
               Workshop, June 15-16, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a0114452

Award Number: 0114452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29730              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Kargon kargon@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wilda Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 
SGER
Kargon and Anderson, Light and Enlightenment, A Digital
              Variorum Edition of Newton's Opticks
SES 01-14452

This project supports a
              two-day workshop to bring together representatives of various disciplines.  The
              goal is to lay a secure foundation for a multi-year effort to bring into
              existence a digital variorum edition of Newton's Opticks.  Such an edition is
              intended to clearly represent the changes over time in Newton's work, for
              during Newton's lifetime, the Opticks appeared in three English, two Latin and
              two French editions. The evolution of this text is a key indicator of changes
              in Newton's thinking about important concepts such as the aether and force, and
              provides important clues to Newton's views on the rapidly changing experimental
              sciences of chemistry and electricity over the last quarter century of his
              life. Variorum editions are notoriously difficult to effect. Print versions
              that attempt to collate changes over several versions are complicated,
              sometimes confusing and always difficult to use.

This workshop is intended
              to discuss avenues for solving some of these problems, so that a scholarly
              instrument can be developed.  This instrument will make of use of digital
              techniques to enable researchers in the history of science and technology to
              perform analyses of Newton's Opticks hitherto not possible. Most digitization
              work in our area of concern either (1) transfers existing patterns of research
              to the screen and allows text searching, or (2) makes useful materials
              available at a distance. This work has been useful and worthy but does not tap
              the power and range of digital environments. The PIs wish to develop a software
              tool that will enable us, though digitization, to allow our research to go
              beyond the paper world and to ask and answer questions not now possible. This
              project will require the efforts of historians of science, language
              specialists, historians of publishing, and software designers. Putting together
              such a diverse team, asking the right questions, designing an instrument useful
              to its intended audience, and managing the dissemination of the product is a
              very complex task and entails large risks: risks of our time and effort, and
              substantial funds for the development of technical tools that do not now
              exist.

