Title       : Dissertation Research: Theory Development and Evaluation in Early Universe
               Cosmology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0114760

Award Number: 0114760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8580               (Estimated)
Investigator: John Earman   (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Norton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Historians and philosophers of science have studied the development and
              evaluation of theories in a wide variety of fields, and have developed a number
              of different approaches to these topics. What little attention has been devoted
              to modern cosmology has focused almost entirely on the controversy between the
              big bang theory and the steady state theory, a controversy which ended in the
              mid-60s. Since then a great deal of theoretical effort has been devoted to
              understanding the very early universe. This dissertation research project
              intends to develop a content-rich history of this research, with a focus on
              issues of theory development and evaluation. The NSF dissertation research
              support will allow the researcher to interview several prominent cosmologists
              and visit archives with collections related to modern cosmology (England,
              Chicago, Boston, and Princeton). These interviews and archival visits will
              allow the researcher to develop a more nuanced and insightful historical
              account of this period and to pose methodological questions to working
              scientists. In addition, detailed interviews with cosmologists will be a
              valuable resource for future historians. The research and interviews will focus
              on two methodological questions. Much of early universe research has been
              motivated by the alluring idea that fundamental physics dictates large scale
              properties of the universe. In particular, inflationary cosmology has won
              widespread acceptance due to its ability to solve a number of "fine-tuning"
              problems of standard cosmology. However, cosmologists' assessments of the
              importance of this success differ widely. Via focused interviews with
              proponents and critics of inflation (and earlier theories with a similar
              motivation), the researcher will explore the reasons for these differing
              assessments. The interviews will also focus on attempts to make precision tests
              of inflation. 
