Title       : Acquisition of 12 Tesla Magnet for Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Facility for
               Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0114200

Award Number: 0114200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130371             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex I. Smirnov Alex_Smirnov@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tatyana I. Smirnova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will enable
              North Carolina State University to purchase a specialized wide-bore 12 Tesla
              superconducting magnet for a High Field Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (HF
              EPR) Laboratory. The instrument will be used primarily in ongoing research
              programs at North Carolina State University that are focused on exploiting
              paramagnetic properties of novel materials. The new Cryogenic 12 T EPR magnet
              will have specialized cryostat/accessories and will enable key experiments in:
              (1) spin-polarization experiments with novel magnetic materials; (2)
              measurements of zero-field splitting for effective integer spin-systems of
              coupled spins that are EPR-silent at lower magnetic fields; (3) quantum
              computing experiments with essentially pure quantum state for an ensemble of
              quantum dots; (4) high accuracy measurements of zero-field splitting from field
              dependence of EPR spectra to determine the nature of magnetic interactions; (5)
              studies of phase separation phenomena; (5) and cluster nanostructure in
              lanthanide-doped optically-active glasses. This state-of-art HF EPR facility
              will be available for education of students in modern magnetic resonance
              techniques, and will be accessible to users from the UNC-Chapel Hill and Duke
              as well as to researchers from the Research Triangle Park. Thus, this magnet
              acquisition will provide new measurement capabilities, improve the research
              infrastructure, and enhance student education, improve the research
              infrastructure, and enhance student education.

This award from the
              Instrumentation for Materials Research program will enable North Carolina State
              University to purchase a specialized wide-bore 12 Tesla superconducting magnet
              for a High Field Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (HF EPR) Laboratory. The
              instrument will be used primarily in ongoing research programs at North
              Carolina State University that are focused on exploiting paramagnetic
              properties of novel materials. The new Cryogenic 12 T EPR magnet will have
              specialized cryostat/accessories and will enable a wide range of  experiments
              from including quantum computing and cluster nanostructure in lanthanide-doped
              optically-active glasses. This state-of-art HF EPR facility will be available
              for education of students in modern magnetic resonance techniques, and will be
              accessible to users from the UNC-Chapel Hill and Duke as well as to researchers
              from the Research Triangle Park. Thus, this magnet acquisition will provide new
              measurement capabilities, improve the research infrastructure, and enhance
              student education, improve the research infrastructure, and enhance student
              education.

