Title       : Oxygen Regulation of Mannoprotein Gene Expression in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0114040

Award Number: 0114040
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles V. Lowry cvlowry@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albany Medical College
	      47 New Scotland Avenue
	      Albany, NY  122083412    518/262-5181

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	The research is on a newly discovered global response of yeast cells to the
              depletion of oxygen. Two families of "anaerobic genes"-i.e. genes expressed
              under anaerobic conditions, the "hypoxic genes" and the recently discovered
              DAN/TIR genes, are under the negative control of heme; heme also stimulates
              transcription of a large group of oxygen-induced genes. The DAN/TIR genes
              encode cell wall mannoproteins; they are induced at the same time that the
              normal cell wall proteins, Cwp1 and Cwp2 are down-regulated, leading to
              remodeling of the cell surface. Three of the Dan/Tir proteins are essential for
              anaerobic growth, indicating the importance of adaptation to oxygen depletion.
              Regulation of the hypoxic genes by the Rox1 and Mot3 repressors is now well
              understood. However, regulation of the eight DAN/TIR genes needs to be
              elucidated. This work should help define the pathway responsible for the
              reciprocal heme-mediated regulation of oxygen-induced and oxygen-repressed
              genes.  Some factors play multiple roles in this pathway, providing an
              illuminating example of coordinately and reciprocally regulated gene expression
              system. For example Mot3, under the control of heme, represses the DAN/TIR
              genes, and simultaneously activates the CWP2 gene. The mechanism controlling
              the DAN/TIR genes is complex, involving three factors (the Mox proteins) needed
              for regulated anaerobic induction of the regulon and several repressors which
              serve to squelch basal expression in aerobic cells, when most of these genes
              are not expressed.  In this project the mechanism by which heme controls the
              activity of Mox4, the keystone regulator of the DAN/TIR genes will be
              investigated. This binucleate zinc cluster protein is a transcriptional
              activator targeting a common anaerobic response element in the DAN/TIR
              promoters. It is controlled by two repressors, Mox1 and Mox2, in response to
              the regulatory signal provided by the heme molecule. The guiding hypothesis is
              that heme stimulates Mox1 and Mox2 to interact with Mox4 and block its
              activation function, through a repression domain which has been identified at
              the C-terminus. The structure and function of Mox4 as a target of heme
              repression will be analyzed by deletion mutagenesis and by testing fusions of
              sub-fragments of the protein to LexA, a DNA-binding protein. Subsequently the
              interaction of Mox4 with Mox1 and Mox2 will be analyzed by genetic and
              biochemical means, using co-immunoprecipitation analysis, in a strategy
              designed to test a series of possible mechanisms by which heme controls Mox4
              activity. Finally the interaction will be studied in the setting of Mox4-DNA
              complexes.
	Yeast is a facultative organism capable of rapid adaptation to
              changes in nutrient and oxygen supply, and it has become our best model for the
              regulation of gene expression by oxygen in eukaryotic cells. The proposed
              research will greatly increase the value of this model as a teaching and
              research paradigm, significantly advancing our knowledge about a key topic in
              gene expression. Research on the oxygen regulation in yeast has intersected
              propitiously with the study of transcriptional control in yeast model systems.
              The regulation of oxygen-induced genes, e.g. the cytochrome c gene, was an
              early model for metabolic control of eukaryotic gene expression. This project
              will focus on the other side of oxygen regulation, how the adaptation of yeast
              cells to oxygen depletion is generated at the level of gene expression.
