Title       : Transforming NASA: Space Technology in the Goldin Years
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0114689

Award Number: 0114689
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85001              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Henry Lambright whlambri@maxwell.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
SES 0114689, 
Henry Lambright, Syracuse University
Transforming
              NASA: Space Technology in the Golden Years

What role does the administrative
              leader play in change in a federal science and technology agency? There are
              some scholars who say that role is trivial and others who say the opposite. The
              answer lies in understanding the relationship between the leader and
              organization and circumstances in the political environment at the time the
              leader serves. To explore and analyze that complex relationship, the PI
              examines Daniel Goldin at NASA in the period 1992 to 2001. Goldin has served
              longer than any administrator in NASA history, in terms of continuous service.
              Appointed by George Bush, retained by Bill Clinton, he has been asked by George
              W. Bush to stay on while the President recruits a replacement. With this much
              time in office, Goldin has had the opportunity to make a difference. What has
              he done with that time?

This study tracks Goldin's role in the
              organizational and technological change process at NASA. During his tour, he
              has helped get the Space Station redesigned and linked with the Russians.
              Called International Space Station, this facility is currently being assembled
              in space. He has also used a "faster, better, cheaper," management approach to
              bring down the cost and speed the launch rate of robotic spacecraft,
              particularly those associated with Mars missions.  That approach has had
              successes (Mars Global Surveyor, Pathfinder) and failures (Mars Climate
              Orbiter, Mars Polar Lander). He has initiated a host of new programs,
              reorganized frequently and downsized his agency dramatically. Throughout his
              tenure, he has worked against the budgetary wind, fought one conflict after
              another, and become probably the most controversial administrator NASA has
              had.

Using a policy process model, this project studies the circumstances
              prior to Goldin's appointment that caused President Bush to bring an "outsider"
              to NASA with a mandate for change. The  PI tracks Goldin's evolution as an
              administrator over the years as this business executive/engineer developed
              political skills to operate in Washington.  The project also examines how the
              ever-shifting political environment impacted his decisions and how Goldin, in
              turn, influenced that environment. A key issue is how NASA administrator shaped
              not only an organization but its technologies, imparting to them his values.
              The PI also examines which of Goldin's changes have had results that were
              successful, unsuccessful, and mixed, and the reasons why. Finally, the study
              extends past Goldin's departure to investigate any policy innovations that
              survived him. This three-year research project culminates in a book on
              administrative and governmental leadership and change in the contemporary
              science and technology context. 

