Title       : Acquisition of a SQUID Magnetometer for Education, Training and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0114132

Award Number: 0114132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Heiman heiman@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports the
              acquisition of a SQUID magnetometer will enable students and researchers at
              Northeastern University to study the physics, chemistry, and engineering of new
              materials and structures.  The multiuser instrument from Quantum Design (model
              MPMS) has the capability of measuring magnetization and AC susceptibility in
              magnetic fields to 5 T, from 1.9 to 400 K.  It has high sensitivity (10-8 emu)
              required for measuring small MBE-grown samples.  The instrument will be used
              for: (i) student education in electronics courses; (ii) characterizing the
              synthesis of improved ferromagnetic semiconductors;  (iii) investigating
              magnetism and superconductivity in molecules, low-D materials, magnetic oxides,
              semiconductors, and ferrites;  and (iv) training in materials science research.
               Students will perform and analyze most of the measurements.
%%%
With this
              award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program, Northeastern
              University will be able to acquire a SQUID magnetometer enables students and
              researchers at Northeastern University to study the physics, chemistry, and
              engineering of new  materials and structures.  The multiuser instrument has the
              capability of measuring the magnetic properties of novel materials with high
              sensitivity.  The instrument will be used for: (i) student education in 
              electronics courses; (ii) studying the properties of materials for future
              "spintronic" and "quantum computing" applications;  (iii) investigating
              superconductivity and magnetism in molecules and semiconductors;  and (iv)
              training in materials science research.  Students will perform and analyze most
              of the measurements.  The intellectually challenging and technologically
              important projects could strengthen our knowledge base and impact future device
              technology

