Title       : IGERT: Doctoral Training at the Interface of Chemistry and Physics: New
               Materials for Electronics and Optics through Control of Nanoscale Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0114419

Award Number: 0114419
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2700000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Johnson davej@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This IGERT program offers a nationally-unique, comprehensive package of new and
              tested approaches to graduate education in materials chemistry and physics.  It
              is designed to prepare the next generation of graduate students for the
              challenges of an increasingly interdisciplinary and rapidly evolving research
              and development arena.  The research and education activities of this IGERT
              program are unified by the study of the structure/property relationships in
              electronic and optical materials whose properties are dominated by their
              nanoscale structure.  The proposed research builds upon established activities
              in three major thrust areas to address the: (i) synthesis and properties of
              superlattice materials; (ii) preparation and study of metal and semiconductor
              nanoparticles, quantum dots and assemblies; and (iii) fabrication and
              properties of molecular assemblies.  These research topics provide outstanding
              opportunities for interdisciplinary graduate training because both the
              chemistry and physics of short-length-scale systems are intertwined. This
              initiative has received wide-ranging support within the University and among
              our industrial affiliates because it provides a multidisciplinary research
              experience, stimulates industrial/academic relations and prepares students to
              be successful participants in diverse and changing job markets. Our
              student-focused program is designed to address three goals: (i) help each
              student acquire diverse, adaptable and portable technical skills and the
              knowledge base to succeed in rapidly evolving career markets; (ii) help each
              student develop the critical thinking skills necessary to solve complex
              problems and understand new phenomena; and (iii) provide each student with
              comprehensive career training, i.e. development of professional skills,
              exposure to many career opportunities, and training tailored to specific career
              paths. To achieve these goals, a comprehensive and fully integrated graduate
              training program has been developed.  Key activities of the training program
              include: new interdisciplinary courses, core engineering courses, research
              rotations during the first year, interdisciplinary research opportunities,
              targeted internships in industry or academia, and comprehensive career
              preparation.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of
              educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds
              and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career
              demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in
              graduate education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate
              education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
              transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the
              program, awards are being made to twenty-two institutions for programs that
              collectively span all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The
              intellectual foci of this specific award reside in the Directorates for
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences; Engineering; and Education and Human
              Resources.

