Title       : IGERT: Optical Biomolecular Devices: From Natural Paradigms to Practical
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0114434

Award Number: 0114434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2742000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal W. Woodbury NWoodbury@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Devens Gust  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Willem F. Vermaas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael N. Kozicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent B. Pizziconi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This IGERT brings together Arizona State University's well known basic research
              program in photosynthesis and photobiology with two other major research
              thrusts on campus: the Nanostructures Research Group in the Center for Solid
              State Electronics Research and the Bioengineering thrust within the Engineering
              College led by the newly formed Bioengineering Department.  The research theme
              is the design and fabrication of molecular-scale devices based on the
              principles learned from photobiology.  This effort represents a major expansion
              of the current NSF funded RTG training program in this area, shifting the
              educational and research focus towards the applied realm by including new
              faculty from four Engineering Departments and Physics as well as several
              industrial and international partners at Motorola, Lockheed/Martin, Kodak, QTL,
              CEA-Saclay, Max Planck-Muelheim, and the University of Glasgow.  In order to
              form an integrated graduate education program between these different
              disciplines, the IGERT includes the creation of a Ph.D. emphasis program that
              will normalize the curriculum requirements across colleges.  Industry will also
              play a major role through scientific collaborations, student internships and
              classroom discussion. The IGERT curriculum includes a series of courses that
              center on research and discovery based learning.  Students will solve problems
              by drawing on an extensive dynamic resource infrastructure that includes both
              well-equipped instrument facilities, including a new biohybrid fabrication
              facility, and high level personnel.  In addition, the program includes a major
              educational thrust in science policy, science ethics, and societal impact,
              culminating in a two week workshop at the Center for Science, Policy and
              Outcomes in Washington DC.  Here students will have the opportunity to consider
              the impact that research and development in the molecular device area will have
              on society and to hear the thoughts of scholars who have considered the ethical
              and political aspects of this expanding area of science.  Students will also
              have the opportunity to participate in research abroad and in the "Preparing
              Future Faculty" or "Preparing Future Professionals" programs run by the ASU
              Graduate College.  Finally, the three IGERTs on the ASU campus will be
              coordinated within a superstructure run by the Dean of the Graduate College. 
              This will facilitate common mechanisms for recruiting and evaluation, and
              provide a formal avenue for information exchange between IGERT faculty and
              students.  This larger scale integration among the ASU IGERTs should result in
              a practical model of interdisciplinary graduate education that can be used in
              the future both at ASU and elsewhere. 

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended
              to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new,
              innovative models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment
              for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.
              In the fourth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-two
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award
              reside in the Directorates for Biological Sciences; Engineering; Mathematical
              and Physical Sciences; and Education and Human Resources.

