Title       : Acquisition of Gel Permeation Chromatographic Instrumentation for Materials
               Research and Eucation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a0114267

Award Number: 0114267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dominic V. McGrath mcgrath@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program in the
              Division of Materials Research will allow the University of Arizona to acquire
              a new Gel Permeation Chromatography instrument for research and education in
              the Department of Chemistry.  The proposed GPC system will replace current
              outdated equipment and will be housed in the new Molecular Characterization
              Facility in the Department of Chemistry.  This instrument will be used by
              students at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels to improve the
              quality and scope of integration of research and education into our curricula.
              Consisting of a separations module accompanied by Ultra-violet-Vis, refractive
              index, multi-angle laser light scattering, and viscometric detectors, this
              instrument will allow for more accurate and complete characterization of the
              organic and inorganic materials currently being synthesized by research groups
              within the Department.  


This award from the Instrumentation for Materials
              Research program in the Division of Materials Research will allow the
              University of Arizona to acquire a new Gel Permeation Chromatography (GPC)
              instrument for research and education. The instrument will be housed in the
              Department of Chemistry and will be used to characterize new polymeric
              materials, in particular measure their molecular weight, or size.  The
              molecular weight of polymers is a critical factor in their strength, behavior,
              and ultimate performance.  This instrument will allow for more accurate and
              complete characterization of the polymeric materials currently being developed
              by research groups within the Department of Chemistry for such emerging
              technologies as biological sensors, organic light-emitting diodes, and drug
              delivery systems. Students at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
              levels will use the instrument. This will improve the quality and scope of
              student training, thus impacting the scientific workforce.   




