Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Coordinate Induction of Sink Strength and Polyphenol
               Metabolism in Trees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0114565

Award Number: 0114565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212264             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack C. Schultz ujq@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heidi M. Appel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The ability of plants to respond to damage by pests and pathogens is widespread,
              but not all plant tissues are capable of producing defensive responses. 
              Defensive responsiveness is greatest in young leaves and decreases dramatically
              with age.  The variation in defensive capabilities among different parts of
              plants affects the foraging of herbivores on plants, the ability of herbivores
              to develop resistance to plant defenses, and the success of predators in
              locating herbivores. To understand the ecology and evolution of plants and
              their interactions with herbivores, it is critical to understand how plant
              defensive responses differ among different plant tissues.   

The movement of
              carbohydrates throughout the canopies of trees may influence the ability of
              young foliage to develop defensive responses.  For example, the ability of
              wounded Poplar leaves to obtain the resources they need to produce defensive
              chemicals (polyphenolics) appears to be affected by the rate at which
              carbohydrates are imported from the plant vascular system.  In other words, the
              magnitude of the defensive response is directly related to the flow of
              resources to wounded leaves.  This flow of resources causes variation in
              defensive responses among different plant tissues, because wounded tissues vary
              in their ability to acquire resources from the plant vascular system.  The PIs
              propose to test this hypothesis rigorously with greenhouse and laboratory
              experiments on hybrid poplar and oak saplings.  Chemical analyses of plant
              foliage will be conducted to assess defensive responses, and carbon 13 labeling
              experiments will be used to measure rates of resource movement in whole plants.
               The proposed research will result in (1) the development of a model designed
              to predict where and when defensive responses are likely to occur, (2) the
              establishment of monitoring technology that can be applied to a broad range of
              plant communities in the field, and (3) the training of graduate and
              undergraduate students in the plant sciences.   

