Title       : Managing Uncertainty in Bilevel Robust Design Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0114975

Award Number: 0114975
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241831             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Renaud renaud.2@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of a collaborative optimization
              framework for the robust design of complex engineering systems such as
              automobiles, aircraft or consumer products. The collaborative optimization
              framework will account for and manage the uncertainties in the performance
              predictions generated by the computer simulation tools used for the design of
              these systems. Each computer simulation model is an abstraction of reality and
              has some uncertainty associated with its performance predictions. This
              uncertainty must be accounted for in the simulation based design process. An
              implicit method for estimating system performance uncertainties within a
              bilevel optimization algorithm that employs decomposition techniques to
              facilitate distributed computation will be developed. The  methodology will
              account for both the uncertainty associated with design inputs and the
              uncertainty of performance predictions from each of the simulation tools. A
              mathematical proof of convergence will be developed to validate the bilevel
              optimization algorithm being developed in this investigation. The framework
              will be implemented in a distributed computing environment providing for
              parallel computation and concurrent design. Industry partners will test the
              framework and measure the computational improvements using a suite of benchmark
              test problems.

It is anticipated that the use of the collaborative
              optimization framework developed in this research will lead to reduced product
              development times at reduced cost and risk. The collaborative optimization
              framework will facilitate the concurrent design of complex engineering systems
              in a parallel-computing environment. The benefits of parallel computation lead
              to reductions in product development times. The ability to manage uncertainty
              and risk in this parallel design environment will ensure robust performance of
              the resulting system. The development of the non-deterministic collaborative
              optimization framework will demonstrate that designers can effectively manage
              both the uncertainty and risk associated with the simulation based design of
              new products in a parallel computing environment.

