Title       : Quantum Critical Behavior at Metal-Insulator and Magnetic Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2001     
File        : a0114798

Award Number: 0114798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Rosenbaum t-rosenbaum@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Phase transitions at zero temperature involve fundamentally new physics. The
              Heisenberg uncertainty principle inextricably intertwines the static and
              dynamical response of the material changing state, introducing new critical
              exponents, new scaling laws, and a new relationship between interactions and
              disorder.  This project will probe the fundamental nature of the quantum phase
              transition in two model experimental systems.  The first is the metal-insulator
              transition in hydrogenated films of elemental Y and La.  Rare earth hydride
              films can be converted reversibly from metallic mirrors to transparent,
              insulating windows simply by changing the hydrogen content or via UV exposure. 
              The physics of the Mott-Hubbard MI transition in metal hydride films will be
              pursued with an emphasis on the roles played by electron-electron interactions,
              by different types of disorder, and by the (non-linear) dynamical response in
              electric and magnetic fields.  The second model system involves single crystals
              of the only elemental antiferromagnet, Cr.  Dilution of chromium with small
              amounts of vanadium, smoothly depresses Cr's spin-density-wave transition to T
              = 0.  Will a simple antiferromagnet display the anomalous behavior demonstrated
              by the related high-Tc superconductors and heavy fermion compounds? The
              experimental focus will be on high resolution pressure studies at ultra-low
              temperatures, broadly developing the technical skills of students at the
              undergraduate, doctoral and postdoctoral levels. 
%%%
Materials most commonly
              undergo changes of state with changing temperature.  Non-thermal processes like
              pressure and magnetic field also can induce magnetic, electronic, and optical
              changes.  When these transitions occur at absolute zero, where all motion
              stops, new quantum physics arises.  Moreover, the effects can be felt up to
              surprisingly high temperatures. This proposal aims to probe the fundamental
              nature of the quantum phase transition in two model experimental systems.  The
              first of these is the metal-insulator transition in hydrogenated films of
              elemental Y and La. Rare earth hydride films can be converted reversibly from
              metallic mirrors to transparent, insulating windows simply by changing the
              surrounding hydrogen gas pressure or through illumination with ultraviolet
              light.  Switchable mirrors with both homogeneous and pixilated optical
              properties will be investigated, with applications in mind.  The second model
              system involves single crystals of the only elemental antiferromagnet, Cr. 
              Dilution of chromium with small amounts of vanadium, its neighboring element in
              the Periodic Table, smoothly depresses the magnetic transition temperature to
              absolute zero.  Will a simple antiferromagnet display the anomalous behavior
              demonstrated by the related high-temperature superconductors?  The experimental
              focus will be on high resolution pressure studies at ultra-low temperatures,
              broadly developing the technical skills of students at the undergraduate,
              doctoral and postdoctoral levels.
***  



