Title       : GOALI: High-Power Optical Materials for Micro- and Nanofabrication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0114017

Award Number: 0114017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Kong kongw@chem.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Keszler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to advance our understanding of the properties
              that limit both high-power and short-wavelength operation of laser and
              nonlinear optical (NLO) crystals. In addition, new and improved materials will
              be developed. At present, lack of a suitable combination of high birefringence
              and high transparency in NLO materials is limiting direct second-harmonic
              conversion to deep UV and VUV wavelengths. In the future, nonlinear absorption
              and thermal properties are likely to become limiting factors for performance at
              very high-power levels. To study and address these materials issues, the
              optical and thermal properties of several wide bandgap oxides will be examined.
              Linear optical properties, thermal conductivity, and thermo-optic coefficients
              will be studied for high-transparency nonlinear optical crystals that will
              allow either direct second-harmonic conversion to wavelengths shorter than 200
              nm or frequency mixing for generation of tunable VUV light.

The production
              of high powers in solid-state lasers is largely a thermal-management issue.
              Substantial improvements in solid-state laser output powers and efficiencies
              are certainly attainable by incorporating the small energy-defect emission of
              Yb3+ in a very high thermal-conductivity host. To achieve this combination of
              properties, several new materials that are rich in Y203 and BeO will be studied
              and developed. Detailed spectroscopic examinations will be made on the emitting
              Yb3+ ion; large single crystals will be grown; thermal conductivities will be
              assessed; and laser properties will be established.

The effects of the
              proposed program extend well beyond optical science and engineering, as the
              work has direct relevance to manufacturing and micromachining of most of the
              high-technology devices that are currently being produced in the electronics
              and telecommunications industries. Moreover, in the future, such laser systems
              will play important roles in connecting pico-, nano-, meso-, and microscale
              functions to our everyday world through the fabrication of
              microelectromechanical devices (MEMs,) microelectrochemical systems (MECs,) and
              other small photonic and biodevices.

The proposed project is also important
              for the development of human resources in science and engineering; the area is
              growing rapidly and experienced scientists and engineers are needed. The
              program involves an international collection of researchers from a variety of
              disciplines in both academia and industry. Graduate and undergraduate students
              will be exposed to many different areas of the materials and laser sciences,
              providing unique research and education opportunities.

