Title       : Injection Molding Microfeatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0114489

Award Number: 0114489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Byung H. Kim kim@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research project is to develop a novel technology for
              successful micro injection molding with respect to lower cycle time and better
              replication as compared to the existing technology. This will be accomplished
              by rapidly heating the mold surface so that the melt can fill the cavity
              isothermally and yet be processed within the normal injection molding cycle
              time.  Plastics have so far played only a subordinate role in the
              multibillion-dollar microsystem industry.  A commercial breakthrough strongly
              depends on means of low cost mass fabrication with dimensional accuracy and
              good part quality. Widely used mass-production methods involving polymeric
              materials such as injection molding, however, require significant modification
              to adapt to micro molding applications.  One of the hurdles limiting the
              current technical capability in micro injection molding is that the molten
              polymer in a tiny cavity instantaneously freezes upon contacting the relatively
              cold cavity wall. The problem gets worse when micro features with higher aspect
              ratio are to be molded. The three phase research plan includes an experimental
              component devoted to creating a flexible micro molding fixture, the second
              phase will be to conduct processing experiments with several thermoplastics,
              and the final phase will be the characterization of micro scale flow behaviors
              for this micro injection molding process. This research project will also yield
              much needed experimental data regarding the effect of microscale phenomena on
              the flow behavior of polymeric materials. 

It is expected that development
              of the integrated technology will push the current technical envelope of micro
              injection molding further into those areas that have so far been predominated
              by etching- and lithography- based fabrications. This can lead to 3-D
              microfabrication of structurally designed parts.

