Title       : RUI: How do the snoA and snoB Suppressors Modify Function of the Aspergillus
               NimODbf4 Initiator of DNA Synthesis?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0114446

Award Number: 0114446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $445000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. James sjames@gettysburg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gettysburg College
	      North Washington Street
	      Gettysburg, PA  17325    717/337-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In eukaryotes, the Dbf4-dependent kinase (DDK) triggers DNA synthesis at origins
              of
replication by phosphorylating at least one component of the replicative
              DNA helicase, Mcm2p.
This in turn leads to unwinding of DNA and establishment
              of the replication fork. In the
filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans, DDK
              is composed of a regulatory subunit, nimO Dbf4 ,
and a kinase catalytic
              subunit, cdc7 asp . The substrate of nimOp-cdc7p kinase is encoded by the
nimQ
              Mcm2 gene. Mutations in two newly identified genes, snoA and snoB
              (suppressor-of-nimO),
partially alleviate the heat sensitivity of the nimO18
              mutation. snoA suppressors act indirectly by
stabilizing nimO18p or by
              elevating nimO18p levels, whereas snoB suppression may occur
through direct
              association with nimO18p. This project is devoted to isolating the snoA and
              snoB
genes, and to defining the molecular mechanisms by which snoAp and snoBp
              influence nimOp
function. The specific aims of the research are as follows:
              (1) use a combination of walking,
sequencing, and functional complementation
              to isolate and molecularly characterize the snoA
and snoB genes; and (2) use
              cell biological and biochemical tools to investigate mechanisms by
which snoA
              and snoB suppressors modify nimO function. For example, in vivo DNA
              labeling
will be used to measure DNA synthesis, and northern blotting will be
              used to assess nimO
mRNA levels. Epitope-tagged nimO and/or cdc7 asp alleles
              will be used to characterize nimOp
cell cycle dynamics, including turnover,
              phosphorylation, localization, and the influence of snoA
and snoB suppressors.
              A nimOp-Cdc7p kinase assay will employ the tagged alleles and
Mcm2p nimQ as a
              substrate. 

This project will enhance the understanding of eukaryotic DNA
              synthesis and cell cycle regulation by defining the functions of two genes that
              interact with an initiator of DNA synthesis. These discoveries may in turn
              provide new insights about cell division.  In addition, this project will
              provide undergraduate students with the opportunity to play an active,
              substantive role in an ongoing, scientifically rigorous research project.
