Title       : Time Scales in Motor Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0114568

Award Number: 0114568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281196             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl M. Newell kmnl@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The learning of movement skills is characterized by persistent change in
              behavior over time.  There are many indices of change in motor behavior and
              many time scales (rates of change and time periods) over which the change in
              behavior occurs.  A central proposition of this research is that time scales
              are fundamental in the description and prediction of the change in behavior
              that we infer as learning.  The research stems from a theoretical framework
              based upon the concepts and tools of nonlinear dynamical systems; this
              framework was devised to account for both the persistent (relatively long-term,
              such as days, weeks, months) and transitory (relatively short-term, such as
              trial to trial) changes traditionally shown for the learning of motor skills. 
              The last 100 years of research on the learning of motor skills has shown that a
              number of different functions of change are revealed in learning curves, such
              as an exponential, power law, S-shaped, logistic, sudden "discontinuous". 
              Typically, different theories of learning make different assumptions about the
              time scales of change that are inherent in the mathematical equations used to
              fit learning data.  Moreover, theories of learning tend to focus on one
              function of learning rather accommodate the complete set of learning functions.
               This research will test the proposition that a small set of principles from
              nonlinear dynamics can produce all of the standard functions of change observed
              in motor learning.  A series of experiments conducted within a dynamical
              systems framework will examine, in a range of motor tasks, the time scales of
              change in motor learning.  This research will provide a first test of the
              notion that a unified and parsimonious dynamical account of time scales of
              change can derive the established set of short- and long-term learning
              functions in motor learning.  The promise of this theoretical and experimental
              approach to the time scales of motor learning is that it will lead us beyond
              traditional descriptions of learning toward a predictive science of human motor
              learning, that links theoretically to neural net approaches to human cognition
              and artificial system learning.
