Title       : Effects of Turbulence on the Collision-Coalescence Growth of Cloud Droplets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a0114100

Award Number: 0114100
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289739             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lian-Ping Wang lwang@me.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wojciech W. Grabowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the mechanisms by which rain is formed is the collision and coalescence
              of cloud droplets.  This is usually called the warm rain mechanism, to
              distinguish it from the process of diffusional growth, which is important for
              the formation of precipitation in clouds colder than 0 degrees C containing a
              mixture of ice crystals and supercooled water droplets.  It has long been
              speculated that turbulent air motions may increase the rate of droplet
              collisions and hence speed up the formation of precipitation.  Two effects are
              attributed to turbulence that would tend to increase the rate of droplet
              collisions: (1) an inertial effect whereby collisions are caused by the
              inability of a drop to move with the airflow out of the path of an approaching
              larger drop; (2) an accumulation effect, whereby persistent vortices in the
              turbulent flow create regions of higher drop concentration, in which the rate
              of collisions will be increased.  This project analyzes these effects by
              computing the movement of drops in turbulent air by direct numerical simulation
              (DNS).  One objective is to quantify and parameterize the combined effects of
              turbulence, droplet inertia, and gravitational settling on the droplet
              collision kernel, a quantity that describes the probability that a larger drop
              will overtake and collide with a smaller drop in unit time, given that they are
              both present in unit concentration.  Another objective is to apply the new
              parameterization in solving the stochastic coalescence equation, which
              describes the evolution of a droplet spectrum as the drops interact and collide
              with each other, to determine the extent to which turbulence shortens the time
              for precipitation-sized drops (about 0.1 mm) to form.  The project requires the
              collaboration of a specialist in computational fluid dynamics and a cloud
              physicist.  Basically, it brings to bear on cloud physics techniques that have
              been developed for the analysis of multiphase flows in engineering.  The result
              will be a more accurate parameterization of rain formation by the warm rain
              process, which could help to explain discrepancies that seem to exist between
              current theory (which does not include turbulence) and the observed times for
              precipitation formation.
