Title       : Development of Advanced Ferromagnetic Resonance Microscopes for Materials
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0114176

Award Number: 0114176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ichiro Takeuchi takeuchi@squid.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel E. Lofland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program in the
              Division of Materials Research, scientists at the University of Maryland will
              develop a microwave microscope based on the phenomenon of ferromagnetic
              resonance. Using a novel hemispherical cavity design, which focuses the
              microwave field, they will attain the spatial resolution of 5 micron or better
              with an ultimate goal of less than 1 micron. The instrument will allow mapping
              out many different magnetic properties including magnetization, spin-orbit
              coupling, and magnetic anisotropy. It will also measure magnetic homogeneity
              and image local stresses via magnetoelastic coupling. In addition, by using
              multiple cavity resonance, which range from 5 to 50 GHz, we will also be able
              to investigate local spin relaxation dynamics. The instrument will play a key
              role in the education and training of the next generation of students studying
              magnetic materials.

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials
              Research Program in the Division of Materials Research is for instrument
              development at the University of Maryland. Scientists at the university of
              Maryland will develop an innovative scanning probe microscope, which allows
              mapping of a variety of magnetic properties of materials. Magnetism plays a
              critical role in many technological applications including magnetic storage and
              magneto-optic switches for high-speed communications. The microscope will be
              invaluable for investigating properties that are difficult to study by
              conventional magnetic techniques. This will also be used to screen
              combinatorial libraries to aid in the search for novel magnetic materials. This
              new type of scanning probe microscope will become a useful educational tool by
              providing spatially resolved images of various properties.




