Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Functional Analysis of the Arabidopsis Yellow Stripe-Like
               (YSL) Family: Heavy Metal Transport and Partitioning Via Metal-nicotianamine
               Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0114748

Award Number: 0114748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $655411             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elsbeth L. Walker ewalker@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1145,1684,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              


This project concerns a family of metal transporters called YELLOW
              STRIPE-LIKE (YSL), which have been identified based on their very strong
              sequence similarity to the YS1 protein of maize.  The function of YS1 is in the
              primary uptake of iron from the soil.  However, unlike other known plant iron
              transporters, YS1 transports iron that is complexed by specific plant-derived
              Fe(III) chelators called phytosiderophores.  There are eight YSL proteins
              encoded in the Arabidopsis thaliana genome
              (http://www.bio.umass.edu/biology/ewalker), but they cannot function in
              phytosiderophore uptake, since Arabidopsis (like all non-grasses) can neither
              synthesize nor use phytosiderophores.  Arabidopsis does make and use a related
              compound, nicotianamine, which is the biosynthetic precursor to
              phytosiderophores. Preliminary evidence suggests that YSL proteins mediate
              transport of metals bound to nicotianamine.  The many roles of nicotianamine in
              achieving proper metal ion allocation in plants are incompletely understood,
              but there is strong evidence that nicotianamine is necessary for distribution
              of Fe, Zn, and Mn via phloem, and that it is required for transport of Cu in
              xylem.  

The functions of the eight  Arabidopsis thaliana YSL genes will be
              determined from the narrowest definition of function-biochemical function, to
              the broadest definition of function-the role of these proteins in the growth
              and development of the plant. A comprehensive description of the function of
              each YSL protein will be formed that will answer these questions: Which metals
              are transported by YSL proteins? Which cells express each YSL and therefore are
              involved in transporting these metals? Which nutrient conditions affect
              expression of each YSL family member?  In what way(s) does abolishing specific
              YSL genes affect the pattern of metal ion distribution in the plant?  By
              integrating this specific information for all eight YSL genes, our
              understanding of the metal ion allocation mechanisms used by plants will be
              greatly improved.  

Sequence information will be made immediately available
              through Genbank and on the project website.  The website will also be updated
              with experimental data for each YSL gene as it becomes available.




