Title       : IGERT: Macromolecular Science and Infrastructure Engineering (MS&IE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0114346

Award Number: 0114346
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2742000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy S. Riffle judyriffle@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Lesko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Myra Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard O. Claus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Weyers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This IGERT program in Macromolecular Science and Infrastructure Engineering
              (MS&IE) focusses on polymeric adhesives and composites in civil structures, a
              national need identified by the National Research Council.  The vision is to
              train scientists, engineers, and business leaders with an interdisciplinary
              perspective allowing them to bridge the gap between the materials and
              infrastructure community, structural and civil engineers, and the economic and
              business communities to create and maintain a durable, safe, and cost-effective
              U.S. civil infrastructure.  Seven departments (Chemistry, Engineering Science
              and Mechanics, Civil and Environmental Engineering, Electrical and Computer
              Engineering, Wood Science and Forest Products, Marketing and Accounting) from 4
              colleges will collaborate.  A University-based (not departmentally based)
              graduate degree program in Macromolecular Science and Engineering (MACR) will
              be launched concurrently with this cross-disciplinary IGERT program to afford
              sufficient coursework flexibility for gaining depth and breadth in
              infrastructure materials and design. Thus, the MS&IE IGERT students will
              comprise one part of a new graduate degree option (MACR). New courses to build
              depth in this field will be co-developed and co-taught via distance learning
              technologies with our partner institution, North Carolina State University. 
              IGERT students will begin their research in cross-disciplinary teams with two
              required semesters of teamed research.  Internship opportunities with national
              labs, key industrial groups, international infrastructure centers, and in
              congressional offices will enable students to gain experience in specialized
              topics, develop leadership skills, and obtain a global perspective on
              infrastructure methodologies and applications. A competitive summer
              undergraduate program, mentored by the MS&IE students, will facilitate
              leadership skills for the MS&IE students and recruiting into the program.  NSF
              IGERT funds will support approximately 40 students at VT and NC State during
              their first year with the objective of at least 50% being either women or
              students from under-represented groups.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program
              intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers
              with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and
              personal skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is
              intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing
              new, innovative models for graduate education and training in a fertile
              environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary
              boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards are being made to
              twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
              science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this
              specific award reside in the Directorates for Engineering; Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences; Biological Sciences; and Education and Human Resources.

