Title       : Advanced Instrumentation Development for Research and Education on Plasma
               Coating Crack Formation Fundamentals and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0114186

Award Number: 0114186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Gevelber gevelber@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Soumendra N. Basu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald E. Wroblewski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program to Boston
              University will enable constructing the first of its kind instrumentation for
              insitu and real-time characterization and control of coating microstructure.  A
              deeper understanding crack formation mechanisms will enable custom tailoring of
              coating structure for different applications through use of the advanced closed
              loop control system.   Plasma spray is a widely used deposition process since
              it can be economically used to engineer coating attributes. As such, it is an
              enabling technology in many applications in aerospace, engines, power systems,
              electronics, and biomedical applications. This custom designed system includes
              sensors for measuring the particle state, the thermal distribution and
              roughness characteristics of the deposit surface, as well as the actuators
              needed to implement real-time control of the process.


This award from the
              Instrumentation for Materials Research Program supports instrument development
              at Boston University.  The instrument will enable a better understanding of
              microstructural development and crack formation in plasma sprayed coatings, as
              well as design of an advanced process control system that is expected to enable
              manufacture of new coating structures.  The interdisciplinary research team
              includes researchers in materials, heat transfer, mechanics, and control. Broad
              educational impact is planned, including the direct research experience of
              undergraduate and graduate students, and by incorporation of the equipment and
              results obtained into the course work of not only materials courses but the
              related process control, heat transfer, and experimental courses offered by the
              College.  

