Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Nutritional mechanisms of population regulation in
               frugivorous primates: the effects of logging on redtail monkeys in Kibale
               National Park, Uganda
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a0114621

Award Number: 0114621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin A. Chapman cachapman@zoo.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With primate populations losing 125,140 km2 of habitat annually most populations
              exist either in isolated, scattered protected areas, or in unprotected areas
              facing pressures from an increasing human population.  Cercopithecine monkeys,
              a subfamily of small, frugivorous monkeys, are now found only in tiny forest
              fragments and a few national parks and forest reserves throughout West and East
              Africa.  Scientists have recognized that little progress has been made towards
              providing scientific information that managers can use in the conservation of
              this subfamily.  For example, while it has been suggested that weather,
              disease, infanticide, and food resources may all act to regulate primates
              populations, little is known about the specific conditions necessary for a
              species to survive and prosper.  Food resources have been argued to be the most
              common limiting factor for most species, yet little is known about how food
              quantity and quality interact to determine the size and distribution of primate
              populations.  This is particularly true for frugivorous primates since fruit,
              unlike leaves, is typically low in protein, minerals, and lipids, making it
              difficult to maintain a balanced diet.  Therefore, this study will use redtail
              monkeys in Kibale National Park, Uganda to investigate the relationship between
              nutrient intake and availability, reproduction, and population densities.  In
              addition, it will determine if nutritional factors are responsible for reduced
              population densities of redtail monkeys in heavily logged areas.  Three focal
              groups have been identified in the heavily logged and unlogged areas to: 1)
              quantify and compare seasonal nutrient intake of groups between areas and to
              examine relationships between nutrient availability and intake, 2) compare the
              relationship between nutrient intake and reproduction between groups and
              correlate nutrient intake and availability with reproductive rates, timing, and
              infant survival, and 3) identify behavioral responses to changes in seasonal
              nutrient availability and intake.  In addition, nutrient intake and behaviors
              will be correlated with group size across all six groups.  Finally, existing
              data on redtail population densities and diets across six habitats within
              Kibale will be used to test for correlations between nutrient availability, key
              food resources, and redtail population densities.  This will be the first study
              to explicitly examine the role of nutrition in population regulation of
              frugivorous primates and one of only a few to quantify the mechanisms by which
              habitat disturbance affects primates.  The results of this study have
              implications to our understanding of the diets and nutrition of extinct and
              extant primates and hominids, the role of nutrition in population regulation,
              and the conservation and management of frugivore populations.  By identifying
              the tree species needed to support high densities of redtail monkeys, current
              and future habitat restoration and protection plans will have the information
              necessary to design appropriate management strategies.  
