Title       : Exceptions to the Canonical Genetic Code in a Methanogenic Archaeon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0114797

Award Number: 0114797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Krzycki   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Methanogenesis (the synthesis of methane) from methylamines is initiated in
              microbes by one of three methylamine methyltransferases that methylate
              corrinoid cofactors specifically using either trimethylamine (TMA),
              dimethylamine (DMA), or monomethylamine (MMA). The genes encoding the TMA, DMA,
              and MMA methyltransferases are non-homologous, yet each gene contains a single
              in-frame amber codon. If amber codons were read as stop codons, each
              methylamine methyltransferase gene would produce an amber termination product
              markedly truncated relative to the isolated and characterized
              methyltransferase. Sequencing of the tryptic fragments of the MMA
              methyltransferase revealed that readthrough occurs without a frameshift, and
              that the amber codon is translated as lysine in a representative
              methyltransferase. No editing or changes are evident in transcripts, indicating
              direct translation of the amber codon as lysine occurs. Two phylogenetically
              distinct lys-tRNA synthetase (lysRS) genes were found in Methanosarcina
              barkeri. A class I lysRS synthetase is found downstream of an operon with two
              of the amber containing methyltransferase genes and is co-regulated with the
              MMA methyltransferase gene. A constitutive class II synthetase is also encoded
              in the genome. A possible role of the class I enzyme is charging an amber
              lys-tRNA for translation of amber as lysine. Working hypotheses are that the
              amber codons are required for either proper folding and/or translational
              processing of the methyltransferase proteins, or are involved in controlling
              methyltransferase transcription and translation. The regulation of amber codon
              readthrough, as well as cis requirements for amber translation, will be
              examined using either an in vitro amber readthrough assay, or alternatively,
              using in vivo reporters of amber translation. A mutant strain will be
              constructed in which the amber codon of a methylamine methyltransferase gene is
              changed to a canonical lysine codon, and the effect on transcripts, protein
              levels and enzyme activity determined. The amber lys-tRNA will be identified by
              one of several alternate approaches and characterized. The two lysRS enzymes
              will either be expressed recombinantly or isolated from the native host in
              order to characterize their behavior with respect to lysine and different
              lys-tRNAs. These studies will shed light on the function of a change in the
              usual genetic code found in these methane producing microorganisms. In a select
              group of their genes a signal that usually stops biosynthesis of a protein,
              instead directs the insertion of an amino acid into the protein. Since the
              genetic code is universal such changes in the genetic code are relatively rare.
              This research project will in part explain the biological driving force behind
              this change in the genetic code. This is expected to provide new insights into
              the process of protein biosynthesis, gene regulation, and the catalytic
              activities of enzymes in methane-producing microbes.   Understanding these
              processes is important because methanogenesis is an essential component of the
              global carbon cycle. 
