Title       : Collaborative Research: Aviation Access Control Security Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a0114046

Award Number: 0114046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148257             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Kobza john.kobza@coe.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding to create a mathematical framework to design
              effective aviation security system strategies. Aviation security protects vital
              national interests, as well as passengers and aircraft. Key components of an
              aviation security system include baggage and passenger screening devices and
              operations. The goals of this project are to determine:  (1) how to measure the
              performance of aviation security systems, (2) where to deploy aviation security
              technology devices when designing such systems, (3) how to operate such devices
              optimally after they are deployed, and (4) how to quantify and optimize the
              resulting effectiveness of deployment and security operation strategies. The
              methodology will use discrete optimization models such as the knapsack problem,
              complexity analysis, and heuristics developed for intractable instances of the
              models to conduct the necessary analysis and to obtain the desired
              results.

The results of this research will provide a systematic approach to
              compare and evaluate different types of aviation security system strategies
              that incorporate both new and existing aviation security technologies. This
              approach also has the potential to be used to design and implement new aviation
              security system strategies capable of enhancing the level of security
              attainable given the security resources and technologies that are currently
              available or may be available in the future. Moreover, the results of this
              research can be used to quantify the value of new investments in different
              types of aviation security technologies, to determine their potential impact on
              enhancing aviation security at airports within the nation. Beyond aviation
              security, this approach may also be applied to other screening environments,
              such as computer security systems screening for unauthorized users and food
              safety systems screening for toxic levels of bacteria.
This grant provides
              funding to create a mathematical framework to design effective aviation
              security system strategies. Aviation security protects vital national
              interests, as well as passengers and aircraft. Key components of an aviation
              security system include baggage and passenger screening devices and operations.
              The goals of this project are to determine (1) how to measure the performance
              of aviation security systems, (2) where to deploy aviation security technology
              devices when designing such systems, (3) how to operate such devices optimally
              after they are deployed, and (4) how to quantify and optimize the resulting
              effectiveness of deployment and security operation strategies. The methodology
              will use discrete optimization models such as the knapsack problem, complexity
              analysis, and heuristics developed for intractable instances of the models to
              conduct the necessary analysis and to obtain the desired results.

The
              results of this research will provide a systematic approach to compare and
              evaluate different types of aviation security system strategies that
              incorporate both new and existing aviation security technologies. This approach
              also has the potential to be used to design and implement new aviation security
              system strategies capable of enhancing the level of security attainable given
              the security resources and technologies that are currently available or may be
              available in the future. Moreover, the results of this research can be used to
              quantify the value of new investments in different types of aviation security
              technologies, to determine their potential impact on enhancing aviation
              security at airports within the nation. Beyond aviation security, this approach
              may also be applied to other screening environments, such as computer security
              systems screening for unauthorized users and food safety systems screening for
              toxic levels of bacteria.

