Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: A Comprehensive Digital Library of Stellar
               Spectra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0114536

Award Number: 0114536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19500              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Rose jim@physics.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francisco Valdes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0114536
Rose

Description:  This award supports a US-India cooperative
              research project entitled "A Comprehensive Digital Library of Stellar Spectra."
               The US PIs are Drs. James Rose, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
              and David Bell and Francisco Valdes of the National Optical Astronomy
              Observatories (NOAO).  With Indian counterparts Drs. Ranjan Gupta and Harinder
              Singh of the Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCCA),
              they will work toward completing a comprehensive library of stellar spectra,
              obtained with the coude feed telescope at the Kitt Peak National Observatory. 
              The library will consist of spectra for more than 1000 stars, covering a large
              range of atmospheric parameters such as effective temperature, surface gravity,
              and metal-abundance.  

Scope:  The library will be made publicly available
              through the NOAO archives.  It will be a major resource for many investigators,
              given its unprecedented scope and quality in spectral resolution,
              signal-to-noise ratio, and coverage of stellar atmosphere parameters.  The
              library will also be used by both the US and India investigators in their
              efforts to apply Artificial Neural Network techniques to the classification of
              stellar spectra and population synthesis of galaxy spectra.  This award is
              supported by the Division of International Programs and the Division of
              Astronomical Sciences.   
   
 
0114536
Rose 

Description:  This award
              supports US-India Cooperative Research: A Comprehensive Digital Library of
              Stellar Spectra.  US PIs are Drs. James Rose of the University of North
              Carolina at Chapel Hill, and David Bell and Francisco Valdes of the National
              Optical Astronomy Observatories (NOAO).  With Indian counterparts Drs. Ranjan
              and Singh of the Inter-University  IUCCA, they will work toward completing a
              comprehensive library of stellar spectra, obtained with the coude feed
              telescope at the Kitt Peak National Observatory.  The library will consist of
              spectra for more than 1000 stars, covering a large range of atmospheric
              parameters such as effective temperature, surface gravity, and metal-abundance.
               

Scope:  The library will be made publicly available through the NOAO
              archives.  It will be a major resource for many investigators, given its
              unprecedented scope and quality in spectral resolution, signal-to-noise ratio,
              and coverage of stellar atmosphere parameters.  The library will also be used
              by both the US and India investigators in their efforts to apply Artificial
              Neural Network techniques to the classification of stellar spectra and to the
              population synthesis of galaxy spectra.  This award is supported by the
              Division of International Programs and the Division of Astronomical Sciences.

