Title       : RUI: The Carbon Dioxide Theory of Climate Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0114998

Award Number: 0114998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Fleming jrflemin@colby.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colby College
	      4000 Mayflower Hill
	      Waterville, ME  04901    207/872-3000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
JamesFleming, Colby College
The Carbon Dioxide Theory of Climate
              Change: Emergence, Eclipse, and Reemergence

This study documents the
              discovery and early development of the carbon dioxide theory of climate change,
              its eclipse during the first five decades of the twentieth century, and its
              reemergence after 1950. It also examines subsequent developments in modeling,
              monitoring and climate reconstructions, while examining more recent social and
              political implications of the theory. Based on archives, interviews, expert
              consultations, and primary printed sources, the study provides an historical
              context for understanding current climate concerns. It also demonstrates the
              importance of intellectual and social changes in the study of global
              environmental change.  
 
In the nineteenth century, the work of John
              Tyndall, Svante Arrhenius, T.C.  Chamberlin and others drew scientific
              attention to the role of carbon dioxide as a possible mechanism of climate
              change. Throughout the first half of the twentieth century, however, most
              scientists did not think that increased carbon dioxide levels would result in
              global warming. It was believed that current levels of carbon dioxide already
              absorbed all the available long-wave radiation, so any increases would not
              significantly alter the radiative heat balance of the planet. Most
              meteorologists gave other mechanisms of climatic change more credence. 
              Beginning in 1938 the work of Guy Steward Callendar, Gilbert Plass, Hans Seuss,
              Roger Revelle, Charles Keeling and others revived the carbon dioxide theory of
              climate change and placed it on a more solid scientific basis. Callendar based
              his theory on new detailed measurements of the infrared spectrum, further
              noting that the warming trend from about 1900 to 1938 might be related to
              rising fossil fuel emissions. Seuss and Revelle later named the rising levels
              of atmospheric carbon dioxide caused by industrial fuel combustion the
              "Callendar effect."

In the second half of the twentieth century, computers,
              satellites, and reconstructions of past climate records provided new privileged
              perspectives on the climate, allowing the emergence of a scientific consensus
              (but not unanimity) on the carbon dioxide theory of climate change. The state
              of climate science (in theory and in practice) during this convergence of
              opinion will be contrasted with that during the earlier eclipse and
              re-emergence phases. By the 1950s, station temperatures around the Northern
              Hemisphere reached early-twentieth-century peaks, giving credence to
              Callendar's warnings and placing climate warming on the public agenda. Concerns
              were expressed in both the scientific and popular press about rising sea
              levels, loss of habitat, and shifting agricultural zones. This was followed by
              a global cooling scare in the 1970s and the re-emergence of global warming
              consensus through the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and
              the Framework Convention on Climate Change. The project concludes with a
              reconsideration of the human dimensions of climate change in light of history,
              including popular perceptions, economic and public policy initiatives, and
              politicization of the issues.

Outcomes include paper at professional
              historical and scientific meetings, refereed journal articles, materials posted
              on a WWW Center for the History of Meteorology web site, and a fully-documented
              book. 

