Title       : Collaborative Research: Reconfiguring Economies, Communities, and Regions in
               Post-Socialist Europe: A Study of the Apparel Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0114395

Award Number: 0114395
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196886             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Pickles jpickles@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adrian Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,5915,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the changing economic geographies of apparel production
              in Central and Eastern Europe (CEE).  After an initial period of rapid
              industrial collapse and only limited persistence of apparel firms, there has
              been a more recent 'rebirth' of production throughout the region, linked
              primarily to changes in the international structure of the industry and in
              European Union legislation and markets.  The project investigates four aspects
              of these changes.  First, using international trade, production, and employment
              data, the project documents the emergence of these complex new geographies of
              apparel production and trade, and assess the specific roles played by changes
              in the international structure of the industry and by changes in international
              trade regulations.  Second, through interviews with brand-name manufacturers,
              retailers, marketers, and national buying firms in Western Europe, the U.S.,
              and CEE, the study analyzes the important role of buyer-driven commodity chains
              in sourcing and controlling suppliers in CEE under conditions of intensely
              competitive pricing and rapidly changing demand.  Third, through detailed case
              studies in six regions in Slovakia and Bulgaria, the project examines the ways
              in which international sourcing restructures existing national industries,
              impacts upon the creation of new firms, and produces a variety of industrial
              forms and practices. Fourth, in seeking to explain this diversity of apparel
              production, the project examines the ways in which existing social,
              institutional, and community conditions in different regions of each country
              are shaping the enterprises and regional economies that are emerging. 

The
              pace of new firm creation in these regions is astonishing and the regional
              impacts of these firms and the scope of their integration with European markets
              surprising.  Through this research we hope to contribute to our understanding
              of the specific forms and practices of what has been more generally
              characterized as low-wage, assembly production for export.  In particular, we
              hope to contribute to the literatures in economic geography, globalization
              debates, and post-socialist restructuring about the roles of national suppliers
              and markets in the operation of the new firms, the extent to which uniform or
              differentiated production and marketing strategies are emerging, and the
              impacts local conditions have on the operation of primarily international
              contract and assembly production.  The proposed research will enable us to
              examine more fully the conditions and contradictions associated with
              international integration and local economic reconfiguration in post-socialist
              Europe.  The project will enable us to move beyond single-region and
              single-country case studies by providing a cross-national and cross-regional
              analysis of local economic transformations in apparel producing areas. 
              Finally, the research will contribute to our understanding of the role of other
              economic and social practices in shaping the internationalization of the
              post-socialist apparel industry and its producing regions.


