Title       : Acquisition of Magnetometer for Magnetic Films Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0114189

Award Number: 0114189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zbigniew J. Celinski zcelinsk@mail.uccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Colo Springs
	      1420, Austin Bluffs Parkway
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80933    719/262-3153

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major
              Research Instrumentation program supports the acquisition of a highly sensitive
              magnetometer at Colorado State University at Colorado Springs. The magnetometer
              will have a profound impact on research program and teaching and training
              students. The instrument will be used to fully correlate the static and dynamic
              properties of studied magnetic structures. The system will significantly
              enhance materials characterization capability on magnetic structures in three
              research projects currently underway at the institution: (1) studies of the
              exchange biased ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic structures, (2) studies of the
              exchange coupled Fe/Pd/Fe and Fe/Ag/Fe structures, (3) studies of the high
              frequency devices based on ferromagnetic metals. Furthermore, this new
              magnetometer will give graduate students but also undergraduate and high school
              students opportunity to work on research projects, further expanding their
              training. The interaction between students and postdoctoral fellows or faculty
              creates an atmosphere, which strongly stimulates education and
              training.

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program
              and the Major Research Instrumentation program allows Colorado State University
              at Colorado Springs to acquire the acquisition of a highly sensitive
              magnetometer. The magnetometer will have a profound impact on research program
              and teaching and training students. The instrument will be used to fully
              correlate the static and dynamic properties of studied magnetic structures. The
              system will significantly enhance materials characterization capability on
              magnetic structures in three research projects currently underway at the
              institution. Furthermore, this new magnetometer will give graduate students,
              but also undergraduate and high school students, opportunity to work on
              research projects, further expanding their training. The interaction between
              students and postdoctoral fellows or faculty creates an atmosphere, which
              strongly stimulates education and training.

