Title       : The Mathematical Works of Thomas Hobbes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0114312

Award Number: 0114312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45014              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas M. Jesseph doug_jesseph@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
Douglas Jesseph, North Carolina State University
The
              Mathematical Works of Thomas Hobbes

This project is a renewal of support for
              the preparation of three volumes of mathematical works of Thomas Hobbes.  The
              works will appear through  Oxford University Press as part of the Clarendon
              Edition of the Works of Thomas Hobbes.  Hobbes is a figure of central
              importance in the development of early modern science, and his prominence as a
              political theorist has placed him at the center of numerous studies of the
              social, cultural, and intellectual context of seventeenth-century science.
              Hobbes's significance for the development of mathematics is also profound,
              although scholars have tended to overlook his mathematical work. This relative
              neglect stems, in part, from the mistaken impression that his mathematical
              writings are nothing more than misguided attempts to solve such unsolvable
              problems as the squaring of the circle. Although Hobbes was convinced that his
              first principles would enable the solution of such problems, the majority of
              his mathematical writings concern methodological and philosophical issues that
              are independent of his failed circle quadratures, and many other of his
              writings are part of his long and bitter controversy with John Wallis and other
              members of the Royal Society. A proper edition of his mathematical works is of
              interest to STS scholarship generally, and particularly to studies of science
              and mathematics in the seventeenth century.  

A major obstacle impeding
              scholarly attention to Hobbes's mathematics is the fact that the current
              standard edition of his collected works has a completely inadequate
              presentation of the mathematical material. The edition is almost useless for
              scholarly investigation of Hobbes's mathematics. By including complete texts,
              adequate diagrams, introductions, translations, notes, and a critical
              apparatus, the mathematical volumes of the Clarendon Works will make accessible
              a wealth of material relevant to studies
of the philosophical, social, and
              cultural background of seventeenth-century mathematics.  The PI has assembled
              the printed sources in electronically editable form and has compared them line
              by line with the originals. In addition, all known manuscript sources
              (including those the PI has recently discovered) have been transcribed or
              photocopied, and they are being rendered in electronically editable form.
              Approximately one third of the material in Latin has been translated, with to
              be completed in the summer of 2001.   This support permits final redaction of
              all three volumes, (including notation of variants, writing introductions, and
              preparation of explanatory notes).  They are to be ready for copy editing by
              the Press in September of 2002.

