Title       : IGERT: Optical Commuications and Networking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0114418

Award Number: 0114418
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2241171            (Estimated)
Investigator: Guifang Li li@creol.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. G. Moharam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Delfyett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick LiKamWa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mostafa Bassiouni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Central Florida will establish an IGERT program with a
              multidisciplinary research theme in Optical Communications and Networking to
              train 30 Ph.D. students over the next five years. This program is a joint
              effort of twenty scientists, engineers and educators from the
              Departments/Schools of Mathematics, Statistics, Optics, Physics, Material
              science, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, and Education at UCF.
              Optical communications and networking is a particularly well-suited IGERT theme
              because the diverse multidisciplinary technologies that need to be developed to
              enable next-generation information infrastructure. Major research efforts are
              grouped in four areas: advanced components, transport, switching, and
              networking and network management. Each IGERT thesis project is designed to
              build upon expertise from at least two different groups in realizing an
              enhanced functionality that is greater than the sum of the parts, over and
              above what the two groups would pursue independently. The advising team of each
              IGERT student, consisting of two or more faculty members from different
              departments, an industrial advisor and a non-technical advisor, is designed to
              ensure the successful integration of education, research and training.
              Industry, the users of technology considered in this effort, will be involved
              at the onset of the thesis research for each student. The research framework is
              complemented by the existing multidisciplinary courses, new courses in optical
              communications and networking to be developed under this IGERT program and
              being developed under an existing NSF CRCD grant, on-site training on
              state-of-the-art equipment at UCF, off-site training in industry, and
              non-technical training including business, communication/ interpersonal skills
              and ethics. The objective of this IGERT program is not only to train the
              participating Ph.D. students to become leaders in industry and/or academia but
              also for this program to serve as a national model for training scientists and
              engineers in today's globally competitive and technology-driven market economy.
              

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating
              Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
              technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
              the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
              education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and
              training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
              traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards
              are being made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span
              all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of
              this specific award reside in the Directorates for Engineering; Computer and
              Information Science and Engineering; Mathematical and Physical Sciences; and
              Education and Human Resources.

