Title       : Center for Gravitational Wave Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0114375

Award Number: 0114375
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee S. Finn LSF5@PSU.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pablo Laguna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter I. Meszaros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gabriela I. Gonzalez  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1646      PHYSICS FRONTIER CENTER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1243,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the formation of The Center for Gravitational Wave
Physics.
               This Physics Frontier Center is devoted to development of
gravitational wave
              phenomenology: the physics and astrophysics that can
be explored by
              gravitational wave observations in all wavebands.  It is
organized in three
              tightly-linked Major Research Components: i)
learning how to exploit the
              fundamentally new perspective that gravitational
waves offer, when compared to
              electromagnetic observations; ii) using
gravitational wave observations to
              test and contribute to the
understanding of strong-field, dynamical gravity;
              and iii) developing
modeling tools that combine detector and source science to
              provide
quantitative assessments of the ``science reach'' of advanced
              detector
designs.  To achieve its goal of crystalizing the formation of this
              new
field, the Center functions as a National Facility with a
              substantial
visitor program; workshops, conferences and institutes devoted
              to
critical research areas where the focused attention of experts can
              be
expected to lead to breakthroughs or rapid advancements; and
              a
substantial, interactive interface to Center activities
              (seminar,
colloquia, workshops and research group meetings) for off-site
              Center
members and program participants.  The Center's education
              program
emphasizes middle school children nationwide, through an
              affiliation
with the educational public television program "What's In The
              News?".
Three special programs form the core of its outreach program: 
              to
women, through its participation in the Women In Science and
Engineering
              "Expanding Your Horizons" workshop (focused on grades 7--9)
and the Women In
              Science and Engineering Research mentoring program
(focused on first and
              second year undergraduate women), and to upper
division and graduate Hispanic
              students, through a special liaison with
the University of Texas,
              Brownsville.

The forthcoming generation of ground and space-based
              gravitational wave
detectors have unleashed exciting challenges and
              opportunities at the
interface of general relativity, astrophysics, and
              experimental
physics. The waves they will detect arise in strong,
              dynamical
gravitational fields, offering the first opportunities to test
              the
understanding of fully non-linear relativistic gravity.
Simultaneously,
              the observations' astrophysical implications are likely
to be novel, diverse
              and rich as they reveal the inner dynamics of
processes hidden from
              electromagnetic astronomy: e.g., the collision of
black holes in the center of
              a galaxy at high redshift.  A new field of
physics --- gravitational wave
              phenomenology --- is thus poised to
emerge; however, lacking a tradition of
              large experiments,
gravitational physics lacks also a community of
              phenomenologists ready
to fully exploit the rich physics that the forthcoming
              observations
offer.  The Center for Gravitational Wave Physics provides
              the
intellectual platform upon which existing expertise can be combined
              and
focused in a synergistic manner, crystallizing the formation of
              a
coherent, flourishing field that can fully realize the promise
              that
gravitational wave observations hold.

