Title       : The Possession of Kuru: Exchange Relations In Modern Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a0114731

Award Number: 0114731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105023             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warwick H. Anderson wanders@itsa.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Abstract
Warwick Anderson, University of California -San
              Francisco
THE POSSESSION OF KURU: EXCHANGE RELATIONS IN MODERN SCIENCE

This
              project explores the material cultures of modern by looking intensively at the
              case of D. Carleton Gajdusek's investigations of the disease of kuru, conducted
              among the Fore people of New Guinea in the 1950s and 1960s.  This focus is on
              the circulation of goods in global biomedical science.  This is a multi-sited
              historical study designed principally to describe and explain transactions
              involving local inhabitants, anthropologists and biomedical scientists,
              exchanges clustered around contested kuru material, principally brains, blood
              and corpses. The goal is to outline some of the basic features of the material
              cultures of late colonial, postwar scientific exchange, and to see how these
              material cultures structured and transformed the identities of transactors. The
              transaction of kuru material can help us to think more generally about the
              creation of value and the circulation of goods in global science.  In view of
              Gajdusek's later (1990s)
involvement in the patenting of cell lines, this
              study will additionally present an
unrivalled opportunity to consider how
              local exchange regimes of science may have
changed over the last fifty years,
              in particular to investigate whether science has become
more commodified and
              marketable. The study of the character of kuru transactions etches
in
              especially clear relief the more recent global traffic of genetic material
              (including that
proposed in the Human Genome Diversity Project). Moreover, the
              analysis of the
changing transactional orders of global science can serve to
              illuminate contemporary
tensions between ownership and authorship in science,
              and prompts us to reconsider
scientific authorship as an exchange function, 
              possibly now an imperiled form of
exchange, not just as a writing process.
              This is essentially a historical study that
addresses issues usually in the
              province of anthropology or sociology: it describes how
scientific identities
              are fashioned in collection and exchange; it advances the analysis of
the
              material cultures of late-twentieth century science; it explores new ways of
              describing
the increasing global circulation of goods in science, and the
              creation of value in
international scientific transactions; and it brings the
              Asia-Pacific region into focus in
science and technology studies as an
              important, but previously much neglected, location
of scientific production
              and exchange. The outcomes include a monograph, a series of
articles, and
              enhanced graduate student education.

