Title       : Exploring the Potentials of an All DC (ADC) Bulk Power System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0114937

Award Number: 0114937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Zaborszky zab@zach.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heinz M. Schaettler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0114937
Zaborszky

It is proposed to compute in the Control Center, virtually
              instantly, the desired steady state condition of each building block and then
              subtract it from the existing state in each building block.  This difference is
              the excess or transient energy within each building block.  Then in each block
              utilize the series and shunt controls to eliminate this difference in voltage
              and current at the controlled end of each line.  If this is accomplished then
              the transient energy of the block is drained into or out of the capacitors
              available for this purpose.  If accomplished this would mean that the desired
              system state is realized virtually instantaneously at all times without
              transients, in a distributed manner.  This idealized situation may be
              acceptably approximated provided the control process i is virtually
              instantaneous compared to the rate of variation of the desired
              state.

Observe that the question asked here is not how to utilize newly
              developing technology and its tools to improve existing practice, but the
              converse:  how to utilize existing and developing technology to solve the
              existing problems in the most favorable way.  This then raises the question of
              how a transition can be found.

Given the present riches of power
              electronics, computing and communication equipment and facilities, the question
              of how the total power system could be constructed for the best reliability,
              security, efficiency and other features.  Of course,  to be practical, it would
              be expected that current facilities such as transmission lines, generators,
              transformers capacitor bank etc. would be used, sometimes in novel roles.  The
              innovation would involve a new structuring of the system e.g. an all DC bulk
              power system and a novel approach to controlling the restructured system.

