Title       : Development of a Database for the Discovery and Annotation of Functional Sites
               in Protein Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0114796

Award Number: 0114796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Olivier Lichtarge lichtarge@bcm.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lydia Kavraki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      One Baylor Plaza
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/798-6970

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal aims to develop novel and general computational tools to discover
              functional sites in protein structures. These sites control nearly all aspects
              of cellular chemistry and their identification has important applications, such
              as to understand the basis of protein function, and to modify cellular pathways
              by engineering protein mimetics or inhibitors.  Until now, however, functional
              sites could be identified reliably only after exhaustive mutational analysis: a
              laboratory process that is slow, labor intensive, limited by assay sensitivity,
              and which is protein specific. Here, we propose instead to identify functional
              sites with new algorithms for sequence analysis and for the efficient geometric
              comparison of important features in protein structures. This builds on our
              preliminary work on the Evolutionary Trace (ET) method.  First, in proteins
              with sufficient evolutionary information, we will use ET to identify the key
              geometric and chemical features of active sites and summarize these into
              3-dimensional molds.  Second, in protein structures lacking sufficient
              evolutionary information, we will search for look-alike areas that mimic these
              molds. At a time when the outpour of raw sequence and structure date overwhelms
              conventional means of analysis, this low-cost strategy will reveal the regions
              of protein structures that are most relevant to function, and therefore to
              experimentation. 

