Title       : Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
               (PGE): (DEM) Bringing Up Girls in Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0114917

Award Number: 0114917
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tandra L. Tyler-Wood wood@tac.coe.unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Pemberton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Mortensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Bringing Up Girls in Science (BUGS) is a demonstration project in the Department
              of Technology 
and Cognition at the University of North Texas (UNT). The goal
              of this project is to provide 
educational experiences in an outdoor learning
              lab for girls in grades four and five that will
increase girls' interest,
              participation, self-concept, knowledge, and achievement in the 
environmental
              sciences. During Year One, thirty 4 th and 5 th grade girls (BUGS participants)
              
will participate in an after school outdoor science lab at Sam Houston
              Elementary in the 
Denton Independent School District in Denton, TX.
              Participants for the project will be 
recruited from across the district. BUGS
              participants will be mentored by female 
high students enrolled in the Texas
              Academy for Mathematics and Science (TAMS). 
BUGS participants and mentors
              will be joined the second and third year of the project
by girls in special
              populations at distance sites through the use 
of two-way audio-visual desktop
              conferencing tools, a project WEB site, chat rooms, and 
computer
              ``pen-pals''. For the second and third year special populations joining the
              project 
will include: (1) students with emotional and behavioral problems
              attending Rose Street 
Day Program and Therapeutic School in Wichita Falls,
              TX; (2) a school district which serves 
large numbers of Hispanic and Native
              American students in Bernalillo, New Mexico; and
(3) students from a rural
              school district in Decatur, Texas. BUGS participants at distance 
sites will
              be able to use ``electronic field trips'' developed from activities that were
              
videotaped during Year One to increase their opportunities to participate in
              the ``outdoor
science lab experience.'' Family involvement will be ongoing
              throughout the project.
Career awareness and educational opportunities
              materials will be housed by a local
public library for the parents of BUGS
              participants. Three parent 
meetings per year will be provided to ``showcase''
              student work and provide educational 
and career information.


