Title       : Geology and the Emergence of Science as a Profession in the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0114869

Award Number: 0114869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135021             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Newell jnewell@spsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Polytechnic State
	      1100 S. Marietta Parkway
	      Marietta, GA  30060    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
Julie R. Newell, Southern Polytechnic State
              University
Geology and the Emergence of Science as a Profession in the United
              States


In the secondary literature on the history of science in America,
              geology has long been recognized as the first science to develop an extensive
              professional community. Further, geologists developed the support structures
              and institutions that made professional science in the United States possible.
              Among the critical institutions founded by geologists were the first general
              scientific journal, The American Journal of Science (1818), and the Association
              of American Geologists (1840), which would become the American Association for
              the Advancement of Science (1848). These achievements were critical to the
              emergence of professional scientists in other disciplines in the United States.
              No published history of science in America has, however, rooted these
              generalizations about the importance of geology in primary documents and
              archival evidence. Nor has it been explained why geology, rather than some
              other science, should have played this pivotal role. 

This project focuses
              on one central question with a multitude of ramifications: Why geology?  Why
              were geologists able to garner public, political, and most importantly
              financial support for their scientific endeavors? What was it about the science
              of geology in the period before 1865 that particularly suited the cultural,
              political, and physical environment in the United States? Dr. Newell's thesis
              is that geology was a relatively new science uniquely well suited to the values
              and goals of the early United States and for which the United States provided
              unique materials for study and for the generation of truly American geological
              theories. 

Working from her earlier manuscript, Dr. Newell is conducting
              extensive additional archival research in order to unravel the personal and
              institutional relationships that underlie the development of geology in the
              United States and its impact on the broader history of science.  The ultimate
              goal is an book-length manuscript that provides an integrated account of the
              early history of geology in the United States, including the content of the
              science, the goals and methods of the scientists, and the contexts that shaped,
              and were shaped by, American geologists and their geology. No such account
              exists in the published literature of the history of American geology. In
              addition, because of the centrality of geology to the emergence of science as a
              profession in the United States, this study should interest scholars concerned
              with the general history of science in the United States or in American
              intellectual history. 

