Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Bioluminescence Resonance Energy Transfer (BRET)- A Tool to
               Explore Protein-Protein Interactions in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0114653

Award Number: 0114653
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $805540             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albrecht G. von Arnim vonarnim@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl H. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              



The goal of this project is to develop a novel optical technique,
              termed
     Bioluminescence Resonance Energy Transfer (BRET), as a resource
              for the plant
     functional genomics community, specifically in the model
              species Arabidopsis
     thaliana. BRET has shown promise as a tool to chart
              the physical contacts
     between specific cellular proteins, and their
              time-resolved interactions, in
     living tissue and in real time. While the
              importance of such interactions has
     long been recognized in the life
              sciences, the corresponding experimental tools
     have largely been limited
              to in vitro conditions or to heterologous, non-plant
     organisms.
              Therefore, the BRET technique will provide a unique contribution
     toward
              delineating the functions of the 25,000 genes thought to be contained
    
              within the Arabidopsis genome.

     BRET is a form of radiation-free
              energy
     transfer that can occur when two compatible optical probes are
              brought into
     molecular proximity. In detail, to probe for a
              protein-protein interaction
     between two given partner proteins, the two
              proteins are genetically fused to a
     blue light emitting luciferase and to
              a blue light absorbing yellow fluorescent
     protein. If the two hybrid
              proteins interact, the excitation energy of the
     luciferase may be
              transferred to the fluorescent protein, resulting in an
     easily detected
              yellow-shift in the luminescence spectrum.

     The first goal
     of this
              project is to construct molecular genetic tools, such as cloning
     vectors,
              for the expression of BRET hybrid proteins. Second, instrumentation
     and
              experimental protocols will be optimized for time-resolved BRET data
    
              acquisition. Moreover, as a prototype example of the efficacy of BRET for
    
              research in plants, BRET will be applied to illuminate the genetic networks
  
                that mediate the control of nuclear gene expression by light and the
              circadian
     clock. Resources developed in this project shall be widely
              disseminated to
     encourage their application within the entire plant
              science community
    
              (http://chicory.bio.vanderbilt.edu/chj/arabidopsisbret



