Title       : Collaborative Research: Nearshore Canyon Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2002   
File        : a0114881

Award Number: 0114881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $881000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Guza rguza@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Subject:	Elgar/Herbers/Guza abstract
Funds are provided for development,
              testing, and improvement of circulation models driven by wave propagation and
              wave-breaking in the presence of abrupt nearshore topography.  These will be
              tested using data collected from a California field site with two offshore
              canyons.  Specific objectives include: determining how surface gravity waves
              propagate across a  complex inner shelf topography, determining how
              bathymetrically-induced alongshore variations of the wave field affect
              shoaling, breaking, and nearshore circulation, and determining the
              characteristics of mass exchange between the surf zone and the inner shelf in
              the presence of abrupt topography.  Four waverider buoys over the outer and mid
              shelf will provide offshore wave boundary conditions for the models and
              characterize the refraction over the outer shelf.  Pressure cells at mid shelf
              will identify reflected waves from Scripps Canyon.  PUVs (pressure and velocity
              sensors) and acoustic doppler current profilers (ADCPs) over the inner shelf
              will characterize inner shelf and surf zone circulation and wave fields. 
              Drifters will be deployed and tracked.  Moderate wave and low wave situations
              will be compared in an attempt to isolate flows induced by the canyon in the
              absence of wave forcing.  The buoys, pressure cells, and PUVs will provide
              estimates of the evolution of the directional wave spectrum for comparison with
              model output.  Various inner shelf models, including the NOPP community model,
              will be compared to the field data.



