Title       : Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
               (PGE): DEM-Girls Exploring Mathematics through Social Sciences (GEMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0114683

Award Number: 0114683
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $842877             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela T. Reid pamreid@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Abigail J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This demonstration project grows out of planning grant activity, which designed
              a multi-level approach to adapting a successful, intensice two-week summer
              program to reach a broader audience of urban girls. The present project (GEMS,
              or Girls Explore Mathematics through Social Science) encompasses an integrated
              set of three programs designed to strengthen middle-school girls' interest,
              competence and confidence in mathematics and mathematics-related activities
              through engaging them in social science research on adolescents. All three
              progams offer a curriculum that is attractive to middle-school girls, and that
              encourages their interest in mathematics, science and technology through their
              pre-existing interest in social issues. All three programs enhance girls'
              technical skills and itnerests by building on their preference for
              collaboration and connection; and all three encourage contact with older,
              relevant model-mentors. The project includes a 10 week, Saturday morning
              version of the program (GO-GIRL or Gaining Options: Girls Investigate Real
              Life) that can be offered to urban girls, but retains the key features of high
              interest, hands-on experience, collaboration, and intergenerational mentoring;
              and a web based version of the program (SMART-GIRL or Surveys Mathematics and
              Research Technology: Girls Investigate Real Life) that expands the capacity of
              a popular existing website to teah girls how to gather and analyze survey data
              online. At both the University of Michigan and Wayne State University, this
              project will provide opportunities for the pre-service teachers of mathematics
              and social studies who are also students, to observe, train, and teach girls on
              a small scale. The project will yield an economical version of the GEMS
              curriculum that is usable in urban settings, a teacher professional development
              program that is exportable to other institutions, as well as appropriate
              support materials to enable others to implement this curriculum in other
              cities.
