Title       : Acquisition of Tunable Narrow-line Laser for Photonic Band Gap and Disordered
               Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0114224

Award Number: 0114224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102442             (Estimated)
Investigator: Azriel Z. Genack genack@qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is an instrument acquisition award from the Major Research Instrumentation
              program and the Instrumentation for Materials Research program to the City
              University of New York Queens College. The award will allow CUNY Queens College
              to purchase a Coherent 899-29 Autoscan II single frequency scanning laser for
              the study of the statistics of optical propagation in random and nearly
              periodic materials and photonic devices. The instrument will allow the
              principal investigators to extend the coherent technique developed in the
              microwave region of the spectrum to visible and infrared frequencies. It will
              allow them to characterize the statistics of transport using statistical
              measures of the transmitted fields and intensity, and to use the variance of
              intensity fluctuations as a sure test of phonon localization free of
              ambiguities arising from absorption of microwave resonance.  Band edge and
              localized modes in cholesteric liquid crystals will be characterized. The
              objective is to clarify the conjunction of lasing and localization and guide
              development of homogeneous cholesteric materials in which ultra-low lasing
              threshold will be observed. The instrument will provide students preparing for
              careers in physics with a sound mix of microwave and optical techniques as well
              as exposure to industrial research laboratories engaged in forefront research. 
              

This is an instrument acquisition award from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program and the Instrumentation for Materials Research program
              to the City University of New York Queens College. The award will allow CUNY
              Queens College to purchase a Coherent 899-29 Autoscan II single frequency
              scanning laser for the study of the statistics of optical propagation in random
              and nearly periodic materials and photonic devices. The instrument will allow
              the principal investigators to extend the coherent technique developed in the
              microwave region of the spectrum to visible and infrared frequencies. The
              instrument will provide students preparing for careers in physics with a sound
              mix of microwave and optical techniques as well as exposure to industrial
              research laboratories engaged in forefront research.

