Title       : The Regulation of Ca2+-Gated and Voltage-Gated K+ Channel Genes in the Nervous
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0114716

Award Number: 0114716
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $725310             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel S. Atkinson nigela@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PI: Nigel Atkinson

Abstract
Different types of neurons must have different
              patterns of electrical activity for the nervous system to function properly.
              For example, neurons that initiate movement often "fire" high frequency bursts
              of action potentials, whereas neurons that control slow, rhythmic behaviors may
              fire only slowly, but with very precise timing. A neuron's ability to generate
              specific activity patterns is determined by the types and numbers of ion
              channels it expresses. Nerve cells pick and choose which channels to express by
              transcriptional regulation. Our understanding of how cells make this decision
              is very immature. Furthermore, our ability to inspect the sequence of a gene
              and to then predict its expression pattern is nonexistent. Presently, the
              purpose of DNA sequences that regulate gene expression (control elements) can
              only be empirically ascertained. Dr. Atkinson and his students will utilize the
              genome project, evolutionary studies and functional testing to determine the
              grammar of regulatory sequences that control ion channel gene expression.
    
                 Using Drosophila melanogaster as a model system, Dr. Atkinson has had
              substantial success describing how the slowpoke Ca2+-activated K+ channel gene
              is transcriptionally regulated. It has an extremely complex control region. The
              Atkinson lab has described control elements that specify the developmental- and
              tissue-specific expression pattern. Most notable was the identification of
              control elements that differentially activate one promoter in four different
              muscle subtypes and the identification of an intronic region that modulates
              developmental specificity.
        In the this project Dr. Atkinson will add
              the Shaker gene to their list of channel genes to be studied. Shaker encodes a
              voltage-gated K+ channel.  Work on slowpoke will also continue. Work on these
              to genes will enable a comparison of how genes encoding two major classes of K+
              channels, the voltage-gated and Ca2+-gated K+ channels, regulate gene
              expression. In all cases, the focus will be on the regulation of the genes in
              the nervous system. Transcriptional start sites (~promoters) will be physically
              mapped and their expression pattern determined using transgenic animals.
              Because the entire fly is the expression system, the group can study expression
              in all tissues and organs in their natural developmental context. To identify
              the control elements the group will make use of the fact that important DNA
              sequences tend to be conserved over evolutionary time. For each gene, the
              transcriptional control regions from four different insect species will be
              sequenced and compared. Small sequences conserved in both sequence and position
              will be assumed to be control elements. The candidate elements will be tested
              for function by deleting them from a transgene and then asking how expression
              had been altered. These methods have been very successful in dissecting the
              regulation of the slowpoke gene. Furthermore, it will be determined whether the
              slowpoke and Shaker K+ channels genes show evidence of coordinate regulation;
              that is, do some of the same combinations of control elements regulate their
              expression.  Because each control element is recognized by a specific
              transcription factor(s), it will be possible to infer which transcription
              factors are involved.
        Drosophila have the same families of ion channel
              genes found in vertebrates. In addition, most of the important regulatory
              cascades affecting developmental gene expression were originally discovered in
              or shown to exist in Drosophila. Therefore, it is expected that the description
              of the regulation of channel gene expression in Drosophila will also be
              relevant to the understanding of the same process in other organisms.


