Title       : The Creation of a Wireless Exchange using an Enabling Multiple Access Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0114629

Award Number: 0114629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143554             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl R. Nassar carln@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1367,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0114629
Nassar

Wireless networks are getting clogged in high-use areas like
              New York and Los Angeles. That congestion will grow almost without end over the
              next few years, and by 2003, (1) more than one in every 10 individuals
              worldwide will carry a cell phone; (2) 126 million hand held devices will
              demand high data rate services; and (3) 600 million of the cell phones in use
              will cry out for access to the Internet.

It's no wonder then that the demand
              for spectrum far outpaces supply, and FCC chairman William Kennard has been
              inviting companies to come up with more and more innovative ways to utilize the
              existing bandwidth.
Proposing one powerful solution to the wireless bandwidth
              problem, William Kennard recently suggested that wireless companies start
              trading bits and pieces of their unused wireless spectrum, so that these scarce
              pieces don't go to waste. Such an idea, still far from reality in wireless, is
              in the testing stages in the fiber-optic market. There, companies are already
              suggesting that a fiber-optic bandwidth exchange could handle $12 billion worth
              of orders within a five year period. In a world where wireless spectrum is in
              short supply, a wireless exchange may be the only way to meet the rapidly
              growing consumer demands.

To capitalize on the idea of a wireless bandwidth
              exchange between companies, an enabling multiple-access technology must be
              developed at the physical layer. This technology must be capable of using
              non-contiguous bands of the frequency spectrum in an optimal fashion. In this
              research, the PI will develop a novel form of DS-CDMA (direct sequence code
              division multiple access) offering the following far reaching benefits:

o
              The technology is well suited to support wireless bandwidth exchange between
              companies; through this wireless exchange
o Companies can best meet their
              consumer demands, generate additional revenues, and best use the limited
              wireless resource licensed to them.
o Groups of companies can agree to work
              together to allow customers of all
companies to experience the benefits of
              very large bandwidths

In a world where spectrum is in short supply, we see a
              wireless world based on cooperation not competition as the only way to meet
              consumer demands. This research lays the foundation for such future
              collaborations.

