Title       : Control of Nonlinear Dynamical Systems with Time-Periodic Coefficients
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0114571

Award Number: 0114571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159952             (Estimated)
Investigator: Subhash C. Sinha ssinha@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract:
	Modeling of many mechanical systems leads to a set of
              nonlinear differential equations with periodic coefficients.  The dynamics and
              control of these systems is a very significant issue due to its impact on
              reliability, capability of operating under high speeds and longevity.  In most
              instances, the linearized equations are used to design the controllers, which
              by no means is an efficient or a practical solution.  Further, in the case when
              a system has linearly uncontrollable modes then a linear controller cannot be
              designed and one must resort to a nonlinear controller. 
	In this study a set
              of practical and efficient techniques are developed that can be applied to a
              wide class of control problems encountered in nonlinear systems with
              periodically varying parameters.  The main approach is based on the application
              of Lyapunov-Floquet transformation and time-dependent normal form theory. For
              linearly uncontrollable critical cases, bifurcation control is suggested
              through an application of the center manifold theory. Backstepping and
              Lyapunov's second methods are also employed to synthesize controllers. 
	The
              practical significance of this study is demonstrated through applications (via
              computer simulations) to some typical problems including the controller designs
              for an asymmetric magnetic rotor-baring system, helicopter blades and
              structures subjected to periodic loads. As an application to cardiac dynamics,
              a control system is designed to change an irregular heat beat to a desired
              periodic rhythm.


