Title       : Dividing Reason: Mathematics and Spirit in the World of Augustus and Sophia De
               Morgan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a0114474

Award Number: 0114474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan L. Richards   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
SES 0114474
Joan Richards, Brown University
Dividing Reason:
              Mathematics and Spirit in the World of Augustus and Sophia De Morgan


The
              principal investigator is preparing a paired intellectual biography of the
              early Victorian couple, Augustus and Sophia De Morgan.  An in-depth study that
              links the lives of Augustus and Sophia De Morgan will contribute to our
              understanding of the historical roots of modern secular society. Augustus
              taught mathematics at the secular University College in London; all of his
              prolific writings on mathematics and logic were motivated by his desire to
              establish a public world of reason that would transcend religious difference.
              The approach to truth that Sophia drew out of her experiences producing and
              raising their seven children was very different from those Augustus developed
              in his University classes. Whereas Augustus tried to capture truth through a
              purifying rational program, Sophia found it in empathetic listening. The
              contrast between the views of this husband and wife team reflects the deep
              structure of a secular world that mandated a strict separation between the
              private and public spheres; revisiting that world promises to shed light on the
              epistemological implications of the sharp distinctions between public and
              private on which many modern secular societies are built. 

NSF support
              supplements a  Guggenheim Fellowship, and covers research travel in England. 
              The investigator will examine materials in London, Oxford and Cambridge to
              supplement an already substantial knowledge of Augustus's work with research
              into Sophia.  Outcomes include a scholarly monograph and presentations to the
              History of Science Society.  

