Title       : Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
               (PGE): LCP: Middle School Students' REALM (Really Exploring and Learning
               Meteorology)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  2002  
File        : a0114882

Award Number: 0114882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $887322             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alejandro J. Gallard agallard@garnet.acns.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul H. Ruscher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mara Z. Hernandez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Meteorology Department and Science Education program of Florida State
              
University, in collaboration with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
              Administration 
(NOAA), will carry out a school-site meteorological project to
              be located in Miami/Dade 
County Public Schools. This new collaborative
              project is entitled Middle School 
Students' REALM (Really Exploring And
              Learning Meteorology). The project's foci 
are: (1) to expose more middle
              school girls to meteorological science content, (2) to 
develop a positive and
              supportive learning environment for participating girls and boys, 
(3) to
              provide on site technical assistance to participating science teachers for
              content 
implementation, and (4) to provide a vehicle for greater parent-girl
              participation in 
science activities. In order to maximize resources,
              available 
meteorology resources (weather stations) that are in
              demographically dispersed middle 
schools will be used. Involvement in this
              project will enhance girls' awareness of career opportunities 
for women in
              the field of science in general and meteorology in particular. This project
              
will also increase middle school girls' self-esteem and confidence in
              learning science 
concepts, which integrate the use of mathematics and
              technology. This project model 
aims to reduce the attrition in advanced level
              science, mathematics and technology 
coursework that typically occurs as girls
              move from middle school to high school, 
which carries over into higher
              education.
