Title       : Participant Support, Gordon Research Conference on Thin Film and Crystal Growth
               Mechanisms; Williamstown, MA; July 1-6, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a0114212

Award Number: 0114212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Cahill d-cahill@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A Gordon Research Conference on Thin Film and Crystal Growth Mechanisms will be
              held at Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts, July 1-6, 2001. The
              conference will cover liquid-phase crystal growth, vapor-phase crystal growth,
              thin film deposition, materials chemistry, and surface physics research. An aim
              of the conference is to develop strong interactions between these disciplines
              and emphasize how understanding of fundamental chemical and physical processes
              can be used to develop novel methods for the growth of nanostructures.
The
              program is organized around invited speakers, discussion leaders, a chair, and
              vice-chair; both contributed papers and posters are scheduled. Special efforts
              have been made to recruit a diverse group of participants, including foreign
              and American scientists, younger and older researchers, and industrial,
              national laboratory and academic researchers. Objectives are to stimulate
              communications among the broad community of researchers addressing crystal
              growth from a variety of disciplinary backgrounds--chemistry, physics,
              engineering and materials science, and to formulate and delineate critical
              research necessary to further basic understanding. 
The conference is expected
              to provide an effective forum for discussion of critical scientific issues in
              crystal growth. Topics include: Crystal Growth from Solution; Novel Assembly;
              Organic Thin Films; Fundamentals of Nucleation and Growth; Dynamics of
              Structure Evolution; and Nanoscale Metals and Silicides. Along with the
              opportunity to assess the field and future directions, it is expected that new
              ties will be established between universities, research institutions, and
              industry.
%%%
An evaluation of the progress and status of crystal growth
              research issues along with current assessments of the most important
              developments will be of significant value to the understanding and enhanced
              utilization of electronic materials in computing, data processing, and
              communications. 	 
***

