Title       : Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
               (PGE): Girls Online: GO Team!
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0114859

Award Number: 0114859
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562484             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Widener   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer A. Blitz  (Principal Investigator former)
              Rafael Rosa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chicago Acad of Sciences
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60601    /   -

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through funding provided by the National Science Foundation, the Nature Museum
              of the 
Chicago Academy of Sciences, in collaboration with El Valor and James
              Ward School 
will create Girls Online: GO Team! , an innovative after-school
              science and technology 
program that targets girls between the ages of eleven
              and thirteen living in 
underserved areas of Chicago. This pilot program will
              offer engaging science activities
and real-world applications to teachhands-on
              science and technology to approximately
450 girls over a three-year period.
              Each semester, between forty-five and ninety girls
 will join the GO Team! at
              locations in their own neighborhoods. Of the girls who excel 
in this
              after-school program, six will be selected every semester to return and team
              
teach with Academy staff to a new group of participating girls. As the girls
              grow in 
competency and skills, they can attend a more advanced GO Team! the
              following
 semester. The participating girls will attend weekly lab sessions
              taught by 
educators and scientists from the Academy, have fun with their
              families at a 
Kick -Off celebration and a Graduation Ceremony, learn about
              science and technology 
careers during a job shadow day with museum staff and
              outside professionals, and
learn how science and technology impact their
              everyday lives. Successful women 
mentors will function as teachers and role
              models to help build the girls' science 
knowledge, career choices, and
              self-esteem.

