Title       : The Role of Stretch-Activated Calcium Channels in the Regulation of Cell
               Movement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0114231

Award Number: 0114231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $443530             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juliet Lee jlee@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Cell movement is fundamental to many other important biological processes such
              as embryogenesis, tissue formation, wound healing and immune function. Aberrant
              cell movement is involved in immune dysfunction and the development of
              metastatic cancer. Current studies of cell movement continue to be fueled by
              the potential benefits of understanding such a fundamental process. Cell
              movement along a surface involves repeated cycles of protrusion at the cell
              front followed by retraction at the rear. This coordinated series of shape
              changes depends on the spatial and temporal regulation of different
              cytoskeletal functions. Recent investigations have provided increasingly
              detailed information about the molecular basis of cytoskeletal function.
              However, one important yet relatively unexplored area concerns how the
              production of mechanical force integrates various aspects of cytoskeletal
              function to produce movement.
A promising new approach to the problem of cell
              movement, to be used in this project, is the combined use of microscopic
              imaging techniques with force detection assays, to study the interrelationship
              between cytoskeletal behavior, force production and cell shape change during
              movement. Fish epidermal keratocytes are an excellent model system for this
              type of study because they can display a rapid mode of movement, while
              maintaining a simple, semicircular shape. In addition, these cells can exhibit
              a slower, less efficient
mode of movement that is common to many other cell
              types. The fact that the same molecular machinery can give rise to different
              modes of movement, in a single cell type, points to the importance of
              regulatory mechanisms in governing how cells move. Recently, stretch-activated
              calcium channels (SAC's) have been found to regulate keratocyte cell movement,
              by coordinating protrusion with retraction. Thus, when retraction of the rear
              is impeded, cytoskeletal tension increases leading to the activation of SAC's.
              This triggers a transient increase in intracellular calcium concentration
              ([Ca2+]i) which induces retraction of the cell rear. Thus, SAC's provide a
              mechano-chemical feedback mechanism that coordinates protrusion with retraction
              and which is essential for continued cell movement.
The main goal of this
              project is to investigate different aspects of SAC meditated regulation of cell
              movement. The first aim will examine which molecular mechanisms are involved in
              triggering retraction of the cell rear, following activation of SAC's.
              
Selective inhibitors of each mechanism will be used to see which is effective
              in blocking retraction, while simultaneously monitoring [Ca2+]i, force
              production, adhesion morphology and cell shape. The second aim will investigate
              the process of force transduction via SAC's, by using a force assay together
              with calcium imaging, to quantify the relationship between force production and
              activation of SAC's. The third aim will
determine how adhesion strength
              influences the SAC mediated regulation of cell movement, by observing the
              effects of transfecting keratocytes with mutant adhesion receptors.
The
              ability to simultaneously monitor changes in cellular force production, [Ca2+]i
              and cell shape change, in response to defined physical and biochemical
              perturbations is particularly useful for studying how cell movement arises from
              the physical integration of molecular mechanisms. The proposed work is expected
              to form the basis of a new experimental and conceptual approach to the study of
              cell movement that can be used to study additional mechano-chemical signaling
              mechanisms both in keratocytes and other cell types.

