Title       : Workshop on Advanced Methods of Mapping Surficial Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a0114135

Award Number: 0114135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61147              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Bloomquist dave@ce.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Carter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramesh L. Shrestha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This workshop will bring together leading academic practitioners of Airborne
              Laser Swath Mapping (ALSM, LIDAR), Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR), Airborne
              Digital Imaging (ADI), Infrared (IR), and Hyperspectral Imaging (HI) with a
              cross section of both the engineering and scientific communities.  The intent
              is to provide a forum to discuss how best to incorporate data collected by
              these powerful techniques into the monitoring and study of geo-surficial
              processes.  The overall objective of the workshop is to increase the awareness
              of the potential uses of these advanced technologies and to obtain from the
              engineering and scientific communities research needs and activities that could
              benefit from their usage, both short and long term.

The workshop will take
              place over two and one half days.  The first two days will contain a half-day
              each on ALSM technology, and a half-day on a mix of the complementary
              technologies, including SAR, ADI, IR and HI.  Each of these sessions will open
              with invited papers to provide the participants a state-of-the-art update on
              each specific technology.  The second day will begin with a session on current
              applications, new applications expected to emerge in the immediate future and
              the research needs of the engineering and scientific communities.  After the
              invited summary papers, there will be panel led discussions to maximize the
              exchange of information between the particular experts and researchers that
              have ongoing projects utilizing these innovative technologies, as well as those
              considering the use of them in current or future research.

In addition to
              the invited oral presentations, participants will be invited to submit poster
              presentations that will be on display for the attendees to view and discuss
              during breaks in the formal sessions.  The UF/FIU ALSM aircraft will be
              available for viewing by the participants. 

The morning of the third day
              will be devoted to an open session with the Steering Committee serving as a
              panel to outline the final draft report and discuss the preliminary findings
              and recommendations to be included in that report.  All participants will have
              the opportunity to provide input, and members of the Committee will be asked to
              draft specific sections of the final report to meet a schedule agreed to by the
              Committee. 
  

