Title       : LSAMP: Puerto Rico-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, Phase III:
               Constructing Permanent Pathways to Graduate Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0114586

Award Number: 0114586
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2580000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel Gomez m_gomez@upr1.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ana C. Pinero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9133,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Puerto Rico Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (PR-LSAMP) is
              an 
alliance of the Resource Center for Science and Engineering of the
              University of Puerto 
Rico, the University of Puerto Rico System, the Inter
              American University System, 
Pontifical Catholic University of Puerto Rico,
              and Polytechnic University of Puerto Rico.
During the academic year 1999-00,
              these institutions had a SMET enrollment of 27,441,
or 90% of the SMET
              undergraduate population on the Island. Ninety-nine percent of the 
student
              population is Hispanic and 80% are low-income students. The goal of
              the
PR-LSAMP is to increase the quantity and quality of minority college
              students who 
successfully complete a BS/BE degree and enter and complete a
              graduate degree in
a SMET field. During Phase I and II (1991-92 to 1999-00),
              PR-LSAMP institutions
awarded 21,878 BS degrees in SMET, with a 62% annual
              increment from baseline year,
from 1,709 annual degrees in 1991 to 2,771 in
              1999-2000. This was achieved
following a two-prong approach: (1) increasing
              enrollment in SMET disciplines, and
(2) improving retention and graduation
              rates by implementing a series of strategies 
to improve the effectiveness and
              efficiency of SMET programs. In Phase III, PR-LSAMP
will build upon these
              achievements to: (1) further increase the SMET production curve 
from 2,771 to
              3,600, which more than doubles the Phase I baseline figure of 1,709; 
(2)
              increase to 50% the percent of BS SMET graduates from UPR institutions who
              enter
graduate school, and to 25% for those graduating from the private
              institutions, and (3) 
increase the number of BS graduates from PR-LSAMP
              institutions that complete a PhD
degree in SMET, either locally or nationally,
              from 239 to 300 by the end of year 5.

During Phase I and Phase II the core
              of PR-LSAMP was the revision of the SMET
curriculum to emphasize for depth of
              understanding with a "less is more approach",
to promote active learning based
              on inquiry and the use of interactive demonstrations, 
to incorporate
              technology to the learning process, and the development of broad-based
              
mathematics skills. Teaching strategies such as cooperative learning and
              the
development of Study/Learning Skills within the Context of a Course were
              also
implemented across SMET disciplines. Jointly with this curriculum
              revision,
PR-LSAMP offered undergraduate SMET students mentoring and research
              opportunities
to increase their motivation to remain in SMET careers and
              enhance their qualification
for pursuing graduate studies. During Phase I and
              II a total of 2,363 research stipends 
were awarded, for an average of 262
              stipends per year. As a result of these sustained
efforts, the Index of Course
              Efficiency (the average number of times students have to 
take a SMET course
              to satisfactorily pass it), was reduced from an average of 2.5 to 
1.7. The
              average graduation rate at UPR institutions increased from 48% to 62% in
              
science, while the average graduation rate for engineering at UPR increased
              from
 53% to 81%. At private institutions the average graduation rate
              increased to 49%.
Also the weighted average for satisfactory grades in science
              and mathematics 
courses increased from 47.5% to 59.3%. In the case of
              Engineering courses, 
the weighted average increased from 74% to 83%.

For
              Phase III PR-LSAMP proposes the following additional strategies to
              complete
the construction of permanent pathways to graduate studies in SMET:
              1) the
development of interactive web-based learning to master hard to teach
              concepts in 
science and mathematics; (2) the development of electronic
              modules to expand the
interdisciplinary capabilities of undergraduate SMET
              students to further enhance
their preparation for graduate studies; 3) the
              scaling-up of the teaching/learning 
strategies that have proven successful in
              improving student performance in
SMET courses, through ongoing academic and
              technical assistance to faculty and 
an Annual Best Practices Conference; and
              4) the development of Information Technology 
skills in SMET students so they
              are capable of making effective and more critical use of
accurate and valid
              information in their professional lives. To increase the number of
students
              pursuing undergraduate degrees in SMET, PR-LSAMP will develop a Pre-College
to
              College Bridging Component that will induct students into research experiences,
              and 
to further enhance the number of students entering graduate school and
              completing a 
PhD in SMET, PR-LSAMP will expand its research and mentoring
              program to
provide a larger number of students with key skills and guidance to
              improve their 
preparation and motivation for graduate studies, in
              coordination with the Alliance
for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
              (AGEP) Program. The results of the
project will be disseminated widely in the
              professional community through presentations
at regional and national
              scientific meetings. Curricular materials developed
will be available to other
              institutions through CD format and the WWW. The general
public will have
              access to updated information on the PR-LSAMP through its website.
