Title       : SGER: Evaluation and Modeling of Interlayer Forces in Montmorillonite For
               Development of a Particulate Based Model for Swelling Clays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a0114622

Award Number: 0114622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41313              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dinesh R. Katti Dinesh.Katti@Ndsu.Nodak.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kalpana S. Katti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The understanding, modeling and prediction of interaction of clays with water
              and other environmental fluids is an important issue in the field of
              geotechnical engineering, geoenvironmental engineering as well as industrial
              applications such as muds for oil well drilling and water treatment. The
              swelling response of saturated montmorillonite and the corresponding
              development of swelling pressure when swelling is restrained is the result of
              fairly complex interactions a) within the interlayers of the clay particle and
              b) the interactions between the particles.  The recent advances in
              experimental, analytical and computational mechanics areas will allow the PIs
              to model and simulate these complex interactions and allow for prediction of
              the swelling response using Discrete Element Method (DEM).  The PIs plan to
              consider both the interlayer and interparticle interactions.  The interlayer
              interactions will include silica-water interactions including hydrogen bonding
              at silica-water interface and the hydrogen bonding between water molecules in
              the interlayers.

This focus of this work is to understand and model the
              significant interlayer forces in montmorillonite clay during hydration and
              swelling to provide a foundation for the development of particulate based
              models for swelling clays.  A combination of analytical characterization
              techniques [Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), X-ray diffraction
              and scanning electron microscopy (SEM)] and analytical description of forces
              from classical physics will be used for implementation into DEM. 





