Title       : Spatial Representation and Modeling in Natural Resource Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0114362

Award Number: 0114362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130009             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan T. Murray murray.308@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A goal of natural resource management is to balance multiple uses of forest
              lands.  One aspect has been production oriented, and is concerned with where
              and when timber extraction takes place.  This is commonly a component of the
              harvest scheduling process.  Another aspect of natural resource management
              involves the protection of species and habitat through a process known as
              nature reserve design.  Both timber harvesting and resource conservation are
              integral components of public and private forest usage and planning, but do not
              necessarily occur in a coordinated fashion.  One area of study will be a
              comparative evaluation of harvest scheduling optimization models for limiting
              spatial activity.  The dominant feature of current approaches is the need to
              limit or restrict the local extent of harvest activity.  One approach assumes
              that spatial units are of sufficient size to require explicit stipulations
              regarding what may take place in neighboring units.  The alternative approach
              recognizes that spatial units may in fact be relatively small in relation to
              maximum disturbance restrictions.  The differences between these two approaches
              are associated with how spatial impacts are limited mathematically.  This
              project will investigate differences between these two approaches, particularly
              with respect to spatial scale and unit definition.  The research will utilize
              data for two study areas: Buttercreek watershed in California and Forestal
              Millalemu in Chile.  Exact and heuristic solution development for harvest
              scheduling will be examined.  An important theoretical aim is to evaluate
              whether spatial inconsistencies exist between the two approaches.  Finally, the
              project will integrate spatial optimization techniques with geographic
              information systems (GIS) to find solutions that address both harvesting
              production and nature preserve design. 

The development of exact and
              heuristic solution techniques based on different spatial unit constraints will
              contribute to the optimization literature as well as the issues of scale and
              unit definition in geographic information science research.  Establishing
              reserves is an important component of natural resource management.  The
              integrated modeling approaches developed in this research, which combine issues
              of production (harvest scheduling) and conservation (nature reserve design)
              using multi-objective optimization methods, enable conflicts to be resolved in
              a coordinated fashion.  Such integration utilizing GIS techniques and
              functionality is expected to contribute significantly to planning and policy
              evaluation directed at sustainable forest management practices.


