Title       : Acquisition of an Optic Image Furnace for Ferroic Materials Research and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0114214

Award Number: 0114214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruyan Guo ryguo@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program supports Penn
              State University with the purchase a state-of-the-art optical image furnace for
              the growth of up to 10 mm diameter single crystals for the study of oxide
              ferroic and dielectric materials. The need for the capability to grow highly
              uniform and sufficient size single crystals is stemmed from the necessity to
              separate and understand the mechanisms in the mixed valence solid solution and
              often refractory ferroic crystal systems. The equipment is a NEC double lamp
              elliptical mirror cavity image furnace is particularly suited to the study of
              bulk single crystal samples. The ongoing NSF supported research program carried
              out by this PI, as well as several current NSF, DARPA, ONR sponsored programs
              would benefit strongly from the proposed equipment. Future research areas
              particularly the meta-materials, microwave field agile dielectric materials,
              electrooptic and acoustooptic materials are closely aligned with the proposed
              capabilities. The equipment will provide invaluable enhancement of available
              processing and analysis resource at the Materials Research Laboratory, at Penn
              State. Both graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will obtain training and
              carry out funded research using the proposed facility. Laboratory intensive
              senior/graduate level course on Science and Technology of Crystal Growth,
              currently being developed, will get invaluable enhancement from this proposed
              addition. Undergraduates and graduates and minority will be trained with the
              handling of this state-of-the-art crystal growth facility. The award is
              leveraged by Enthusiasm 30% cost sharing from Penn State. 

This award from
              the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program supports Penn State
              University with the purchase a state-of-the-art optical image furnace for the
              growth of up to 10 mm diameter single crystals for the study of oxide ferroic
              and dielectric materials. The equipment is a NEC double lamp elliptical mirror
              cavity image furnace is particularly suited to the study of bulk single crystal
              samples. The ongoing NSF supported research program carried out by this PI, as
              well as several current NSF, DARPA, ONR sponsored programs would benefit
              strongly from the proposed equipment. Future research areas particularly the
              meta-materials, microwave field agile dielectric materials, electrooptic and
              acoustooptic materials are closely aligned with the proposed capabilities. The
              equipment will provide invaluable enhancement of available processing and
              analysis resource at the Materials Research Laboratory, at Penn State. Both
              graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will obtain training and carry out
              funded research using the proposed facility. Laboratory intensive
              senior/graduate level course on Science and Technology of Crystal Growth,
              currently being developed, will get invaluable enhancement from this proposed
              addition. Undergraduates and graduates and minority will be trained with the
              handling of this state-of-the-art crystal growth facility. The award is
              leveraged by Enthusiasm 30% cost sharing from Penn State.

