Title       : Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
               (PGE): Dis: Science, Gender and After School: Creating a Research/Action Agenda
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0114741

Award Number: 0114741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100249             (Estimated)
Investigator: Merle Froschl mfroschl@aed.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Sprung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Educational Equity Con
	      100 Fifth Avenue
	      New York, NY  10011    212/367-4598

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
              (PGE): Dis: Science, Gender and After School: Creating a Research/Action
              Agenda

Educational Equity Concepts, Inc. (EEC), in collaboration with the
              Directorate for 
Human Resources and Education at the American Association for
              the Advancement
of Science (AAAS), and the Academy for Educational Development
              (AED) requests 
$100,000 over 18 months from the National Science Foundation
              Program for Gender
Equity for a dissemination project to create a
              research/action agenda around SMET
programming for girls in the informal,
              out-of-school learning arena. The overall 
goal of the project is to use
              after-school programming as a vehicle to both engage 
and sustain girls=
              interest in pursuing education and careers in SMET. Specific 
objectives are
              to: (1) bring together a multi-disciplinary group of researchers and
              
practitioners in a working conference setting; (2) develop a research/action
              agenda; 
(3) develop an action plan to carry out the agenda; and (4)
              disseminate the
conference proceedings to researchers, practitioners, gender
              equity activists, 
policy-makers, and funders who are involved in informal and
              SMET education. 
Research focusing on girls at this juncture is critical
              because although there are 
a growing number of SMET programs, we do not know
              which programs are effective
and which are not, especially with regard to
              engaging and supporting girls interest in 
SMET. 

The out-of-school
              learning arena encompasses community and school-based after-
school programs;
              summer camp and Saturday/weekend programs; museum programs; 
programs at
              community technology centers; college/university science programs; 
on-line
              science clubs and competitions; and programs offered by
              girl-specific
organizations. After-school as an educational field (rather than
              child-minding
or purely recreational) is both new and growing. Moreover, we
              are moving rapidly 
toward a technology-based economy where women are an
              increasing part of the
workforce. This conference will take advantage of a
              ground floor opportunity 
to create a research/action agenda and inform the
              development of SMET programs
that are free of gender and other forms of
              bias--race, ethnicity and disability 
that have traditionally contributed to
              educational inequality. 

The agenda created at the conference will be
              distributed to a broad audience of 
researchers, practitioners, gender equity
              activists, policy-makers, and funders. 
In doing so, the conference will
              extend awareness and information about the 
participation of girls and women
              in SMET education; catalyze new thinking on
the subject; and serve as a
              springboard for research and action. Dissemination
will take place via
              journals, publications, web sites, listservs, and professional 
association
              conferences. 



 

