Title       : SDEST: Toward A Better Theory of Public Participation in Environmental
               Decision-Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0114784

Award Number: 0114784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143904             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth Tuler SPTuler@crocker.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Webler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Social/Env Rsch Inst
	      474 Norton Rd
	      East Otis, MA  010290020    /   -

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research proposes to advance theoretical understanding of public
              participation in decision-making about environmental and risk policies that are
              contentious and non-routine. Theories on public participation have emerged out
              of management sciences, decision theory, political science, philosophy,
              communication studies, and small group psychology. A recent National Research
              Council committee report on risk characterization advanced the idea of public
              participation as an iterative, non-linear combination of analysis and
              deliberation. However, despite these theoretical developments and wise
              practitioner reflections, there is little systematic research on public
              participation processes. What is needed is theory that captures the full
              breadth of principles that are important to understanding public participation
              and integrates insights from these different disciplines and different units of
              analysis. One key assumption of this project is that research must also tap the
              knowledge of people who actually take part in public participation processes.
              Theory of public participation also needs to understand how the historical and
              social context or the characteristics of the people involved can influence
              performance. The same participation model (e.g. citizen juries) may not yield
              the same outcomes in two different social settings. Certain handbooks for
              practitioners give hints as to what context features planners should pay
              attention to, but there is no theory that adequately explains how context
              matters. This research undertakes a systematic comparison of public
              participation processes in three different policy issue arenas: forest
              policy-making, watershed planning, and radiation health effects protection. For
              each arena researchers will inquire into participants' ideas of what matters in
              a public participation process. By selecting individuals with vastly different
              points of view about the process, they will gather a wide breath of principles
              that theory of public participation should incorporate. To make sense of these
              different points of view, they will use a combination of in-depth interview
              methods and Q methodology. Q methodology is a way of revealing the presence of
              pre-existing social discourses about a topic. The researchers will also conduct
              a second order Q analysis across the case studies to explore whether there are
              stable discourses about good public participation process that are independent
              of characteristics of the policy venue. The analysis will involve comparing
              results within and between policy arenas. The interviews will be used primarily
              to explore the relationships between contextual features of a policy issue,
              personal characteristics, and beliefs about good process. Results will enable
              progress on theory of public participation and generation of hypotheses for
              future research. Such theory will be useful to planners and organizers of
              public participation processes and can thereby lead to improved decisions about
              environmental and risk issues.
