Title       : Determinants of Demographic Choice and Intergenerational Transfers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0114147

Award Number: 0114147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244321             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele Boldrin mboldrin@atlas.socsci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This research project consists of two, related but independent parts: (1)
              Modeling demographic evolution; (2) Evaluating the intergenerational aspects of
              the Welfare State. The issues addressed are of great social relevance. We are
              debating the implications of demographic changes and population aging for our
              society; at the same time we are considering the opportunity of reforming our
              social security, public health and public education systems. The two research
              projects are meant to study and quantify fundamental economic factors behind
              the working of such systems. The first project should improve our understanding
              of the long-run interactions between public health, fertility decisions,
              population growth and capital accumulation. It aims at building a quantitative
              model for evaluating the impact of improvements in life expectancy at various
              ages on fertility and saving choices. Key aspects of this research are the
              explicit links established between: (i) improvements in health, (ii)
              availability of public pensions and other forms of retirement savings, (iii)
              internal family structure, on the one hand, and the dynamics of fertility and
              capital accumulation, on the other. The second portion of this research project
              aims at providing tools and criteria useful for evaluating the welfare value of
              pay-as-you-go pension systems and their (often underestimated) connection with
              the provision of public education and health. This project shows that a good
              pay-as-you-go pension system should link pension payments to past investment in
              the human capital of young generations and not, as it is currently done, to
              previous social security contributions. Redesigning the intergenerational
              welfare state along these lines, not only makes the pension system immune from
              demographic shocks but also foster economic growth by increasing human capital
              accumulation and reducing labor supply distortions. A key goal of this project
              is to deliver a quantitative appraisal of such effects for the USA and other
              OECD countries. From a more general policy perspective, this investigation
              should provide new tools for designing the intergenerational features of the
              welfare state and for furthering the use of Generational Accounting methods in
              evaluating it. 


