Title       : IGERT: Regional Resilience and Adaptation: Planning for Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0114423

Award Number: 0114423
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2662100            (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Stuart Chapin terry.chapin@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rosamond L. Naylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. David McGuire  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joshua A. Greenburg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Caulfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This IGERT award is for an interdisciplinary graduate-training program in
              regional resilience and adaptation (RR&A).  One of the major challenges facing
              humanity is to sustain the desirable features of Earth's ecosystems and society
              at a time of rapid changes in all of the major forces that shape the structure
              and functioning of ecosystems and society.  The RR&A program seeks to train
              Ph.D.-level scholars, policy-makers, and managers to address these questions in
              an integrated fashion.  The program integrates the tools and approaches of
              ecology, economics, anthropology, climate dynamics, and philosophy in a systems
              framework to understand the functioning of regional systems.  It emphasize
              high-latitude ecosystems, where current management issues require an
              application of the integrated understanding of these disciplines.  This
              graduate-training program will train a new generation of scientists to
              integrate the perspectives of natural and social sciences in addressing both
              the basic understanding of regional systems and the application of this
              understanding to management issues.  The goal is to train scientists that are
              well-grounded in one or more disciplines but have an understanding and research
              experience in a range of natural and social sciences.  The program will provide
              training to graduate students from the University of Alaska and students
              enrolled in other universities.  It provides course work and a seminar program
              that integrates ecology, economics, and anthropology in a systems-modeling
              framework and provides faculty mentorship and internships in areas outside of
              each student's parent discipline.  The program emphasizes cross-cultural
              communication through heavy involvement with the Alaskan Native American
              community and with managers, businesses, and conservation groups.

IGERT is
              an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D.
              scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
              technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
              the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
              education by establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and
              training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
              traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards
              are being made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span
              all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of
              this specific award reside in the Office of Polar Programs and the Directorates
              for Geosciences; Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences; and Education and
              Human Resources.

