Title       : A Hybrid Systems View of Inverse Problems in Power System Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a0114725

Award Number: 0114725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300186             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian A. Hiskens   (Principal Investigator current)
              M. A. Pai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Liberzon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0114725
Hiskens

Interactions between continuous dynamics and discrete events
              are an intrinsic part of power system dynamic behavior.  Physical devices such
              as generators exhibit continuous dynamics.  On the other hand, event-driven
              discrete behavior is normally associated with rule-based components. Examples
              include protection devices and market-dispatch rules. Analysis should
              accurately capture those interactions. This project will attempt to develop a
              unified hybrid systems approach to managing power systems.

The project will
              make novel contributions in three fundamental areas:  modeling, analysis and
              algorithms.  Earlier work has shown that many hybrid systems can be modeled by
              a differential-algebraic (DAE) structure that incorporates impulsive action and
              switching within the algebraic constraints.  This representation will be used
              as the basis for exploring model structures that best satisfy the competing
              requirements of generality, utility and computational efficiency.  To analyze
              the behavior of switched DAE systems, stability results for (non-switched) DAEs
              will be combined with existing stability analysis tools for switched ODEs. 
              Lyapunov stability theory underlies this analysis.  Algorithms will be
              developed to address parameter uncertainty, parameter estimation,
              border-collision bifurcations, critically stable trajectories, boundary value
              problems, optimal control, switching and issues of uniqueness in forwards and
              reverse time. 

