Title       : Collaborative Research: Contests: Experimental Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a0114138

Award Number: 0114138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77339              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amnon Rapoport amnon@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              R&D competitions, election campaigns, litigation, sport competitions, and
              all-pay auctions all have a common theme. In these situations individual agents
              or groups of agents compete with one another by expending limited resources in
              an attempt to win an exogenously determined prize. Contributions to the
              theoretical literature on such contests come from economics, political science,
              organizational theory, marketing, and strategic management. 
	In contrast to
              the rapidly growing body of theoretical literature, there have been very few
              empirical studies designed to test the implications of the various models. We
              propose extending the theoretical literature as well as experimentally testing
              the implications of our models. Six experiments are proposed. Two experiments
              on multi-player contests extend our previous investigation to n (n>2) firms
              competing in the development of a new technology product. Both the cases of
              symmetric and asymmetric firms are examined. Two additional experiments on
              multi-level contests extend the investigation to situations that allow
              simultaneously for within-group conflicts and between-group competitions. These
              situations occur frequently in inter-organizational conflicts that elicit free
              riding within the competing groups. We propose to investigate the effects of
              different rules for sharing the prize on the level of individual contribution,
              and the effects of unequal group sizes. The final two experiments on
              multi-stage contests extend the investigation in yet another direction to
              within-group competitions with shortlisting in which the number of contestants
              decreases from stage to stage (e.g., NBA championship).
	Our research program
              is mostly driven by the game theoretic solution concepts of Nash equilibrium
              and subgame perfect equilibrium. The insights gained from analyzing the
              behavioral patterns uncovered in the proposed experiments should help in 1)
              assessing the descriptive power of these solution concepts, 2) stimulating new
              theoretical and experimental research, and 3) applying the findings to the
              design of optimal contests. 

