Title       : Program for Gender Equity in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
               (PGE): DEM:Women on the Prairie: Bringing Girls into Science through
               Environmental Stewardship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0114723

Award Number: 0114723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $875343             (Estimated)
Investigator: Beth A. Montelone bethmont@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth A. Dyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne E. Franks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dolores J. Takemoto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacqueline D. Spears  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This demonstration project, a collaborative network of faculty, public school
              teachers
and counselors, and professionals in both private sector/non-profit
              organizations will
deliver and evaluate activities designed to bolster and
              reinforce the interest of 
middle-school girls in SMET disciplines and
              careers. These activities are based on 
research showing that access to role
              models, career information, and hands-on
activities have beneficial effects. A
              hands-on summer workshop, industrial site 
tours, classroom activities, visits
              with women scientists and engineers, activities
developed in conjunction with
              commercial and service organizations, and a web site
characterize the
              intervention for the 6th and 7th grade girls who participate. 
Furthermore, in
              response to research showing that professional development for
teachers,
              interactions between teachers and scientists, and implementation of 
methods
              to address diversity and gender equity issues are of paramount importance
in
              creating more gender equitable classrooms, middle-school and high-school
              teacher
in science and mathematics will be invited to partner with University
              faculty in 
developing the summer workshop activities. In addition, they will
              be invited to 
participate in a graduate-level course on gender equity in
              science and mathematics 
education and conduct action research projects that
              can be shared within the 
collaborative network. Finally, packets with
              information on both various SMET 
careers and on women who are currently
              employed in these fields, will be 
distributed to school counselors, the
              parents of girls in Girl Scout troops, and 
the parents of those girls who
              participate in the project activities. Summative 
evaluation will focus on the
              comparison of SMET course-taking patterns and course
grades of participants in
              the project activities compared to a matched sample of 
girls who did not
              participate.
