Title       : Regulation of BMP-4/Smad1 Signals by MAP Kinase During Xenopus Neural
               Specification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0114476

Award Number: 0114476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy K. Sater asater@jetson.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0114476
Sater

The proposed work addresses the cellular mechanisms underlying
              neural specification in Xenopus.   Neural fate is inhibited by BMP-4, and
              induction of anterior neural ectoderm is initiated by extracellular BMP-4
              antagonists such as noggin and chordin.  FGF has been implicated in the
              initiation of neural development;  current findings indicate that the FGF
              effector MAP kinase is necessary for neural specification.   The inhibitory
              effects of BMP-4 are mediated by transcriptional repression:  expression of key
              neural-specific genes is initiated prior to gastrulation and later inhibited in
              non-neural ectoderm by BMP-4.  The recent finding that MAP kinase can inhibit
              Smad1 in mammalian cells suggests that MAP kinase may antagonize BMP-4/Smad1
              signals during neural specification in vivo.  The proposed work tests this
              hypothesis, and examines the functional significance of these interactions. 
              The studies in Aim I will determine whether transcriptional regulation via
              endogenous Smad1 is affected by alterations in MAPK activity. The studies in
              Aim II will use overexpression of Smad1 proteins carrying mutations at MAPK
              sites that prevent inhibitory phosphorylation.  These studies will determine
              whether inhibitory phosphorylation of MAPK sites in Smad1 participates in
              neural specification and patterning.  They will also address the hypothesis
              that inhibition of Smad1 is necessary for posterior neural specification.  The
              studies in Aim III will determine whether antagonistic interactions between the
              FGF/MAPK and BMP-4 pathways can affect boundaries of gene expression within
              gastrula ectoderm.  These studies will examine the spatial patterns of
              activation of these pathways, and of Smad1-dependent gene expression, in
              ectoderm exposed to localized sources of FGF and/or BMP-4. This investigation
              will compare the pattern of Smad1-dependent transcription in ectoderm
              overexpressing WT-Smad1 with that of ectoderm expressing a mutant Smad1
              impervious to MAPK.  The comparison will show whether antagonistic interactions
              contribute to the establishment of spatial boundaries.  
Preliminary findings
              indicate that MAPK and BMP-4 signals are mutually antagonistic in Xenopus
              ectoderm:  mutations in Smad1 that prevent inhibtion by MAP kinase act
              collectively as a gain-of-function mutation, while BMP-4 inhibits MAP kinase
              activity via a TAK1-dependent pathway.  Since BMPs and FGFs have opposing
              effects in many developmental processes, analysis of the interactions between
              these pathways may elucidate a key cellular mechanism of developmental
              regulation.

