Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Infant Event Representations and Verb Argument
               Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0114277

Award Number: 0114277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Perfetti perfetti+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Ms. Scherff and her advisor Dr.
              Perfetti will conduct a year long investigation of the possibility that
              prelinguistic infants identify the same kinds of structures in observed events
              that languages identify with verb argument structure.  The verb argument
              structure is a highly constrained format for describing events in language. 
              Infants' ability to map events in the world onto concepts such as "give" and
              "hug" raises questions about both the structure of language and of event
              perception.  As adults, we implicitly identify discrete events from a scene of
              complex and even ambiguous interactions among objects.  Further, we verbally
              characterize these events in remarkably consistent ways, relating our cognitive
              representations of events to our linguistic representations of events.  The
              difficulty in this process is that while the world of conceivable events may be
              fairly unconstrained, language itself is a highly constrained format for
              representing events.  How then, do infants acquiring language learn to map the
              less constrained world onto highly constrained linguistic structures? Scherff
              and Perfetti will investigate infant event perception and the acquisition of
              verb argument structure in preverbal infants (10-12 months) and infants just
              beginning to produce word combinations (18-20 months).  Their project focuses
              on whether infants' conceptually categorize events based on the number of
              obligatory participants, an operation that might be critical for acquiring
              verbs with different argument structure.  Using methods sensitive to a child's
              perception of novel events, Scherff and Perfetti will examine how infants'
              knowledge of event structures correspond to linguistic argument structures.
              They will also examine the underlying contributions of perceptual and cognitive
              mechanisms to infants' event representations and how language acquisition
              impacts infant event knowledge.  By recording electrical potentials at the
              scalp, the investigators gain a rough idea of where in the infant brain
              perceived events structures are represented.

This combination of
              methodologies and research questions can uniquely inform our understanding of
              how infants form bridges between their cognitive representations of events and
              the language acquisition process.  This work will increase knowledge about how
              the cognitive and language functions of humans develop in the very early stages
              of life. 

