Title       : Effects of Noise on the Electrosensory System of Mormyrid Electric Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0114558

Award Number: 0114558
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd K. Leen tleen@cse.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick D. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1185,9107,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 The brain handles a continuous temporal flow of sensory information, but
              there also is noise in the physiological signal that affects the uncertainty in
              information processing.  At the microscopic level of the synapses, which are
              the functional contacts between nerve cells (neurons), the relevant signals are
              the small variable electrophysiological events called synaptic potentials. 
              When learning occurs, there is a change in the relative weighted value of these
              synaptic potentials, for how strongly they influence the targeted neurons to
              fire and ultimately to drive a particular behavior.  At the more macroscopic
              level of a functional region of the brain, there are systems properties of the
              response to large numbers of cellular inputs.  The system needs to optimize the
              trade-off between accuracy, which may take some time to establish, and
              adaptability, which often requires rapid adjustment to changes in the sensory
              environment.  This collaborative project combines a neural network approach
              with computational biology and experimental neurophysiology, to test a
              statistical model on rules of adaptive learning.  Experiments involve a species
              of weakly electric fish, which produces a pulsed electrical field around
              itself.  Objects in the water distort the field, and the lateral-line sensors
              on the body detect these distortions.  Neurons in the electrosensory
              lateral-line lobe (ELL) in their brain receive signals from the lateral line
              sensors, and also receive signals temporally locked to the motor command for
              the electric pulses.  Responses of cells in the ELL adapt to changing
              electrosensory conditions, and this adaptability allows these neurons to
              'store' an image of the fish's expectation of the electrosensory field.  It is
              not clear whether the adaptive learning seen at the cellular level can explain
              collective neural activity in the brain of the behaving fish.  This project
              involves a novel aspect of modeling emphasizing statistical properties of the
              synaptic system in the presence of noise, and making testable predictions about
              how noise can affect the accuracy of the fish's stored expectation of the
              signal.
   Results of this project will clarify how synaptic learning rates
              and signal processing interact, and how the effects of noise are handled by the
              system.  The impact will extend beyond electrosensory processing and
              computational neuroscience to studies of learning and of how cerebellar-like
              brain structures function, and there is highly cross-disciplinary training
              involved.


