Title       : The Blue Crab Exoskeleton - A Model System for Studying the Control of
               Biomineralization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a0114597

Award Number: 0114597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312873             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Roer roer@uncwil.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Shafer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Dillaman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. McCartney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mineralized skeletons, whether they are bones, teeth, mollusc shells or
              crustacean exoskeletons, are all comprised of two structural components: an
              organic matrix and the minerals that impregnate it.  The organic matrix is a
              complex mixture of proteins and carbohydrates; sometimes the proteins have
              carbohydrates attached to them and are referred to as glycoproteins,
              proteoglycans or mucins.  The minerals may be crystalline forms of calcium
              phosphate, like the hydroxyapatite of bones and teeth, or calcium carbonate,
              like the calcite of crab exoskeletons.  One of the central and most basic
              questions in the field of skeleton formation (biomineralization) is which of
              the complex of matrix molecules are the ones that actually control the
              initiation of skeletal hardening and control the location and form of the
              mineral.  This project utilizes the blue crab as a model for the control of
              biomineralization.  Because crabs molt in order to grow, they provide an ideal
              system in which to study the biological control of mineralization and the
              interaction between the organic and mineral components of the skeleton.
	The
              outer two layers (epi- and exocuticle) of the new exoskeleton of the carapace
              of the crab are deposited beneath the old exoskeleton in preparation for the
              molt (premolt). They must remain unmineralized until after the crab emerges and
              expands.  Subsequently (postmolt), the inner and thickest layer of the
              exoskeleton (endocuticle) is deposited and mineralized.  The same temporal
              sequence occurs in the exoskeleton covering the joints (arthrodial membrane),
              but it never mineralizes in order to remain flexible.  A number of biochemical
              changes that occur in the epi- and exocuticle of the carapace exoskeleton that
              coincide with their postmolt mineralization were previously catalogued by our
              laboratory.  To determine if these changes are really important to this
              process, the arthrodial membrane will be similarly analyzed during the same
              time period.  The same biochemical changes should not occur in the arthrodial
              membrane if, in fact, they are associated with the initiation of
              mineralization.
	A new approach to be taken in this grant is to compare the
              proteins that are manufactured by the tissue that makes the mineralized cuticle
              to those proteins that are manufactured by the non-mineralizing arthrodial
              membrane.  In this way, it can definitively be determined which proteins are
              the ones that are involved in mineralization.  With the modern molecular
              biological tools now available, the most efficient way to see what proteins are
              being made by a tissue is to extract the genetic blueprint for the proteins in
              the form of the messenger RNAs (mRNA).  The plan is to extract the mRNA from
              the tissues of premolt crabs that are making proteins of the new epi- and
              exocuticle. This will be done for the tissues underlying both the  mineralizing
              carapace exoskeleton and the non-mineralizing arthrodial membrane. The mRNA
              will be extracted from the same tissues of postmolt crabs when they are
              synthesizing the endocuticle.  The mRNAs will be compared using a technique
              termed differential display of expression.  In essence, this technique allows
              the identification of those pieces of mRNA that are found in the carapace
              tissue but not in the arthrodial membrane tissue. The ones that are identified
              from premolt tissue are the likely candidates for the messages for the proteins
              that are intimately involved in the mineralization process of epi- and
              exocuticle.  Those that are identified from postmolt tissue will similarly be
              involved in endocuticle mineralization.  A large part, if not the entire
              sequence, of the message can be reconstructed and these candidate proteins can
              be synthesized. Antibodies to these proteins will be made, which, when labeled,
              will allow the microscopic localization of these proteins spatially and
              temporally within the exoskeleton and the comparison of their presence to the
              sites of initial mineralization.
	To date, no one has firmly identified all of
              the components of an organic matrix that are actually responsible for
              initiating and controlling mineralization.  The crustacean exoskeleton affords
              a unique system in which this can be accomplished and will provide basic
              information that can be applied to other mineralizing tissues.

