Title       : Development of Monochromators for Wiggler-Based Synchrotron X-ray Studies of
               Materials and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0114094

Award Number: 0114094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $415908             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel D. Brock jdb20@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sol M. Gruner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports
              instrument development at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS). 
              Thee goals of this project are: (1) to develop a transmission-mode focusing
              x-ray monochromator optimized for the relatively large spot size and angular
              divergence of the x-ray beams produced by a high power wiggler; (2) to develop
              the electronics required to synthesize locally a high-quality timing signal
              that can be used to synchronize (ultrafast) laser pulses with the electron
              bunch structure of the synchrotron; and (3), to develop a focusing
              asymmetric-cut Bragg monochromator to compress the x-ray beam for small angle
              x-ray scattering applications. These devices will be used to perform
              time-resolved structural measurements on dynamically evolving materials and
              will be permanently installed on the new synchrotron x-ray beam lines currently
              under construction at CHESS (the G-lines). The central campus location of this
              facility allows it to be staffed primarily by graduate students from a wide
              variety of disciplines, creating a comprehensive educational and outreach
              environment.

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research
              program supports instrument development at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron
              Source (CHESS).The goal of this project is to develop x-ray optics designed to
              take full advantage of the powerful x-ray beams produced by three new beam
              lines (the G-lines) at CHESS. These devices will be used to perform
              time-resolved measurements of the atomic scale structure of dynamically
              evolving materials. CHESS's location on the central campus of Cornell
              University enables a level of hands-on training and involvement of all levels
              of students which is difficult to achieve elsewhere. Indeed, the G-lines are
              staffed primarily by graduate students from a wide variety of scientific and
              engineering disciplines, working on a wide variety of materials research
              projects. These students have been involved in all phases of the construction
              of the beam lines and are heavily involved in outreach to the local community,
              working primarily with K-12 students and their teachers. The final result is a
              comprehensive educational and multi-disciplinary research environment that is
              accessible to students of all levels. 


