Title       : Modeling Accelerated Degradation Data for Product Reliability Improvement and
               Warranty Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0114903

Award Number: 0114903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275451             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Kvam paul.kvam@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jye-Chyi Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports research for deriving new methods for accelerated
              degradation testing, or ADT, which involves analyzing product or system
              degradation in various high stress environments in order to predict product
              lifetime or system performance. The research concentrates on existing gaps in
              current test methods used in industry, and works to extend these current
              methods to a larger domain of problems, including non standard degradation
              models that describe more realistic product degradation scenarios in
              manufacturing. Initial work is based on applied problems with vacuum
              fluorescent displays (VFDs), light-emitting diodes, and fiber optics
              manufacturing. VFD performance helps to motivate such models. Emitted electrons
              from its cathode serve to eliminate impurities in the vacuum, and VFD light
              intensity actually increases up to a certain point of time before it decreases
              due to age-induced degradation. Standard ADT models cannot characterize this
              phenomenon.   Specific developments of this research include:  (1) A general
              framework for stress dependent degradation models based on physically motivated
              degradation paths; (2) Building formulas for failure times of various complex
              (non-linear) ADT models, along with uncertainty estimates based on statistical
              resampling methods; (3) Combining failure time data with separate sets of
              degradation data to improve product lifetime estimates; and (4) Finding optimal
              test procedures (in terms of information gained) based on time and cost
              constraints associated with product development.  The ADT models include (non
              linear) random coefficients to reflect variability between test units.
              Bootstrap resampling procedures are derived to ascertain uncertainty because
              simpler variance approximations are not generally available with such random
              coefficient degradation models. 

With degradation data, the proposed
              estimates of the product failure time distribution serves as a key quality
              measure for evaluating a company's process improvement in highly reliable
              products, and can help company managers decide their product warranty policy. 
              If successful, the results of this research can strongly affect process
              condition changes, material selections, equipment innovations, maintenance
              schedule revisions and other production operation changes. Thus, the  research
              provides valuable information for companies to improve their operation
              efficiency and profitability.

