Title       : IGERT: Biophotonics Materials and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0114330

Award Number: 0114330
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2727474            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander N. Cartwright anc@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Kofke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Earl Bergey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paras N. Prasad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce D. McCombe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The thrust of this IGERT program in biophotonics is to produce graduates capable
              of crossing the existing boundaries between Physics, Chemistry, Biology,
              Medicine and Engineering, the combination of which constitutes the
              multidisciplinary research environments necessary for advancing biophotonics. 
              Novel applications and/or solutions to technological problems involving the use
              of photonics (lasers and optics) in biology and medicine, and the use of
              biological materials in photonic applications, have been slow to develop due to
              the lack of a common ground upon which the current researchers, who come from a
              variety of disciplines, can interact.  Specifically, this program emphasizes
              graduate research, education and training through the extension of on-going
              integrative research that includes: (i) nanotechnology (fabrication and
              application) as a tool in developing new, and improving existing, optical
              imaging techniques for real-time imaging of cells and cellular processes, (ii)
              developing the next generation of biosensors and improving sensing
              applications, (iii) using nanotechnology and laser technology for targeting and
              treatment in cancer therapy, (iv) applying computer and information
              technologies in the development of new models and data analysis for
              understanding cellular mechanisms, (v) developing new photonic devices and
              systems that are hybrids of traditional polymeric and semiconductor materials
              with  biological materials, and (vi) molding the existing curriculum to provide
              students with maximum exposure to the diversity of biophotonics and prepare
              them to operate effectively in this rapidly advancing and changing field. The
              program will involve graduate students and faculty from Engineering, Chemistry,
              Physics, Biological Sciences, and the Medical School at the University at
              Buffalo (State University of New York), from Roswell Park Cancer Institute, and
              from Hauptman-Woodward Medical Institute (all located in Buffalo, NY).  A
              cross-disciplinary curriculum will be developed that will provide Ph.D and
              Masters degree graduates with the ability to cross the existing boundaries
              between the many areas of biophotonics. This program builds upon the strengths
              of the Institute for Lasers, Photonics and Biophotonics (ILPB), at the
              University at Buffalo, which has as one of its goals to create a
              multidisciplinary environment using the common thread of photonics.  Moreover,
              this program will capitalize on recent investments in the ILPB for the
              development of biophotonics: equipment, laboratory space, and educational
              training facilities.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
              challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing new,
              innovative models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment
              for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.
              In the fourth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-two
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this specific award
              reside in the Directorates for Engineering; Biological Sciences; Mathematical
              and Physical Sciences; and Education and Human Resources.

