Title       : Acquisition of a Multi-Probe Scanning Tunneling Microscope with SEM for Student
               Training in Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0114210

Award Number: 0114210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen D. Williams edw@physics.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Fuhrer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Lobb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Igor V. Lyubinetsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the
              Major Research Instrumentation program, the University of Maryland will be able
              to acquire a combined scanning probe/scanning electron microscope. The
              instrument will be used to address critical issues of nano-electronics due to
              the variability of nano-device electronic properties with structure.  This
              issue is critical, for instance, in assessing how or whether electrical
              contacts to nano-devices, structural defects in the devices, or even thermal
              fluctuations will limit nano-device performance and reproducibility.  It is
              also key to developing applications of nano-structures that derive from their
              intrinsic properties: i.e. where strong variations of device properties with
              structure and/or local environment are a natural characteristic, these
              properties may be exploited as response mechanisms. Techniques to image the
              atomic structure of nanostructures while simultaneously measuring electronic
              transport properties will be developed.  These experiments will establish the
              correlations between structure and the electronic properties of nanodevices, by
              probing the effects of dynamic changes in structure (driven by temperature,
              electric field, current and chemical potential) on the electrical transport
              properties of the nanodevices. The relationship between structure and the
              electrical response of nanostructures will also be investigated theoretically.
              The new instrument, a combined scanning probe/scanning electron microscope will
              also be used for graduate student training in the research areas described
              above.

Important new technological properties are expected to occur in
              materials structures as their size approaches the nanoscale.  Location of such
              small structures to allow the direct measurement of their properties is a
              serious technical challenge, as is the measurement itself.  This award from the
              Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major Research
              Instrumentation program will help the University of Maryland with the purchase
              of an instrument that combines two microscopes and a fine positioning stage. 
              One microscope will be used to locate small structures, and the scanning stage
              will be used to move the small structures into the measurement range of the
              second microscope.  The second microscope will be an ultra-high resolution
              microscope with the capability of imaging the positions of individual atoms. 
              Experiments will be performed in which the effect of changes in the positions
              of individual atoms in small structures are correlated with the electrical
              properties (e.g. the ability to carry electrical current) of the small
              structures. The new instrument will also be used for graduate student training
              in the research areas described above.  

