Title       : IGERT: Cross-disciplinary Optics Research and Education (CORE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0114319

Award Number: 0114319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2476652            (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfgang Rudolph wrudolph@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Brozik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gabriel P. Lopez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen A. Stricker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mansoor Sheik-Bahae  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A Cross-disciplinary Optics Research and Education (CORE) program is established
              at the Uni-versity of New Mexico to enhance the education and training of
              graduate students. The program involves the departments of Biology, Chemistry,
              Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Physics. The research and
              educational theme of the CORE project is centered about optical imaging and
              spectroscopic techniques with high spatial and temporal resolution and their
              appli-cation to physical, chemical, and biological problems. (i) During the
              project interdisciplinary teams of graduate students will work on various
              aspects of the CORE research, comprising the design and development of methods
              and tools and their application in the fields of biology, chemistry, physics,
              and engineering. The research projects involve the study of fundamental
              pro-cesses in various samples ranging from single molecules, to quantum dots,
              to living cells, and their utilization for the development of biosensors. (ii)
              In addition to the current curricula in their respective departments, IGERT
              students will take a set of cross-disciplinary courses designed specifically
              for the program. (iii) The IGERT fellows will be offered internships in the
              local op-tics industry, in local national laboratories, and abroad to widen
              their horizon and to introduce career opportunities. (iv) A weekly seminar will
              provide the students with training in technical writing and in presentations of
              their research in a multi-disciplinary environment. (v) Mentoring undergraduate
              students will foster team spirit and leadership skills and will help to
              recruit, retain, and involve undergraduates, in particular those from
              underrepresented minorities, in research. The overall goal of our education and
              training activities is to produce a new cadre of engineers and scientists who
              are prepared to work in multidisciplinary environments. As experts in their
              respective home disciplines, the IGERT graduates will share a basic
              understanding of optics, im-aging and spectroscopy. As such, they will be
              prepared to work at the forefront of optics-related research, development and
              education in national labs, academia, and industry.

IGERT is an NSF-wide
              program intended to meet the challenges of educating Ph.D. scientists and
              engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
              professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
              The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
              establishing new, innovative models for graduate education and training in a
              fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
              disciplinary boundaries. In the fourth year of the program, awards are being
              made to twenty-two institutions for programs that collectively span all areas
              of science and engineering supported by NSF. The intellectual foci of this
              specific award reside in the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences; Engineering; Biological Sciences; and Education and Human
              Resources.


