Title       : An Innovative Modeling Approach at the Freshman/Sophomore Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2001   
File        : a9653262

Award Number: 9653262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121366             (Estimated)
Investigator: Silvia Heubach sheubac@calstatela.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    323/343-4970

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This is an innovative project establishing an interactive modeling course
              at the lower division level for culturally diverse students. The course will
              focus on the modeling process using examples based on (systems of) difference
              and differential equations. The first part of the course will introduce basic
              terminology and background necessary for continuous models: the notions of
              derivative as rate of change and as slope of the tangent line. With this
              background students can derive model equations and qualitatively analyze the
              solution using slope field and phase plane graphs created by Mathematica. The
              course will be taught in the Macintosh laboratory, using Joy of Mathematica as
              a user-friendly, menu-driven interface to Mathematics.   In the second part of
              the course, students will work on applications from biology, chemistry,
              economics and physics. Collaborators from these disciplines will identify
              "standard models" based on difference and differential equations with
              interesting applications from their area of expertise. These models will be
              implemented as interactive Mathematica texts; a library of models will thus be
              created for student exploration. Students will present their final projects at
              a poster session.   The emphasis of the proposed course on visual components
              for understanding will make it possible to offer the course as a lower division
              course. The course will be aimed at students with weak mathematics background
              who would not take the advanced courses needed for a traditional modeling
              course, science majors in preparation for modeling applications in their
              disciplines, and prospective teachers in preparation of a curriculum based on
              the NCTM Standards.    Students should leave the course with a solid
              understanding of the modeling process, improved critical thinking and writing
              skills, and an appreciation of the importance of mathematics for modeling
              across the disciplines. It is our hope that they will be less intimidated by
              mathematics, and view mathematics as an integral  part for their understanding
              of the world.
