Title       : Development and Assessment of Multimedia for "Motor Workshop"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1997  
File        : a9653114

Award Number: 9653114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheri D. Sheppard sheppard@cdr.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A multimedia-based title and curricular plan that supports learning about DC
              motors across a range of learning stages will be designed, developed, and
              assessed.  The multimedia piece will be called Motor Workshop.  Prospective
              users range from freshman physics students to masters-level engineering
              students.  The subject matter will be sub-fractional horsepower DC electric
              motors.  This subject is relevant in a variety of technological fields
              including physics students learning about electricity and magnetism, electrical
              engineers learning about circuit analysis and design, and mechanical designers
              seeking the proper motor to drive a particular device.    We have begun working
              with the instructors of the Stanford courses that introduce engineering
              undergraduate students to DC motor to define the learning objectives related to
              motors in their particular course.  All are enthusiastic about the prospect of
              enhanced materials being available to them and their students on motors.  The
              next step in our work with the course instructors is to develop a preliminary
              curricular plan.  The resulting understanding of the particular needs of the
              various courses and a vision of how multimedia-based curriculum might be used
              in each course will in large part form the basis for designing and developing
              the multimedia title.   Other major sources of input during this planning phase
              will be recent work in the Education, Human Computer Interface Design, and
              Cognitive Science communities.    The resulting software title, Motor Workshop,
              will be a comprehensive and scaffolded information resource pertaining to all
              aspects of small, DC motors. By scaffolded we mean that concepts will be
              presented in a graduated manner so that they build in depth and complexity. 
              The architecture of Motor Workshop will allow a more mature student to enter at
              a more advanced level, but will allow her to return to more basic materials if
              she finds the need for review. Motor Workshop will include terminology and
              first principles of physics  which will explicate the basic function of motors,
              concepts of torque, speed and power, issues of circuit design, explanations of
              the basic function of motors and circuit design, determination of critical
              motor specifications and the choice of a motor based on these data, and
              recommended subclasses of motors for particular applications, possibly with
              catalog data embedded into the software.    Motor Workshop will be developed
              with input from the core instructors at Stanford University. In addition, it
              will be distributed to engineering faculty at Arizona State University (Prof.
              D. Evans) and University of Texas (Prof. K. Wood) for them to evaluate its
              portability to other institutions.  Using a variety of assessment techniques
              that we have had experience with, including pre- and post-test performance
              comparisons, questionnaires and videotaped observation (VIA), we will attempt
              to prove our hypothesis that computer-based information resources can be
              developed which will have a positive effect on the learning environment of a
              wide developmental range of students.    This is not the first multimedia title
              that this group has created. Three other titles (Bicycle Dissection, The
              Electric Drill Stack, Linkages) were developed in order to enhance the
              resources and points of view scripted into the curriculum. These title are
              consistently being used in our undergraduate curriculum. The proposed DC motor
              title will built upon the lessons we learned from assessing students working
              with Bicycle Dissection, The Electric Drill Stack, Linkages over the last two
              years.
