Title       : Earth Math Phase 3; Calculus and Statistics for a New World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1996  
File        : a9653153

Award Number: 9653153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy E. Zumoff nzumoff@ksumail.kennesaw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Schaufele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kennesaw State University
	      1000 Chastain Road
	      Kennesaw, GA  301445591    404/429-2700

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Using modeling and real world data as motivation, a two-course sequence which
              integrates calculus and statistics is being developed, tested, and evaluated.
              These courses are designed to improve the mathematical knowledge and skills of
              entering college students outside of science, mathematics, and engineering. The
              first course uses elementary concepts from statistics and calculus to construct
              and analyze algebraic functions which model real data; the second introduces
              more sophisticated functions and uses more advanced methods from calculus and
              statistics. The first course stands alone as a core course; the second can be a
              meaningful replacement for introductory statistics or "business" calculus. The
              sequence, which is being piloted at both Kennesaw State College and Portland
              State University, exposes students to mathematical and statistical concepts and
              tools used in the workplace. Both courses make extensive use of computers to
              gather data and analyze real world problems. In the spirit of the Earth Algebra
              and Earth Math projects, previously funded by both the Fund for the Improvement
              of Post-Secondary Education (FIPSE) and the NSF, the sequence incorporates the
              principles of the NCTM and AMATYC Standards. Dissemination efforts include a
              textbook, workshops, MAA minicourses and posting of some materials on the
              Internet. The assessment activities are investigating the feasibility of a
              technology-intensive integrated calculus/statistics sequence which uses
              modeling and data analysis to motivate the mathematics. This grant supports
              specific materials development and dissemination activities, and complements
              core funding for the overall project by FIPSE.
