Title       : IAS/Park City Mathematics Institute Faculty Enhancement Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9653447

Award Number: 9653447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. MacPherson rdm@ias.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Advanced Study
	      Einstein Dr.
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    609/734-8000

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                         Non specialist faculty at universities and colleges have few
              opportunities to keep up with current research, and they are often required to
              teach subjects beyond their area of expertise. For these and other reasons they
              may be unable to offer up-to-date pedagogical techniques and disciplinary
              perspectives.         The Institute for Advanced Study/Park City Mathematics
              Institute (PCMI) seeks funding to enhance the expertise and teaching ability of
              undergraduate mathematics faculty. Specifically, the program seeks to expose
              faculty to cutting-edge research, impart new teaching methods, and strengthen
              their understanding of the mathematics enterprise as a whole.         The PCMI
              is an ongoing, NSF-funded program which seeks to better integrate the research
              and educational aspects of mathematics. For three weeks each summer it brings
              together undergraduates, graduate students, researchers, and high school
              teachers (approximately 180 persons) for collaborative activities.
              Undergraduate faculty would join this program with the  goals of honing their
              mathematical skills, exploring new educational technologies, and sharing their
              own expertise.         The PCMI intends to recruit teaching faculty who are
              motivated toward the reform and strengthening of undergraduate teaching. We
              shall especially seek individuals who are interested in disseminating what they
              learn, whether through publications, educational activities, or other means.
              The program makes a deliberate effort to recruit women and minority
              mathematicians, and to provide regular, objective evaluation of program
              activities.
