Title       : Workshop for Integration of Numerical Methods into the Undergraduate Chemistry
               Curriculum Using the Mathcad Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  1996   
File        : a9653440

Award Number: 9653440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68261              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sidney H. Young syoung@jaguar1.usouthal.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffry D. Madura  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrzej Wierzbicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    205/460-6101

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Physical Chemistry is the first course in the Chemistry curriculum which
              utilizes numerical methods to calculate quantities of physical and chemical
              interest from measurable data, tasks which are required of Chemistry graduates.
              Due to progress in personal computers, the undergraduate student now has access
              to a series of software choices which may be used to perform calculations far
              beyond those previously available. One of the most popular software packages in
              general use is Mathcad. Even as this technology is  being developed,
              undergraduate faculty are striving to implement them in classes.      To aid
              undergraduate Physical Chemistry faculty in the incorporation of numerical
              methods into the undergraduate curriculum, we propose to hold a series of
              week-long workshops whose goals are to produce i) fluency in the use of Mathcad
              as a tool, and ii) the development and presentation of  mathematical methods
              useful in the Physical Chemistry lecture and laboratory courses. The workshops
              will be held for six days at the University of South Alabama during the summers
              of 1997-1998 and will include 18 participants and three instructors each
              summer. The general itinerary will consist of a combination of lectures,
              hands-on computer laboratory exercises, and panel discussions concerning the
              use of numerical methods in Physical Chemistry. One important feature of the
              workshop will be the development of a series of templates by the participants,
              each of which will perform a useful numerical technique relevant to the
              Physical Chemistry course, and will be made accessible to the public through
              our WWW site.      Following the workshop, a discussion group involving all
              participants will be set up through the e-mail network. The purpose of this
              group is to prepare a set of templates and exercises which may be published
              during the year following the workshop. During the summer following the
              workshop, the former workshop  participants will discuss their work at the fall
              ACS meeting. This session will be entit led "Numerical Methods in Physical
              Chemistry Using Mathcad", and will be chaired by one of the principal
              investigators of the proposal.
