Title       : Elementary Physics Course Based on Guided Inquiry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1997  
File        : a9653079

Award Number: 9653079
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49453              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Meltzer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kandiah Manivannan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southeastern Louisiana U
	      100 West Dakota
	      Hammond, LA  704012512    504/549-2000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                     Undergraduate science courses taken by preservice teachers typically have
              textbook-centered lecture formats.  There is a need for new course designs that
              implement ideas found beneficial in recent educational research. This project
              is a continuation and extension of such a course that has been under
              development for about two years.  This elementary physics course, appropriate
              for preservice teachers, embodies a number of the recent innovations in
              educational theory and practice.  It has been found that the breadth of topical
              coverage has to be substantially reduced from standard levels, in order to
              ensure that what is covered is actually learned and retained by the students.  
              The theme of "energy" is used as a conceptual pivot to tie together the various
              topics.  Students' pre/misconceptions regarding physical phenomena--as
              determined by pretesting--guide the presentation, activities, and discussion. 
              The pretests form the basis for a thorough class discussion of the predictions
              made by students regarding the outcome of various experiments.  Investigations
              to test their predictions are carried out by the students, working in small
              groups, through guided "mini-research-projects." Class discussions, centered
              around the results of the student investigations (and comparison with the
              predictions), lead to a systematic summing-up by the instructor to provide
              perspective, and tie into the next topical area with the thread of the theme
              "energy transformation and conservation."  During course delivery, ongoing
              testing and other assessment guide the pacing and depth of the topical
              coverage.    The target audience is prospective elementary and middle-school
              teachers, and other non-technical students.  The project has the potential to
              significantly improve the knowledge of and attitude towards physics on the part
              of those whose typical experience with college physical science tends to be
              distasteful and nonproductive.
