Title       : A Program to Enhance Faculty Development Through Outreach and Participation in
               Regional Computer Science Education Conferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9653407

Award Number: 9653407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36777              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret M. Reek   (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Paul Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet D. Hartman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc For Computing Mach
	      1515 Broadway, 17th Floor
	      New York, NY  100365702    212/869-7440

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is a cooperative effort between the ACM Special Interest Group on
              Computer Science Education (SIGCSE) and the Consortium for Computing in Small
              Colleges (CCSC) to provide outreach services to Computer Science faculty in
              various regions of the United States. These two cooperating organizations share
              a primary priorities of improving faculty teaching skills, increasing awareness
              and knowledge of current issues in computer science education, and providing
              opportunities for faculty to share ideas.  SIGCSE conducts a very well-known
              and highly successful annual technical symposium; but the organization has no
              appreciable regional presence. CCSC, on the other hand, has been providing very
              successful regional conferences for over a decade; but conducts no national
              conference. The two organizations are, therefore, quite complementary.     In
              an era of reduced or nonexistent travel budgets, especially for faculty in
              undergraduate institutions throughout the country, this project seeks to
              involve these faculty in many of the most current and relevant national CS
              education issues and concepts. The two-year project is to offer SIGCSE
              Technical Symposium workshops at each of the six regional CCSC conferences each
              year.   This will allow more faculty to take advantage of the high-quality
              workshops from the national Symposium, but within the context of a less
              expensive regional conference, closer to home.    The effectiveness of the
              project will be ascertained by two separate evaluations from participants: one
              immediately following the workshops, and one six months later in order to
              determine impact on courses, curricula, and professional development in CS
              education.    It is noteworthy that due to the success of earlier federally
              sponsored outreach activities, the SIGCSE Board has decided voted to allocate
              up to 25% of its annual budget surplus to fund these export/outreach activities
              to regions (though not limited specifically to CCSC conferences). Thus we have
              a sort of "matching" funds to repo rt as part of the present application.
