Title       : CPLP: A Chemical Professional Laboratory Program for General Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9653080

Award Number: 9653080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285371             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Wink dwink@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luke Hanley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Haney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Whitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon M. Fetzer Gislason  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Chemical Professional Laboratory Program (CPLP) is being initiated at the
              University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) as a new mode for writing and teaching
              general chemistry laboratories.  The program teaches chemistry with
              environments that simulate the experience and workplace of chemical
              professionals.  Assistance is being provided by faculty from professional
              programs, including engineering, nursing, pharmacy, and laboratory sciences. 
              The program includes four Chicago-area community colleges that are also major
              sources of UIC professional students. These are the College of DuPage, William
              Rainey Harper College, Oakton College, and Harold Washington College of the
              City Colleges of Chicago.  Faculty from those schools are consulting with those
              at UIC on the development of the program, and they are acting as dissemination
              sites.  The laboratories feature one week where general chemistry concepts and
              techniques are studied in a "normal" manner. In the second and, occasionally,
              third weeks the students apply these techniques to a procedure that simulates
              or replicates the environment where a non-chemist might need to use chemistry. 
              Examples include control of blood acidity after a heart attack; development and
              testing of a new catalyst; and analysis of elemental composition of soil.  The
              program includes an assessment run by a faculty member from the UIC College of
              Education. The assessment uses qualitative methods, to make it more useful in
              revising the CPLP lab manual and in learning the response of students to
              non-traditional procedures in the laboratory.
