Title       : Multimedia Neuroscience Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9653051

Award Number: 9653051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Betty Zimmerberg Betty.Zimmerberg@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                    "Multimedia Neuroscience Education" is a new project to bring advances in
              digital technology to the teaching of a complex and growing interdisciplinary
              field. Central to our approach is the conviction that the neurological,
              molecular and electrical structures and processes that are fundamental to this
              field constantly change in time and space. Two-dimensional representations fall
              far short of communicating the complexity of these phenomena. Eventually we
              hope to offer a complete set of animated and interactive multi-media resources
              to support instruction not only of introductory neuroscience, but for use in
              the related fields of biology and psychology. Now, however, we are seeking NSF
              funds to produce, evaluate and implement a pilot program to cover one unit,
              "Synaptic Transmission and Chemical Messengers." We plan to realize this goal
              by taking advantage of several new advances in computer technology. The first
              is the availability of moderately priced but extremely powerful 3- D animation
              software for use on desktop computers. These same computers can run powerful
              new multi-media authoring software that allows for another breakthrough: we
              will distribute only the video from our laboratory simulations and process
              animation on a CD-ROM. All the control of that video plus the related text,
              graphics and 3-D models for use with JAVA will be kept on our Neuroscience
              pages on the World Wide Web. Among other things, this means we can update the
              programming of these materials without ever making the video on the CD-ROM
              obsolete.        The Project is the collaboration of Betty Zimmerberg, Chair of
              the Neuroscience Department at Williams College, and Lance Wisniewski,
              multi-media producer. Dr. Zimmerberg has been a researcher and teacher in the
              neurosciences for two decades at undergraduate and graduate levels, as well as
              being experienced in pre-college science education outreach and training of
              pre-college teachers. Wisniewski has produced educational television programs
              for 20 years, with a spec ialty in computer animation and, recently,
              multi-media applications. This project will have significant impact on
              undergraduate education because, in addition to the informative content and its
              visualization in space and time, the virtual laboratory component will enhance
              critical thinking, quantitative skills, and science writing experience. The
              ultimate goal is to have these materials and laboratory experiences available
              globally, and for a variety of educational levels and setting, in order to
              convey our excitement in the process of scientific discovery on the new
              frontier, the mind.  NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)
