Title       : A New Approach to Introductory College Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1997   
File        : a9653165

Award Number: 9653165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gordon E. Uno                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96729              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beth A. Montelone bethmont@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry G. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This is a plan to improve and modernize the delivery and content of a
              large-enrollment introductory level biology course. We plan to adopt a studio
              approach to delivery of this course: sections of eighty students will work in
              teams of two or four with faculty and graduate students guiding the learning
              process. In place of the traditional formal lecture/laboratory model, the
              students will receive information from computer text, demonstrations,
              simulations, and hands-on experimentation. The studio stresses group work and
              student-driven learning.  To make the general course more relevant to students,
              we plan to group them into studio sections by major and/or common interests. It
              is our hypothesis that the combination of interaction between students with
              similar goals and focus on relevant examples will improve learning and
              retention in our course. This may be particularly true for women,
              non-traditional students, and minorities. At other institutions where studio
              formats have been introduced into basic science courses, preliminary studies
              indicate improved performance in later, more advanced courses among those
              students who have taken the first course in studio form.  We will disseminate
              the results of our project in several ways: 1 ) because course material will be
              placed on the World-Wide Web, it will be accessible at many locations. 2) We
              will prepare a manuscript for submission to educational journals describing our
              results. 3) We will attend regional and national educational meetings and
              present our model and report our findings.
