Title       : Teaching Teachers to Teach Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1996  
File        : a9653456

Award Number: 9653456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52449              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher H. Conley ic7188@trotter.usma.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Lenox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry W. Samples  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark F. Costello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Potter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Ressler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : US Military Academy
	      
	      West Point, NY  10996    914/938-4041

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              "Teaching Teachers to Teach Engineering" is a one-week short course  offered
              during the summer at the United States Military Academy. The  short course is
              offered to faculty of all engineering disciplines who  want to be good
              teachers. The short course strives to address the  needs of faculty from
              two-year and four-year institutions, teaching  and research institutions, who
              are seeking high teaching standards  and efficiencies in preparation.    The
              short course addresses topics in preparation, presentation, self-  critique,
              learning models, course and lesson goals and objectives,  advanced technology,
              student-teacher relations, testing/grading,  advising, legal aspects of
              teaching, research, scholarship, and time  management. Participants are
              expected to prepare and present  classes, critique others, apply short-course
              material in mini-class  environments, and prepare an action plan for their next
              term.  Participants will work in various size teams to develop confidence  and
              poise in the classroom. Participants will leave the workshop with  the tools
              necessary to present logical and thought provoking  presentations to their
              students. They are expected to interact with  faculty at their home institution
              to improve the teaching of others.    This short course will guide faculty
              toward an efficient way to be a  good teacher, giving them the means to teach
              well, while they are  trying to satisfy requirements for tenure and promotion.
