Title       : Cooperative Learning in Undergraduate Mathematics Education: Developing a
               Comprehensive Program for College Faculty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2000  
File        : a9653383

Award Number: 9653383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498479             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Dubinsky   (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Mathews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara E. Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Math Assn of America
	      1529 18th St NW
	      Washington, DC  200361358    202/387-5200

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Cooperative Learning in Undergraduate Mathematics Education (CLUME) is a
              national program to provide faculty with the knowledge, skills, and experience
              to implement cooperative learning in undergraduate mathematics courses.
              Numerous reports document deficiencies in mathematics education and call for
              change in the pedagogical methods employed in the nation's colleges and
              universities. This project focuses on cooperative learning as a strategy
              applicable to courses at all collegiate levels from remedial to majors. It is a
              pedagogical approach that can be used in classes of any size, and embodies a
              kind of thinking which may have profound impact on a faculty member's ideas
              about teaching and learning. CLUME activities will provide faculty who have
              differing levels of interest and expertise an opportunity to explore and
              evaluate the effectiveness of cooperative learning. The cornerstone activities
              are a 12-day summer workshop providing intensive training in the theory and
              practice of cooperative learning, an academic year apprenticeship period with
              mentoring and electronic networking, and a 3-day follow-up workshop during the
              succeeding summer. In addition to the workshop cycle, the project includes
              shorter introductory experiences: mini-courses at national AMS/MAA meetings,
              short courses and panels at MAA sectional meetings, and national conferences.
              CLUME will have impact beyond the funding period. It will develop a cadre of
              experienced practitioners of cooperative learning capable of providing training
              for others. Materials developed as part of the workshop experience will be
              available to the mathematics community at large. Of particular interest are the
              CLUME activities targeting faculty and departments who have large
              responsibilities for pre-service teacher preparation. Special attention is paid
              during the recruitment phase to securing the participation of those faculty,
              and specific components of the workshop activities will focus on cooperative
              learning in the K-12 setting. An evaluation comp onent will document successes
              and limitations of cooperative learning. CLUME will promote cooperative
              learning in the professional organizations (AMS/MAA/AMATYC) and will increase
              collaboration between two- and four-year college faculty.
