Title       : Quantitative Reasoning Across a Core Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9653733

Award Number: 9653733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Lesser   (Principal Investigator current)
              Myra Kogen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louise Hainline  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/417-8423

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Brooklyn College is uniquely qualified to revitalize undergraduate education
              with bold initiatives in mathematics and science learning.  It has developed a
              number of successful math/science programs for majors in teacher education and
              in the sciences.  The goal of this project is to build on these past
              initiatives to promote the development of quantitative reasoning skills in the
              undergraduate population at large.  The College's nationally-recognized,
              ten-course Core Curriculum requires that every student complete 4 semesters of
              laboratory science (physics, chemistry, biology, geology), in addition to
              mathematics and computer science; nonetheless, we find that many students are
              unable to transfer quantitative concepts from one discipline to another. 
              Faculty in such diverse areas as the physical and biological sciences,
              economics, business, computer science, psychology, sociology, and linguistics
              observe that exploration of higher levels of knowledge in their disciplines is
              diminished as a result of students' lack of quantitative reasoning skills.  Our
              solution to this problem is an "across the curriculum" project in which
              quantitative concepts are being systematically linked through core courses in
              mathematics, natural sciences, and social sciences.  The method of freshman
              block programming is being used to facilitate coordination among cohorts of
              students who are being exposed to hierarchically structured quantitative
              material.  Faculty meet to develop and refine curricula that emphasize
              constructivist principles of teaching, including hands-on laboratory
              experiences.  Peer tutoring provides an essential academic support network. 
              The overall aim is to create an institutional culture which affirms the central
              importance of quantitative learning not only to the sciences, but to the entire
              liberal arts curriculum.  Evaluations concentrate on performance outcomes and
              changes in faculty and student attitudes.  To facilitate the program serving as
              a model we will disseminate curricular materials, p rogram descriptions, and
              evaluation results through a capstone conference, professional meetings and
              publications, and the World Wide Web.  The results will be of wide interest to
              those concerned with science and mathematics education at all levels.
