Title       : Student Preceptors and Investigative Laboratories in Introductory Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1999     
File        : a9653232

Award Number: 9653232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202664             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bonnie S. Sherman sherman@stolaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dana L. Gross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Dickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Konrad Talbot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard I. Thorsheim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Olaf College
	      1520 St. Olaf Avenue
	      Northfield, MN  55057    507/646-2222

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                   To provide a laboratory setting for students to carry out
              scientific inquiry that originates with them in their first course in
              psychology, and to stimulate interest in teaching, St. Olaf College proposes to
              develop 1) investigative laboratories as a part of an introductory course for
              120 students a year, and 2) a preceptor program offering students interested in
              teaching, an opportunity to teach in the laboratories during a subsequent term.
              Students in introductory psychology will participate with a faculty member in
              class for three hours per week and will then work an additional three hours per
              week in rotating laboratory sessions conducted by three faculty and preceptors.
              The laboratory will involve groups of 15 students in each of ten different
              laboratory sessions. It will provide opportunities for students to translate
              the curiosity psychology arouses into testable hypotheses, researchable
              questions, and to design experiments as well as to collect and analyze data.   
               This course is taken by the majority of education majors, who must also take a
              course in educational psychology.  For example, 80% of the current group of 80
              seniors in the teacher education program took introductory psychology. Twelve
              of these students with a background in psychology are preparing to teach K-12
              in the laboratory sciences (psychology, biology, chemistry, or physics).  In
              the 1996-97 academic year, 150 students have applied for admission to the
              teacher education program, indicating its strong growth.  Hence, the potential
              influence of investigative laboratories in introductory psychology is very
              high.      Preceptors will follow the laboratory rotation with a group of
              introductory students, teaching, fostering student inquiry, helping students in
              the learning process, and evaluating their work. The goals of the project are:
              1) to teach psychology as an investigative laboratory science on a college
              level from the very first course, 2) to encourage students, interested in
              college or secondar y school teaching, to teach psychology as an investigative
              science, 3) to encourage students to work together as a research community in
              the library, the laboratory and the field, and 4) to design a replicable model
              that will facilitate construction of investigative laboratory sciences at other
              colleges and universities.
