Title       : Support for the Professor Training Course for Geosynthetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1996  
File        : a9653395

Award Number: 9653395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Elton elton@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                More education is needed to teach undergraduate civil engineering students how
              to use geosynthetics to provide more cost-effective designs to construct and
              maintain the U.S. infrastructure.  Industry and government need graduating
              engineers well-versed with geosynthetics, while universities seek a method to
              meet this need.  The Professor training Course in Geosynthetics will meet this
              need.    Geosynthetics are starting to be used in civil engineering structures,
              but few graduating civil engineers receive instruction on how to use them. 
              Currently, many of the practicing engineers that use them do so without an
              adequate background.  Because geosynthetics can provide less expensive, more
              elegant and more efficient designs, there is a need to improve the education of
              undergraduate civil engineering students, so they can design with geosynthetics
              with confidence.    Geosynthetics (polymeric materials used in civil
              engineering projects), can provide cost-effective materials to engineers
              building and rebuilding the infrastructure.  Geosynthetics are used in roads,
              landfills, earth slopes, dams, retaining walls, erosion control, drainage
              structures and agriculture.    This Professor Training Courses for
              Geosynthetics is designed to answer these problems. The Course objectives are
              to:    1. teach Civil Engineering professors about geosynthetics, so they can
              teach undergraduates about geosynthetics.    2. provide class notes for the
              professors to use in incorporating geosynthetic designs in their undergraduate
              university courses, and    3. provide motivation, samples, informational
              contacts, and instructional materials to the professors to incorporate
              geosynthetics instruction in the classroom, and allow continued learning.   
              The Courses will be offered, once a year, tuition-free, to thirty five
              professors unac- quainted with geosynthetics.  These objectives will be met
              through an intense week-long series of seminars.  The professors receive
              instruction from experts from government, academic, and the  private sector who
              are teachers, researchers and practitioners in geosynthetics.
