Title       : Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement in the Earth Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1998  
File        : a9653435

Award Number: 9653435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228384             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip R. Romig   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip M. Astwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dorothy L. Stout  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Marilyn J. Suiter  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Amer Geological Inst
	      4220 King Street
	      Alexandria, VA  223021507    703/379-2480

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                A series of regional workshops is offered to help faculty develop improved
              teaching skills in introductory earth science, earth science-related
              interdisciplinary courses, and/or courses in science teacher preparation. The
              goal is to encourage faculty to be intellectually vigorous in science courses,
              to gain experience in effective teaching methods and educational technologies,
              and to explore the beneficial outcomes of reform-based strategies for student
              learning. Participating faculty will be provided with methods and materials
              that will integrate the geosciences with other academic disciplines. 
              Instructional methods that will be demonstrated include problem-solving
              exercises; an issue-based model in which the teacher plays the role of
              facilitator; integrated learning environments that incorporate field work,
              experiential learning, and technological access to data into more traditional
              classroom/laboratory activities; development of communities of science learners
              by establishing student teams and by building a greater regional or national
              community through telecommunication access; and use of local and regional
              issues to demonstrate relevance and to foster in students a sense of
              stewardship in their communities.  Participants will continue workshop
              activities as they develop strategic plans for collaborative teams at their
              home institutions. Follow-up reports, including evaluative assessment of plan
              outcomes, such as implementation strategies, student learning achievement, and
              dissemination beyond the workshop, will provide information useful to others
              interested in improving their educational programs in introductory earth
              science, earth science-related courses, and courses in (earth) science teacher
              preparation. This information will be compiled into a database that will be
              accessible to the community through AGI's Clearinghouse for Earth Science
              Education, including hard-copy and electronic format.
