Title       : The New Mexico Initiative for Math Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  1996  
File        : a9653367

Award Number: 9653367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98600              (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Pletsch bpletsch@tvi.cc.nm.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albuquerque Technical Voca
	      525 Buena Vista SE
	      Albuquerque, NM  871064023    /   -

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                         The modern workplace needs more mathematically and technologically
              literate graduates in introductory college mathematics and calculus than it is
              receiving. To address this need, a consortium of five New Mexico community
              colleges and the state's mathematics association of two-year colleges created
              the New Mexico Initiative for Math Reform. The project is designed to help
              improve student learning in introductory college mathematics and calculus
              through mathematics reform and technology.  Classroom intervention is being
              achieved by increasing and continuing the professional development of regional
              mathematics faculty member in the ways of mathematics reform and use of
              computer classrooms to implement reform.         The method of operation is the
              recursive application of sessions and workshops in which the participants,
              after acquiring and honing the techniques of mathematics reform, fan out across
              the region and host their own workshops. This iteration of workshops ensures an
              "exponential delivery" of the material. The region to be serviced is New Mexico
              and adjacent areas of its bordering states. The partners are the Albuquerque
              Technical Vocational Institute, New Mexico Military Institute, New Mexico State
              University at Alamogordo, New Mexico State University at Dona Ana, University
              of New Mexico at Valencia, San Juan Community College, and one professional
              organization, New Mexico Mathematical Association of Two Year Colleges. The
              impact is on the students of introductory college mathematics and calculus. The
              project has the potential of reaching every such student in the New Mexican
              region. The project is being evaluated with the aid of an outside investigator
              both formatively and summatively. The results of the project are being
              disseminated by the participants themselves through their own workshops, by
              presentations to professional organizations such as the American Association of
               Two Year Colleges, and by publications in scholarly journals.
