Title       : Cross-Discipline Integration in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9653672

Award Number: 9653672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197315             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura Precedo-Choudhury   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carey Witkov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Peres  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matilde E. Cossio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rolando M. Branly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Broward Community College
	      225 E Las Olas Boulevard
	      Fort Lauderdale, FL  333012208    305/761-7400

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: Traditional education is designed so that each discipline has
              curricula which is independent of other disciplines. This tendency to
              compartmentalize knowledge effectively negates the inherent interconnections of
              "real-world" problems. In today's information age, we need to teach our
              students to exploit the vast amount of information available by providing a
              global overview that stresses the importance of the interconnected parts. One
              of the objectives of this project is to reverse the tendency to separate
              academic disciplines by demanding that students engage in studying problems of
              a multidisciplinary nature using technology as a tool. Broward Community
              College (BCC) will accomplish this objective by implementing a curricular
              reform which integrates the disciplines of Mathematics, Science, Engineering,
              and Technology (MSET) into a comprehensive curriculum. Students in the MSET-Web
              will interact in the completion of multi- course projects that share common
              goals. Interaction will be facilitated by the creation of an Exploration Center
              where students will work cooperatively with other students, faculty, and
              variouq businesses and government agencies. Through these projects students
              will engage in the collection, analysis, image processing, and modeling of
              field data. The Center will also serve as a virtual meeting of the minds
              through the establishment of an Intemet Homepage for the compilation and
              dissemination of information generated by the projects in the MSET-Web. This
              initiative is an affirmation that an understanding of the interconnections of
              knowledge is more important than the independent pieces. This new approach to
              learning through integration will significantly impact future learning at the
              college level. Inclusion of teacher re-certification courses in this initiative
              will also help disseminate this innovative approach to learning to precollege
              students. Graduates at all levels will be capable of extrapolating concepts
              from one area of knowledge to another, and therefore b e better prepared to
              succeed in the real world.
