Title       : Paradigms in Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a9653250

Award Number: 9653250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497063             (Estimated)
Investigator: Corinne A. Manogue corinne@physics.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet Tate  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip J. Siemens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                We are developing materials for a new curriculum for Junior-year Physics
              majors, learning by example in case-study format.  Today's upper-division
              curricula currently require more advanced analytical and problem-solving skills
              than can be taught in a lower-division course dominated by the needs of
              non-major students, as typically offered by most departments.  The objective is
              a double-tiered upper-division course of study, allowing students to consider
              the main topics twice: first emphasizing analytical skills, then emphasizing
              deductive and disciplinary integration. The curriculum, Paradigms in Physics,
              is to be a sequence of case studies of paradigmatic physical situations and
              conceptual examples, typically spanning two or more sub-disciplines. The
              teaching methodology of each Paradigm is being chosen to develop analytical and
              problem-solving skills.  The topics are being chosen to span many of the
              principal examples usually developed while teaching the deductive disciplines.
              These Paradigms are to be followed in the senior year by survey courses which
              systematically present the deductive systems of Physics in a condensed format,
              as well as courses describing the phenomena and methodology of modern research
              areas. The dual-function (topic and method) design of the case studies will
              improve students' comprehension of the deductive disciplines, not only because
              they have enhanced analytical skills, but also because they are familiar with
              the central examples. Textbooks are being chosen for use throughout both years.
               Additional instructional materials is being sought and, as necessary,
              developed for each Paradigm; the content and medium of these materials is being
              chosen according to the specific demands of each topic, as will the
              instructional methodology. This flexibility allows appropriate use of group
              work, collaborative learning, and new technological resources. Evaluation is
              being performed by collaboration with a specialist as well as by external
              review; non-sighted access will be facil itated.  Results will be made
              available at AAPT meetings, as published articles and on the Web.
