Title       : Modeling Effective Teaching and Learning in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1999     
File        : a9653107

Award Number: 9653107
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130331             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Burke   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward D. Walton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly Pomona Fdn, Inc
	      
	      Pomona, CA  91768    /   -

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                In today's science education reform efforts, teachers are being asked to teach
              with different materials, and in different ways than they themselves were
              taught or learned to teach. This chemistry course will provide future teachers
              with the solid underpinning needed to understand chemical concepts, and an
              experience base from which they can draw upon in their teaching.    This course
              will be designed jointly by university chemistry instructors, students, and
              practicing teachers. It will use hands-on, learner-centered, and inquiry-based
              pedagogies to promote deeper learning. The course will offer strong chemical
              content and provide students with a model of effective science teaching.
              Students will define, design, and carry out investigations of real-world
              issues. There will be a focus on the human side of science through inclusion of
              historical, cultural, and environmental perspectives. This project will produce
              a model of effective chemistry teaching that will be applicable to any
              undergraduate non-majors or majors chemistry course.    The goals of this
              course are to increase the chemical knowledge base of non-science majors and to
              provide experiences that will enable them to become life-long learners of
              science. The objectives are; 1) to develop inquiry-based units that use
              investigative types of experiences which show the doing of chemistry based on
              real-world issues, 2) to model effective teaching methods, 3) to produce
              materials that show the human/cultural aspects of chemistry as well as its
              impact on society, 4) to model authentic assessment methods that develop a
              broad, comprehensive picture of a student's overall learning
