Title       : Integrating Multiple Disciplines in an Environmental Engineering Curriculum with
               Field Excercises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1997  
File        : a9653256

Award Number: 9653256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37657              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Litton glitton@uop.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of the Pacific
	      3601 Pacific Avenue
	      Stockton, CA  952110110    209/946-2011

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                    The proposed project will
              develop field exercises to integrate multidisciplinary elements of science and
              engineering in lower and upper division environmental engineering courses. The
              field exercises will be developed and implemented with the input of practicing
              professionals in the field of environmental engineering and science. The goal
              of the project is to provide experiences throughout the environmental
              engineering option for undergraduate students that imitate real-world problems
              in an authentic setting.  These exercises will be designed to 1.) stimulate
              student interest and knowledge in real problems, 2.) develop the ability to
              synthesize information from different disciplines, 3.) impart confidence to
              find information and resources independently, 4.) provide opportunities to
              apply science and technology to practical problems, 5.) motivate students to
              work effectively in a group, and 6.) improve communication skills.       The
              field exercises will be implemented primarily in the introductory courses of
              the environmental engineering curriculum. Undergraduates will be exposed early
              in their academic careers to actual environmental projects and problems so as
              to stimulate interest and enthusiasm, two elements critical for recruitment and
              retention. Two lower division courses, "Aquatic Chemistry for Environmental
              Engineers" and "Environmental Biotechnology", and the students' first upper
              division environmental engineering course, "Introduction to Environmental
              Engineering and Water Resources", have been targeted for five of eight field
              projects proposed here. The remaining exercises will be implemented in upper
              division, analysis and design electives.        While the individual projects
              are site specific, the exercises are readily adaptable to other locations by
              other undergraduate institutions. The effectiveness of these field exercises
              will be evaluated by faculty, environmental professionals participating in the
              project, and the student s. The  project will provide undergraduates with a
              unique experience designed to stimulate interest in environmental engineering
              and science and provide an unmatched preparation for professional practice.
