Title       : Mathematics, Computing Skills, and Science Core for Non- Science Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2000        
File        : a9653712

Award Number: 9653712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216678             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Raich jraich@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Keller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fredrick M. Stein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Loren W. Crabtree  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Sneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Colorado State University proposes a two-year, $200,000 project to effect
              institution-wide changes in the core curriculum in mathematics, computing
              skills, and science for non-science majors.  One goal of the project is to
              develop in non-science majors an integrated understanding of `oth process and
              content in science and mathematics in ways that will be meaningful to them as
              educated citizens.  To achieve this goal we will build on the adoption of a
              joint core curriculum by the Colleges of Natural Sciences and of Liberal Arts
              by developing two new yearlong core courses, one to integrate scientific
              concepts and applications and the other to provide mathematical skills and
              perspectives.  Successful extant experimental courses will be used as the
              nuclei for development of two-semester, multidisciplinary, lab-based science,
              mathematics, and computing skills cores for non-science majors.  A second goal
              will be to make explicit to non-science and science majors the roles played by
              and the impact of science and technology on society in general and the role of
              non-science disciplines in influencing and shaping scientific endeavors.  To
              achieve this goal we will use the new joint core curriculum to establish
              well-defined linkages between arts, humanities, history, and social sciences
              components of the core with science and math courses designed for majors.  An
              ancillary goal is to create a program for faculty development, team planning,
              and team implementation of the above programs as a realistic first step toward
              systemic and sustainable change.
