Title       : Integration of Workshop Approaches in Calculus and Precalculus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1997    
File        : a9653446

Award Number: 9653446
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Y. Narayan narayan@oswego.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Winn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Freeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wesley Ostertag  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Constant J. Goutziers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Oswego
	      
	      Oswego, NY  13126    315/341-2500

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Building upon its previous Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement project, "
              Integration of Workshop Approaches in Calculus and Precalculus", the SUNY
              coalition will now focus on the content and mode of instruction in Ordinary
              Differential Equations (ODE) and Linear Algebra. The SUNY Coalition, comprised
              of twenty nine two- and four-year schools, will be expanded state-wide to
              include private institutions. Participants will learn to: integrate modern
              curricula (conceptualization, exploration, and higher-level problem solving) 
              into the teaching of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE) and Linear Algebra;
              integrate technology and innovative pedagogy into the teaching of ODE and
              Linear Algebra; attract and retain students from underrepresented groups in ODE
              and Linear Algebra; change the academic culture by collaborating with the Long
              Island Consortium for Mathematical Sciences Throughout the Curriculum to extend
              mathematical sciences throughout the curriculum. These efforts will help to:
              increase faculty's knowledge in the content and pedagogy related to teaching
              and scholarship in ODE and Linear Algebra; emphasize the importance of
              mathematical modeling in industry; improve student understanding and retention
              of fundamental mathematics concepts; provide the opportunity for faculty to
              develop and initiate alternatives to the lecture format; and promote effective
              communication between two- and four-year institutions and users of mathematics
              in the real world. The first-year participants comprised of Lead Professors
              from the original SUNY Coalition and new members will implement ODE and / or
              Linear Algebra modern curricula and innovative pedagogical approaches in the
              year following the summer training. The implementation plan for the new
              participants of the second year will be the same as that of the first year. In
              addition the Lead Professors, selected from the first-year participants, will
              begin work on interdisciplinary courses.
