Title       : Science Cornerstone Project: Institution-Wide Reform of Undergraduate Education
               in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1997  
File        : a9653728

Award Number: 9653728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel O. Bernstine   (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith A. Ramaley  (Principal Investigator former)
              Carl C. Wamser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William G. Becker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Portland State University has launched an institution-wide reform effort that
              has attracted national attention as a potential model for other colleges and
              universities.  The heart of the reform is the University Studies Program, which
              encompasses the general education curriculum for all students.  Throughout this
              reform, ongoing efforts to bolster science literacy for all students and to
              develop and evaluate innovative approaches to teaching and learning in the
              sciences, math, engineering, and technology have served as catalysts and guides
              for the transformation of the curriculum.  Over the three-year grant period,
              the proposed Science Cornerstone Project will augment and extend these efforts
              by establishing a flexible framework for interdisciplinary coursework aimed at
              achieving science literacy for students majoring in fields outside of the
              sciences, math, engineering, and technology.  This project reflects the
              university's mission as an urban institution serving a diverse population to
              improve educational opportunities and success for all students.  The specific
              outcomes will include eleven innovative upper-division course sequences (each
              sequence comprising two four-credit courses offered during consecutive terms). 
              Each two-course sequence will include a  laboratory, practical, or field
              experience.  Existing courses will be refined or replaced in order to create
              courses that involve students in an in-depth examination of a particular theme
              or project (e.g., Water in the Environment or The Science of the Atmosphere). 
              The evaluation plan will produce objective qualitative and quantitative data to
              gauge the project's effectiveness as a model of systemic reform.
