Title       : Developing a Communication-Intensive Undergraduate Program in Science and
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1997        
File        : a9653732

Award Number: 9653732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosalind H. Williams rhwill@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kip V. Hodges  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan P. Lightman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward C. Barrett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie C. Perelman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              MIT requests NSF support to develop and expand a variety of discipline-specific
              instructional programs that integrate communication instruction and practice
              into technical and scientific undergraduate programs. The objective of this
              initiative by MIT's Faculty and Administration is to establish an undergraduate
              technical curriculum that educates scientists and engineers to become as
              proficient in communication as in analytical thinking and problem solving. The
              need for this curricular reform is compelling. Scientists and engineers today
              assume professional, managerial, and entrepreneurial roles, in which their
              professional success depends on their ability to communicate effectively to a
              wide range of audiences and within a variety of contexts. While undergraduate
              programs in science and engineering are often successful in teaching students
              key scientific concepts, general problem solving skills, and the knowledge and
              abilities central to a particular discipline, they have often failed to develop
              students' abilities to write, speak, and present information effectively. In
              order to develop these abilities, undergraduates need to write and speak
              throughout their undergraduate careers and in bodh technical and non-technical
              classes. However, the continuing explosion of scientific and technical
              knowledge has created new pressures on science and engineering departments to
              increase the overall technical content of their undergraduate programs. To
              educate our students as effective communicators widlin these constraints, MIT
              has developed several successful pilot programs that integrate substantial
              instruction in writing and speaking into technical classes without significandy
              reducing dhe quality of technical instruction. Indeed, these programs offer
              some preliminary evidence that, at least in some disciplines, integrated
              exercises in writing and speaking enhance student comprehension of technical
              material. During the next two years, MIT will build upon existing programs to
              develop scalable and effectiv e communication-intensive technical classes both
              within dhe freshman year and within major programs. Departments and faculty
              committees are also developing mechanisms to integrate communication
              instruction into non-classroom settings, such as undergraduate research
              projects and sumrner work cooperatives. Both internal and external review
              panels will evaluate all phases of this project and assess individual programs
              in terms of improvement of students' communication skills, the effect of
              writing and speaking exercises on student comprehension of technical content,
              the amount of additional time this instruction will add to both student and
              faculty workloads, and other related issues. MIT plans to share
              communication-intensive curricula we develop with other educational
              institutions, and will explore possible partnerships for further collaborative
              development. We hope that MlT's efforts will serve as a national model for
              communication-intensive undergraduate programs in science and engineering that
              will prepare students to be productive team members and leaders by teaching
              them to write and speak clearly and effectively.
