Title       : Enhanced Learning Through Goal-Based Multimedia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9653027

Award Number: 9653027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149864             (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Purves bill_purves@hmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               We are developing, producing, marketing, and evaluating novel CD-ROMs for use
              in introductory and other lower-division college and university biology
              courses. The new disks will be based on our product currently under development
              but will afford greater interactivity and goal-based, problem-solving models of
              teaching. The CD-ROMs will address significant problems that arise from large
              class size, inappropriate sequencing of instruction, and individual differences
              in speed and style of learning. The products will provide instant feedback,
              constant opportunity (but not a requirement) for self-testing, and an
              exceptional number of hyperlinks through the very large databases of
              information. Individual entries in the database are concise but illustrated by
              outstanding animations and still art created specifically for our products.
              Sound is available on the disks. The tone is light, with considerable humor.   
                We will develop and implement "goal-based scenarios" as a major source of
              interactively. In these, the student is invited to participate in a fictional
              or real-world study of interest to her. To achieve her goal in this study, she
              must explore the large available database to obtain specific information she
              considers essential, and she must acquire necessary skills (e.g., learning to
              do genetic mapping). The student, in pursuing a goal, is an active participate
              in learning.      Dissemination and marketing will be provided by our company,
              The Mona Group LLC, and its marketing arm, Sinauer Associates. Information,
              including evaluation results, will be disseminated by publication in
              appropriate journals.      Evaluation will proceed in several stages under the
              supervision of personnel from the Center for Educational Studies of the
              Claremont Graduate School. Methods of evaluation will include extensive use of
              focus groups throughout product development, beta-testing, and controlled use
              and testing of the marketed products.  1
