Title       : A Parallel College to Pilot Test Institution-wide Reform in Science,
               Mathematics, and Engineering Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1997     
File        : a9653670

Award Number: 9653670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ned J. Sifferlen nsifferl@sinclair.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ned D. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George H. Sehi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen A. Wells  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanne F. Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sinclair Cmty College
	      444 West Third Street
	      Dayton, OH  454021421    513/226-2500

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Sinclair Community College (Dayton, Ohio) is creating a Parallel College to
              pilot test institution-wide reform efforts in science, mathematics, and
              engineering  technology education.  This effort builds upon eight existing
              institutional change drivers at Sinclair: Distance Learning, Sinclair
              Assessment Initiative, Corporate and Community Services Division, Sinclair
              Quality Initiative, Miami Valley Tech Prep Consortium, Advanced Integrated
              Manufacturing Center, National Center of Excellence for Advanced Manufacturing
              Education, and Center for Interactive Learning.  This effort also tests methods
              of correcting common problems at community colleges across the country: (1)
              misalignment of curriculum format with modern delivery systems; (2)
              misalignment of curriculum outcomes with modem workplace requirements; and (3)
              misalignment of college operating systems with modern operating systems.  Using
              curriculum modules created by the National Center of Excellence for Advanced 
              Manufacturing Education (an NSF ATE national center at Sinclair), the project
              is creating a Parallel College to pilot test key changes in the day-to-day
              operating systems (faculty workload and rewards, resource allocation, etc.). 
              The pilot provides a true indication of changes required in the day-to-day
              operating systems to achieve goals of higher quality and greater
              responsiveness.  It also leads the institution to a stronger position for
              meeting customer (students and employers) needs.
