Title       : New England Science Faculty Enhancement Collaborative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1997  
File        : a9653458

Award Number: 9653458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlene D'Avanzo cdavanzo@hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan L. Hankin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                There are serious problems in the college and university science classroom
              including intended majors who switch to other disciplines and pervasive student
              apathy, especially in introductory level courses. These problems exist because
              there is too much emphasis on coverage of material and memorization, an
              atmosphere of competition, and new faculty are either under prepared to teach
              undergraduate science courses. These issues have stimulated reform efforts that
              are just beginning to take place. As a result, there is now a real need for
              programs that help professors incorporate student-active approaches into their
              classrooms. To address this, we propose to develop a program of workshops
              centered in 5 sites throughout the northeast where higher education
              partnerships exist. Our program will target professors, including entry level
              and young faculty, who teach introductory courses. Hampshire College is the
              lead agency on this project; the college has a nationally recognized program in
              student-active, inquiry science teaching. Program objectives are to: 1)
              effectively reach large numbers of faculty through the "train the trainers"
              model, 2) give workshop leaders effective training and tools for leading
              regional workshop programs, 3) introduce workshop participants to effective
              student-active approaches and the learning theories underlying them, 4) help
              workshop participants incorporate student-active approach(es) of their choosing
              into a course, 5) link faculty experienced with student-active teaching
              (mentors) with regional inexperienced but interested faculty, and especially
              new faculty, 6) bring together a diverse group of faculty from different
              disciplines and types of institutions, with special emphasis on
              underrepresented groups in science, and 7) use consortia as effective means to
              identify workshops leaders and workshop participants
