Title       : Building Bridges: Enhancing Teaching and Research Across Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1998   
File        : a9653388

Award Number: 9653388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155513             (Estimated)
Investigator: E G. Simms   (Principal Investigator current)
              Doris Roman  (Principal Investigator former)
              Christendath Mahadeo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : National Consortium GEM
	      University of Notre Dame
	      Notre Dame, IN  465565612    219/239-7183

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  New faculty at research intensive universities as well as new and more
              senior faculty at universities which emphasize teaching are under increasing
              pressure to broaden their skills and expertise to equally encompass research
              and teaching. Additionally, new faculty at a variety of institutions are facing
              increased personal stress as they attempt to balance a variety of personal and
              professional obligations.  This project's vision is to create self-supporting
              networks among Minority Institution (MI) faculty and between MI faculty and
              faculty at research-intensive institutions by bringing together current and
              near-term faculty from these institutions to learn from and instruct each
              other. Senior faculty will provide guidance to new faculty, those trained in
              the latest research techniques will teach those less practiced or whose
              specialties are no longer current. Particular emphasis is placed on involving
              current doctoral students interested in pursuing faculty careers. In all cases,
              those willing to invest the time and energy to expand their skills will have
              the opportunity to network with others of similar interests.  During the next 3
              years, 90 faculty and senior graduate students selected from among applicants
              at MI's and research intensive institutions will participate in an intensive
              5-day workshop held at the University of Notre Dame. This workshop will
              emphasize a review of best pedagogic practices, strategies for initiating or
              revitalizing a research program, and instruction on effective mentoring
              practices for undergraduate students.  This project builds on existing
              collaborations which the GEM Consortium has with faculty at a variety of
              institutions. This project promises to leverage the resources and expertise of
              new and senior faculty at a variety of institutions to build collaborative
              networks to improve teaching, research, and mentoring.
