Title       : Programs, Pedagogy, and Process: Institution-Wide Improvement of Undergraduate
               Education at The Colorado School of Mines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1997  
File        : a9653726

Award Number: 9653726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173641             (Estimated)
Investigator: John U. Trefny jtrefny@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Ely  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara B. Bath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry D. Higgins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nigel T. Middleton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               At the Colorado School of Mines (CSM) we are about to enter the fourth year of
              a comprehensive curriculum improvement process undertaken in response to
              concerns about systemic problems in engineering education.  To date we have
              developed a mission statement and a set of attributes which we wish all
              graduates of the School to achieve including technical depth and breadth,
              communication skills, international awareness, flexibility, and ethics.  We
              have also studied our current curriculum and the curricula at other leading
              engineering schools and have developed a tentative framework for a new
              curriculum in which we emphasize programs, pedagogy, and process.  In the next
              few years we plan to build on existing excellent programs at CSM to develop a
              design-across-the curriculum program, a sequence of Systems courses, and an
              enhanced and thoroughly integrated humanities and social sciences component. 
              In addition, we will build on our long teaching history and our Office of
              Teaching Effectiveness to explore the best pedagogies for these new programs
              and to prepare faculty for teaching in them.  Finally, we will incorporate a
              refined assessment/continuous improvement program into our new curriculum. 
              This program will grow out of our already mature and well-recognized
              state-mandated portfolio assessment program.   As we develop, pilot, and fully
              implement a unique undergraduate engineering curriculum, our tangible products
              will include new texts, laboratory experiments, and hard copy and multimedia
              course materials.  More importantly, we will produce students who are better
              prepared for science and engineering careers and faculty who are better
              prepared to teach them.  Over the long-term, this project will help continue
              our transformation from an institution focused on teaching to one focused on
              learning.  Our project can serve as benchmark for both the products and the
              process of curricular revision elsewhere.
