Title       : Three-Dimensional Visualization in Undergraduate Earth Science Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1996  
File        : a9653146

Award Number: 9653146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Ridky                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86617              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark M. Johnson clarkj@geology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip E. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                     Providing undergraduate students with a deep appreciation of the
              geological evolution of the Earth requires that they visualize in three
              dimensions. Geological observations are intrinsically three dimensional, and
              yet we teach students using two dimensional instructional materials. Add to
              this the fact that the natural features observed in the Earth are the products
              of perhaps billions of years of processes that have occurred in three
              dimensions, and it is not surprising that the majority of non-science
              undergraduate majors leave undergraduate Earth science courses with a poor
              understanding of the processes that have shaped the physical features of the
              Earth, its resources, and its global environment.            Objectives of this
              project are to produce a variety of computer-based three dimensional
              visualization products to address incompatibility between learning styles of
              the non-science major and a highly visual field such as Earth science. Two
              types of 3D visualization products will be developed: 1) virtual reality
              fly-bys and landscape views that are manipulated by the user, featuring
              geologic, satellite, age, and geophysical information which are overlain on
              real world landscapes, and 2) true 3D models that represent the subsurface
              geologic structures, illustrating how these structures intersect the land
              surface to produce the observed features on the Earth. Animation of such
              models, to show changes through geologic time, will be an important component.
              In both cases, these products will feature real-world examples of geologic
              features, from the global scale to detailed regions; in the later cases,
              National Parks in the U.S.A. will often be used as examples.              Some
              of the products will consist of virtual reality, interactive multimedia
              "tutorials" for student's use, but a major part of this program will involve
              Group Learning environments where raw materials (data, interface templates,
              instruction) will allow students to produce their own virtual reality lessons.
              Students  of widely varying learning styles can each make their own unique
              contributions to such projects. The ultimate goal is to provide the student who
              is a non-science major an engaging science experience.  In addition to use in
              undergraduate instruction, it is anticipated that these products will also be
              used by the National Parks in their Visitor Centers, and by individuals with
              interest in the National Parks.
