Title       : Digital Signal Processing and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1996  
File        : a9653397

Award Number: 9653397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rulph Chassaing   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Roger Williams College
	      Old Ferry Road
	      Bristol, RI  02809    401/255-1000

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Digital signal processors, made possible through advances in  integrated
              circuits, have added a new element to the environment of  digital signal
              processing (DSP).  They have found their way into a  number of applications
              including communications and controls,  graphics, instrumentation, speech, and
              image processing.  These  processors are found in cellular phones, modems,
              automotive and  security/identification systems, noise cancelers, etc.  They
              have  emerged as a response to the ever-increasing number of real-time  DSP
              applications.    This workshop addresses the need to add or integrate DSP
              techniques  into courses such as Digital Signal Processing, Controls, Signals 
              and Systems, etc.  It will combine both the lecture and laboratory  components
              of DSP, with a special emphasis on the laboratory  component to provide the
              participants valuable hands-on  experiences.  While a theoretically oriented
              DSP course can be  found at a more convenient location to the participant, the 
              strength of this workshop is derived from its laboratory emphasis.  The faculty
              participants will implement a wide range of experiments  and mini-projects such
              as finite and infinite impulse response  filters, adaptive filters, and the
              fast Fourier transform using  both simulation and real-time techniques.  DSP
              tools and techniques  will be provided to the participants who will quickly
              realize how  software and hardware experiences can be used to motivate their 
              students.  They would then be able to integrate these software and  hardware
              experiences at their home institutions.
