Title       : Campuswide Reform Initiative for Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2000   
File        : a9653664

Award Number: 9653664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199529             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meredith A. Lee malee@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurel L. Wilkening  (Principal Investigator former)
              James N. Danziger  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Calfornia, Irvine (UCI) proposes a Campuswide Reform
              Initiative for Undergraduate Education that focuses on developing students'
              scientific and technological literacy skills which are needed for the 21st
              century. It is essential that al1 students -- not just science, mathematics,
              engineering and technology (SMET) majors-are prepared to succeed in and
              contribute to the changing context of life and work in this post-industria1
              world.    With NSF funding and leadership from UCI's Chancellor, Dean of
              Undergraduate Education, and other key faculty the Campuswide Reform Initiative
              will result in (1) major curricular and course content changes, especially in
              mathematics, engineering, and computer science, (2) the infusion of educational
              technolology throughout the undergraduate curriculum, and (3) .a change in the
              campus climate regarding curricular innovation and reform.    This project will
              build on current efforts at UCI to improve undergraduate education, including
              several funded by NSF, including: the California Alliance for Minority
              Participation (CAMP) recently renewed by NSF for five more years; the Southern
              CA Coalition for Education in Manufacturing Engineering (SCCEME) designed to
              reform manufacturing engineering; UCI's new Interdisciplinary Minor in Global
              Sustainability, a collaborative effort across five of UCI's schools; and
              Project SMART (Science and Mathematics Articulated Roads Toward Teaching),
              funded by the Pew Charitable Trusts and cited by NSF as a national model for
              teacher preparation.    The current project will provide the catalyst for
              developing and implementing more pervasive, campuswide changes in undergraduate
              education at UCI. Specifically, NSF funds will be used for several campuswide
              planning retreats, the creation of multidisciplinary curricular committees, a
              mini-grants program for faculty, instructional technology training for students
              and faculty, and a Teaching Colloquy series focused on effective uses of
              instructional technology. Additional curri cular components will include the
              development of four new courses (an engineering literacy course, an expansion
              of the "Idioms of Science" course for non-science students, and two teacher
              preparation courses), new "dual competency" minors in computer science,, and
              new models of instructional technology (e g, hypertext textbooks and a
              multimedia library accessible from campus classrooms)    The World Wide Web
              will be the primary vehicle for dissemination and will contain documents,
              materials, and prototypes generated by the project, plus links to other Web
              sites supported by this NSF initiative. Additional dissemination activities
              will include presentations at national meetings and papers written for
              educational and professional journals. The project evaluation will consist of
              an Internal, formative evaluation as well as an external, summative evaluation,
              using data collected from course enrollments, student satisfaction surveys,
              focus groups, and interviews.    The Campuswide Reform Initiative for
              Undergraduate Education will have long-term impact on the quality of
              undergraduate education at UCI enriching the scientific and technological
              competencies of both SMET majors and non-majors More importantly, it will
              ensure that all these changes occur within a framework that is shaped by a
              campuswide perspective and an integrated approach to planning and
              implementation.
