Title       : Packaging of Microelectronic Devices: Short Courses for Undergraduate Faculty
               Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1999      
File        : a9653375

Award Number: 9653375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric J. Sheppard                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99721              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guna S. Selvaduray   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Gwozdz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Four one-week long short courses on Microelectronic Packaging will be
              offered over a two year period, in June and July, during Years I and II. 
              Microelectronic packaging, which is the technology of encapsulating
              semiconductor devices, is an interdisciplinary field which requires knowledge
              from several traditional engineering and science disciplines. The subject
              matter of the short course will be of interest to faculty in electrical,
              mechanical, materials and industrial engineering.      Hands-on laboratory
              exercises will be a major component of the course, which will emphasize
              multi-disciplinary package design, long term reliability and manufacturing
              operations.  A field trip to a local Silicon Valley industry will enhance the
              learning process.  Examples of how the short course material can be integrated
              into existing curricula will be provided.  Follow through support will be
              provided for participants to assist them in introducing these concepts at their
              home institutions.  This will be monitored on an on-going basis, via
              questionnaires and direct email contact.  Problems faced, solutions developed -
              especially innovative ones - new laboratory exercises developed, and other
              pertinent information will be compiled and distributed to all participants in
              the form of a periodic newsletter.  SJSU's College of Engineering will serve as
              a depository for this material.  A manual on "Laboratory Exercises in
              Microelectronic Packaging" will be prepared and provided to participants.  This
              will also be made available to other interested university faculty.  An
              independent evaluator will conduct, compile and distribute course evaluations
              by participants.
