Title       : In Search of Nature: Edward O. Wilson on Conservation Biology and Biodiversity;
               and Multimedia Teaching Tools for Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1997      
File        : a9653119

Award Number: 9653119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles C. Savitt csavitt@islandpress.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan L. Perlman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward O. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ctr for Res Econ Island Pr
	      1718 Connecticut Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  20009    202/232-7933

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              While science plays a critical role in helping to resolve some of our most
              complex problems, science literacy among young Americans remains inadequate. 
              To ensure that students actively pursue and receive an education grounded in
              science, new mechanisms are needed that make science less intimidating and more
              accessible.  To accomplish this task, scientists and educators must collaborate
              proactively in the development and implementation of new educational
              technologies.    Island Press is working with Dr. Edward O. Wilson to produce
              and disseminate new materials dedicated to science education and featuring
              interactive, multimedia CD-ROM.  We are drawing from Dr. Wilson's experience in
              instructing Harvard undergraduates to create a series of CD-ROM teaching and
              learning tools that will enable the user to actively explore the biological
              sciences at a variety of levels of depth.      Over the years, Dr. Wilson has
              accumulated and developed a series of "teaching aids" that he and his teaching
              assistants employ in lectures, sections, and labs. These aids include computer
              simulations to demonstrate the workings of important ecological processes and
              equations, as well as a library of top-knotch slides.  We plan to harness this
              experience to create the next generation of teaching aids embodied in one
              CD-ROM, entitled "Teaching Tools for Biology."  The CD-ROM will provide a
              collection of multi-media simulations, animations, and other computer-based
              tools that biology professors will use to enhance their teaching of key
              concepts in introductory and mid-level college biology classes.    It is our
              experience that the most important concepts in biology, and those that are
              often the most difficult for students to learn, often discuss change over time,
              whether within individual organisms, populations, species, communities, or
              ecosystems.  Through "Teaching Tools for Biology," we will provide tools that
              will enable teachers to present this material dynamically. In addition to
              giving educators new methods of deliv ering concepts, and providing students
              new ways of grasping these concepts, the CD-ROM will offer the same opportunity
              for exploration and student engagement that Dr. Wilson injects into his course.
                 "Teaching Tools for Biology" will be an important resource for teachers in a
              wide array of classes, including introductory organismic biology, evolution,
              ecology, genetics, and conservation biology, among others. The CD-ROM will
              include a printed Teacher's Manual with instructions on using the CD-ROM and
              recommendations on incorporating the tools into curricula and instruction.  We
              also plan to provide explanation via "dialogue boxes" within the CD-ROM itself,
              and will provide online assistance via our Web site.    A non-profit
              organization dedicated to information dissemination and education in science
              and the environment, Island Press will work with Dr. Wilson to develop the
              substance of the package.  We have entered into a partnership arrangement with
              Adobe Systems, Inc., which will work with us to develop the software.  And our
              advisory committee will provide guidance on quality control and content.
