Title       : Stressed Stream Analysis: Addressing Real Environmental Problems to Stimulate
               Undergraduate Science Faculty and Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  1996  
File        : a9653394

Award Number: 9653394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Ridky                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132464             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Haynes jhaynes@brockport.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph K. Buttner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sara E. Silverstone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph C. Makarewicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Norment  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Brockport
	      
	      Brockport, NY  14420    716/395-2211

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                    The Center for Applied Aquatic Science and Aquaculture will conduct a
              three-week summer project for 20 undergraduate faculty that demonstrates
              environmental problem-solving as an effective teaching strategy to stimulate
              undergraduates' interest in environmental science. Using the theme of Stressed
              Stream Analysis, participating facultv will learn NEPA-based environmental
              analysis concepts and techniques and will work in teams to prepare an
              Environmental Impact Statement for a new pollution source in a disturbed stream
              ecosystem. Concepts and skills participants will learn and use hands-on
              include: hierarchical habitat analysis, employing biotic indices and
              microscopic techniques to evaluate pollutant effects on organisms, analyzing
              anthropogenically-induced landscape changes over time with GIS (Geographic
              Information System) technology, and water quality analysis of nutrients, metals
              and microbes in a stressed stream ecosystem. In the year following the June
              1997 program, participants will develop and implement new curricula at their
              home institutions then meet for a three-day workshop to report on and discuss
              successes and problems. Written reports by the participants will be compiled
              into an edited report available at cost to other educators and advertised in
              professional newsletters and on the Internet. We seek applications from a
              diverse mix of new and experienced faculty who teach at colleges that emphasize
              undergraduate science education and student research opportunities.
