Title       : Catalysts for Change: Foundation Courses and Instructional Innovation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9653663

Award Number: 9653663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John S. Bradley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Watson ghw@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara J. Duch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold B. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah E. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry L. Shipman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In university science and engineering education, an emphasis on algorithmic
              problem-solving and rote memorization of abstract concepts has been
              traditional.  This approach does not adequately prepare the majority of
              students for the real challenges of life in a technological society.  The
              passive role often relegated to students stifles their interest and initiative;
              this provides scant opportunity for the development of skills with lasting
              value, such as effective communication, mastery in analytical thinking,
              productive teamwork, and responsible, independent learning and resource
              utilization.    Institution-wide, systemic change in science education is being
              made by targeting freshmen and sophomores; their enhanced learning skills and
              spirit of inquiry will instigate further reform in upper-level courses,
              changing campus-wide expectations for science is taught and learned. 
              Longitudinal studies of student performance and attitudes will assess the
              effectiveness of the change.    A core of science and engineering Foundation
              Courses are developed that aid students in the early acquisition of the skills
              and habits of mind required for learning after college and outside of the
              classroom.  The Foundation Courses are developed by interdisciplinary teams of
              faculty, supported by an annual Instructional Innovation Institute that
              provides training in appropriate learning strategies and computer technology. 
              The Institute will sustain this drive for reform across disciplines and
              throughout the university.  The project builds on prior NSF-supported projects
              at the University of Delaware: "Problem-Based Learning in Introductory Science
              Across Disciplines" and Delaware's Innovative Science/Mathematics Collaborative
              for Undergraduate Success".    As a result of this project, we expect to find
              that our students graduate with improved learning and problem-solving skills an
              enhanced appreciation of and attitude regarding science, and an improved
              ability to learn outside the classroom.  We expect to imbue in fac ulty a
              renewed interest in teaching and improving their effectiveness, specifically an
              enthusiasm for actively engaging their students in learning.  Finally, we
              expect that our administration will hold in high esteem our efforts in teaching
              science to and increasingly diverse student body.  We seek to catalyze a shift
              of additional institutional resources to science and engineering departments
              for facilitating active learning and instructional innovation.
