Title       : Developing Multimedia-Based Interactive Laboratory Modules for Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1996   
File        : a9653464

Award Number: 9653464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet D. Hartman hartman@katya.acs.ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean E. Sanders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project consists of a two-week summer workshop and a two-day follow-through
              session during the following the spring semester in each of two years.
              Participants will design and implement interactive, multimedia laboratory
              modules for  computer science courses. Topics include (1) designing and
              constructing an  interactive multimedia module for a laboratory exercise that
              includes audio, still images, full motion video and/or algorithm animation, 
              (2) using hardware to capture audio, still images, and full motion video,  (3)
              requirements for implementation and delivery of multimedia-based laboratory
              exercises in a  laboratory setting, (4) presentations and discussions centered
              on the impact of  multimedia and laboratories on learning,  (5) developing
              portable multimedia-based laboratory exercises for the World Wide Web, and (6)
              software for developing multimedia-based laboratory exercises. Tools to be 
              used include an authoring tool and Java templates (a tool midway between a
              programming language and an authoring tool) for developing modules for the
              World Wide Web. Templates will allow participants to construct modules for the
              Web with only a small introduction to HTML, JAVA and CGIs needed. An expert  in
              graphics design and one who researched and developed the concept of templates
              will interact with the participants during the workshop. Each participant is
              expected to design and develop a working version of a  laboratory module during
              the workshop. The participants will enhance the modules during the
              follow-through session. The modules will be refined and tested with students
              during the academic year following the workshop.
