Title       : Institution-wide Reform of SME&T Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9653692

Award Number: 9653692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick S. Humphries   (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil James  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. S. Shetty  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Florida A&M University
	      400 Foote Hilyer Administration
	      Tallahassee, FL  32307    850/599-3531

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:  requested in this proposal will allow Florida A&M University to
              initiate institution-wide reform of the SME&T curricula.  The President of the
              University will serve as the principal investigator.  Day-to-day activities
              will be directed by the project director, who will be an Associate Vice
              President for Academic Affairs. The project director will interface with the
              Deans, department chairs and faculty and students for the implementation of the
              proposed activities.  The principal investigator will receive advisory
              directives from the curriculum reform committee, consisting of the faculty
              representatives from various sectors of the university community.         The
              specific activities to be implemented with funds from this project include:    
                  1.  the development of a multi-disciplinary general science course that
              uses an integrated cooperative instruction model incorporating an inquiry
              format.  This course will be developed initially as a one semester sequence,
              and expanded in the second year to a two semester sequence. This two semester
              sequence will satisfy the general science education requirement for the core
              curriculum (for non-science majors),       2.  the implementation of a
              structured faculty professional development program that will enable faculty to
              utilize the current technological advances to enhance their teaching skills,   
                 3.  the development of innovative methods of delivery of SME&T instructions
              that include ample use of current technology to transform the learning process
              from a passive activity to one in which the students are active participants,  
                  4.  the implementation of the experimental reform activities that are
              initiated in this effort as a wedge to modify current teaching practices of all
              faculty at the university.    Upon completion of the reform described in this
              proposal, it is expected that FAMU graduates will:         1.  understand the
              uniqueness of the natural world and appreciate the relationship between life
              and the universe,       2.  b e technically informed citizens who can engage in
              intelligent discussions about science and technical topics,       3. 
              understand and utilize science related processes and principles to navigate the
              throws of everyday life,       4.  adapt to and become comfortable with the
              constant changes that result from the development of a more technological
              society,       5.  become talented and creative scientists and engineers for
              the 21st centry, and serve as creative enthusiastic teachers who convey the
              excitement of science to the next generation of citizens.
