Title       : Campus Ecology: Experimental Field Sites as Tools for Teaching Ecological
               Principles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2000   
File        : a9653190

Award Number: 9653190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99884              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald W. Saunders gwsaund@unco.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer A. Clarke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Northern Colorado
	      Carter Hall 4000
	      Greeley, CO  80639    303/351-2881

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                    The goal of the project is to improve 6-16 biology education through the
              production  and dissemination of a manual describing small scale campus-based
              long-term ecological  research sites (school-based LTER sites). A common
              feature of ecology curriculum at  the high school level and in many instances
              at the undergraduate level is a lack of an  experimentally-based field
              experience. School-based LTER sites will allow pre-service  and in-service
              teachers to be actively involved in ongoing short- and long-term ecological 
              research. The manual will detail how to establish LTER sites on school grounds
              and  provide examples of experiments that could be conducted at the sites. The
              approach  differs from traditional uses of school yards by presenting
              experiments patterned after  those in the literature. For the Rocky Mountain
              West, long-term experiments are  presented to address the effects of nutrient
              availability, enhanced water availability and  grazing on short grass prairie
              succession. Experiments that have greater relevance to  other regions of the
              country will also be developed. Regardless of the questions asked or  size and
              budget of the LTER sites, all the experiments will be simple in design, low in 
              cost, low in maintenance and will be explicitly tied to national standards and
              benchmarks  (AAAS 1993, NRC 1996). The University of Northern Colorado views
              this project as  central to its mission as the science education leader in
              region and to this end has  committed over $20,000 in the form of graduate
              stipends, tuition, and equipment dollars  towards its development and
              implementation (see Budget Justification for details).      The manual will be
              developed over a three period by a team that includes the PI's,  and a group of
              invited in-service teachers, biology researchers and science educators from 
              different geographic and demographic regions of the US. The PI's for this
              project  represent a blend of researchers in ecology and biology education,
              including experience in  theoretical eco logy, population ecology, animal
              behavior, and student learning.  Moreover, they possess over 20 years
              experience teaching at the middle and high school  levels. The input from
              additional team members is critical to the success of the project  and to
              insure that the manual be applicable to the widest possible audience. While 
              teachers, researchers and science educators share common interests, the reality
              is that they  write to different levels and communicate to different audiences
              through different venues.  The team will meet once per year in a workshop
              setting to develop the manual. In year  one, the team will setup the
              demonstration plots and activities relevant to each team  member's region will
              be developed. In year two, the team will meet again to refine the  exercises.
              In year three the team will finalize and submit the first edition of the
              manual.      The manual will be disseminated through a national publisher in
              coordination with  the University of Northern Colorado Research Corporation
              (see Dissemination Plan).  Additionally, results will be published in
              professional journals and presented at national  professional meetings. As an
              added bonus, the campus-LTER sites will also be used to  enhance the current
              ecology and science methods curriculum at UNC. Students (a large  percentage of
              which are pre-service teachers) will be active participants in both short-term 
              and long-term experiments. The pre-service teachers will be exposed to a potent
               instructional tool that they might integrate into their curricula. Sites will
              also offer  opportunities for faculty and graduate students interested in
              pedagogically based research.      The University of Northern Colorado is well
              positioned to conduct this project. The  University has a long tradition of
              leadership in science education. Department of  Biological Sciences includes
              faculty specializing in both biology content and pedagogy.
