Title       : Electronic Homework and Intelligent Tutoring on the World Wide Web: Course
               Delivery Tools for Large Enrollment Classes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1998     
File        : a9653064

Award Number: 9653064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberta O. Day rday@chem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly P. Woolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beatrice H. Botch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Vining  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The major challenges in teaching large-enrollment math and science courses are
              (1) providing continual feedback to students even in the face of acute staff
              shortages and (2) dealing with a diverse student body that has become more
              media oriented and less amenable to conventional instructional methods. The
              chemistry electronic homework system, that has been used for over a decade at
              the University of Massachusetts, has demonstrated that electronic homework is
              an effective means of engaging science and engineering students, and that its
              use requires far less faculty time than conventional alternatives when
              administered and delivered electronically.  This project is developing a
              web-based electronic homework and intelligent tutoring system suitable for
              large enrollment chemistry classes, and a tool set which will allow it to be
              used both by other universities and other disciplines. The system is
              interactive and incorporates elaborate feed-back, multimedia elements and
              automatic record keeping. In addition to extensive testing of the electronic
              homework system in our introductory undergraduate chemistry classes, the
              chemistry software is being tested at Boston University and at SUNY Stony
              Brook. A non subject-specific shell and electronic homework system has been
              developed, with authoring capabilities, that is used by our mathematics and
              physics departments as a test of the portability of this technology to other
              disciplines. The effectiveness of the system will be carefully evaluated and
              improved in chemistry classes over a two year period. Once developed, it can be
              used for on-line placement testing or in distance learning environments.
              Because students will have considerable freedom in choosing the ways in which
              they interact with this software, it will also address the challenges
              associated with teaching increasingly diverse student populations. It will be
              promoted via demonstrations and distributed widely through a publisher.    NSF
              FORM 1358 (1/94)
