Title       : Looking Into Mathematics: A Visual Invitation to Mathematical Thinking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1997  
File        : a9653029

Award Number: 9653029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rafael Martinez-Planell                 
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204275             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wallace Feurzeig feurzeig@bbn.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : BBN Laboratories Inc
	      33 Moulton Street
	      Cambridge, MA  021381118    617/873-4277

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Many undergraduates are turned off by mathematics. Their feelings about
              mathematics veer between negative and hostile, between overwhelmed and
              dismissive. As a consequence, they are not only missing something in their
              private lives: as citizens, they are less equipped to evaluate many significant
              developments in humanity's changing relationship to the physical and social
              world. Our objective is to engage and sustain students' interest in mathematics
              by genuinely involving them in mathematical thinking. If some go on in
              mathematics or science, so much the better. We do not, however, seek so much to
              recruit mathematicians as to make friends of mathematics.  We will develop
              instructional materials, activities, and software tools in an interactive,
              visual, experimentally-oriented curriculum that conveys the spirit and flavor
              of modern mathematics emphasizing a variety of key and central perspectives
              (such as local/global, intrinsic/extrinsic, dynamic/static,
              discrete/continuous, and algebraic/geometric). We will enable semi-rigorous
              interactive experimentation--both manual and virtual--with a rich variety of
              complex, interesting mathematical objects like curves, surfaces, linkages,
              knots, and braids. Students will explore these areas using new visual tools
              that are both powerful and empowering.  The audiences targeted by the project
              include, especially,  first-year college students who do not intend to major in
              mathematics or science, and future mathematics teachers. Pilot sections will be
              taught at Brandeis Universitiy, Harvard University, Clark University, and the
              University of Massachusetts, Boston. We will develop materials with a view to
              their use in a wide variety of colleges and universities, either in
              introductory mathematics courses or for enhancement of existing courses. Both
              text and software will be made freely available for adoption and dissemination.
