Title       : Environmental Science, Technology and Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a9653194

Award Number: 9653194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174622             (Estimated)
Investigator: Indira Nair in0a@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The general objective of this curriculum development project is to prepare
              material and a curriculum for teaching environmental issues to a wide range of
              undergraduate engineering and science students. The curriculum will include: a)
              modules that can be incorporated into individual disciplinary courses, and   b)
              a complete curriculum for a self-contained course including a text.    The
              specific components of the project have the following objectives:  1. To
              develop teaching material that uses a project-based approach to understand the
              principles in science, engineering and policy that affect environmental
              decision-making. The materials will include: a) case studies using
              decision-making contents, b) team projects of realistic environmental issues,
              c) role-playing exercises that emphasize decision-making.  2. To demonstrate -
              teach and evaluate - the materials at two institutions: These institutions are
              Rose Hulman Institute of Technology (RHIT) and Carnegie Mellon University
              (CMU). The courses and student groups will include: a required course for all
              civil engineering juniors as a first introduction to environmental engineering
              (at RHIT); science and engineering students pursuing an environmental
              engineering minor (at CMU); and, a core course for environmental studies minors
              (students from all majors, including fine arts, humanities and social sciences,
              science and engineering at CMU).  3. To evaluate the outcome of this
              project-based teaching approach. This demonstration will include detailed
              evaluations by students as to benefits of the approach for learning and
              interest, changes needed for future courses of this kind, and what the possible
              effects may be on future careers/lives. Both formative and summative
              evaluations will be conducted during the project. We will also conduct
              evaluations pre-course, and post-course, and continue the evaluations after
              graduation for those students who took the demonstration courses - 2 years, and
              5 years after graduation. A pilot workshop involving a few fa culty will be
              used as part of this evaluation.  4. To prepare a handbook of the methods used
              in this curriculum for dissemination. In addition to the curricular materials,
              we will prepare a handbook of methods including the use of team projects and
              cooperative learning, concept maps and influence diagrams. This will be used
              and revised during the pilot faculty workshop
