Title       : Mathematical and Quantitative Reasoning Across the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1997        
File        : a9653689

Award Number: 9653689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan F. Pustejovsky pustejsf@alverno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne M. Mente  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alverno College
	      3401 S 39th Street
	      Milwaukee, WI  532154020    414/647-3999

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Alverno College, a women's college in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, with a 25% minority-
              student population, is beginning the next phase of a project called
              "Mathematical and Quantitative Reasoning Across the Curriculum." In the early
              1990s, Alverno undertook the thorough revision of its introductory-level
              general-education mathematics curriculum, with the result that more first-year
              students, including more women of color, now successfully complete the
              College's quantitative-reasoning requirement in a more timely manner.  However,
              at the sophomore through senior levels, there is growing concern that students
              who are not mathematics/science majors are generally unable to apply what they
              learned in their introductory classes to classes in their disciplines where
              they are expected to think and express themselves adequately and effectively in
              quantitative terms.  Alverno is building on the success of its earlier
              curricular reform by expanding the quantitative-reasoning requirement for all
              students, not only mathematics and science majors, beyond the introductory
              level.  This is being accomplished through the integration of appropriate
              quantitative reasoning and application experiences, as well as quantitative
              assessment activities, throughout the Alverno curriculum. 
              Non-mathematics/science faculty are receiving training in how to make more
              public to their students the quantitative dimensions and applications already
              inherent in course content, and how to design appropriate quantitative
              instructional and assessment strategies, including the use of technology.  The
              project ensures that all Alverno students will demonstrate quantitative
              reasoning in non-mathematics/science courses beyond their freshman year and, it
              is expected, in their personal, professional, and civic lives after graduation.
               In particular, this integration serves as a model for the many Alverno
              students who go on to teach at the K-12 level.  Project information is being
              actively shared with other institutions.
