Title       : Inquiry Project Courses: Real Science Investigations for All Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1999  
File        : a9653731

Award Number: 9653731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165420             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann P. McNeal amcneal@hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan H. Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory S. Prince  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  The science and mathematics faculty of Hampshire College are revising  and
              refining their program of Inquiry Project Courses (IPCs), which constitute the
              introductory requirement in all science disciplines.  The IPCs address
              specific, often interdisciplinary, topics of interest to students in courses
              such as Pollution and the Environment, The Biology of Fat, Human Gene Therapy,
              AgroEcology, Optics and Holography, and The Structure of Randomness.   Building
              on this successful existing program of inquiry courses, the faculty are
              systematically incorporating skill development so that each student can better
              carry out, within the course structure, an original research project in the
              lab, field or using the scientific literature.  Students in the Inquiry Project
              Courses are developing skills in several areas:  critical thinking,
              quantitative reasoning, asking and refining scientific questions, written
              communication and revision, oral communication, and collaborative research. 
              The emphasis on group projects within courses is a critical new addition,
              providing a stronger basis for launching students into scientific inquiry;
              previously, virtually all student projects were started in courses but
              completed in individual tutorials.   Goals of the enhancements in Inquiry
              Project Courses include: I) improving student access to science, 2) enhancing
              student learning through more collaborative work, 3) supporting the
              college-wide curriculum with its emphasis on research, and 4) making the
              research-based course model more adaptable for faculty use at diverse
              institutions.   The Inquiry Project Courses are being refined by faculty and
              students working together in the. initial summer and then implementing these
              improvements in the following two academic years.  The evaluation assesses
              whether the IPCs have achieved the same or better results than tutorials in
              terms of engagement, skills, and drawing students into science.  The models of
              investigative laboratory courses are being disseminated through regional  and
              national workshops and talks, presenting both examples of Inquiry Project
              Courses and general strategies for faculty at other institutions to follow in
              designing investigative courses for all levels and types of students.
