Title       : Initiatives for Systemic Educational Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9653682

Award Number: 9653682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219413             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nihat M. Bilgutay Nihat_Bilgutay@coe.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne E. Magee  (Principal Investigator former)
              Robert G. Quinn  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Drexel University has become a national leader in restructuring engineering and
              science education as a result of multi-year efforts.  The experimental E4
              program has emerged as an international model for core engineering education in
              the 21st century.  Its success and the encouragement of virtually every segment
              of the engineering enterprise, caused the College of Engineering to initiate a
              program of unprecedented scale and scope to develop a totally new curriculum
              based on this core.  In the biological sciences, the Enhanced Bioscience
              Education (EBE) program has gained national recognition for the way it engages
              bioscience majors in experiential learning and project-based inquiry during
              their freshmen and sophomore years.  In keeping with the mission of our
              technological University, the faculty, with support from administration, are
              now ready to develop additional University-wide reforms and innovations.  The
              Initiatives for Systmic Educational Reform project is intended to provide the
              next steps in this continuing process.  The project focuses on overcoming the
              problems of scale and paradigm changes which are associated with sweeping
              institutional reforms.  The strategy is to continue curricular innovations of a
              systemic nature and at the same time expand the University's ability of create
              further innovations.  The strategy is being implemented using the teams of
              faculty and the methodologies that created the successes of E4 and EBE.  The
              cadre of experienced faculty is being expanded with the addition of new faculty
              to generate the new courses and approaches that are critically needed in our
              existing reform efforts.  At the same time supporting infrastructures for
              long-term curricular and faculty development are being established to sustain
              the effort in the future.
