Title       : Science, Gender and Community: A Faculty Enhancement Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1998   
File        : a9653437

Award Number: 9653437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric J. Sheppard                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline R. Ross   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Zimmerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Oshkosh
	      800 Algoma Boulevard
	      Oshkosh, WI  549013551    414/424-1234

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                         The proposed project draws on the experience and expertise of
              participants who are currently involved in the NSF-funded UW System Women and
              Science Program, and seeks to expand the program's objectives and disseminate
              its successful innovations to the national level. The overarching goal of the
              program is to promote systemic change in the way that science and science
              education are regarded and carried out within the UW System and to facilitate
              that shift nationally. Within this framework, the ultimate goal is to attract
              and retain qualified female students in science, mathematics, and engineering
              by improving the quality of undergraduate science education for both women and
              men through faculty development activities. The proposed project brings
              together junior and senior faculty from universities around the country,
              engaging them in collaborative active learning experiences. Using
              gender-friendly approaches, participants will develop and implement course
              materials and other products, which can be replicated, that address the
              content, pedagogy and climate in undergraduate science courses. Four components
              will be established: 1) an Institute which allows faculty from a variety of
              institutions of higher education to work with one another in modifying their
              science curricula; 2) follow-up activities to the Institute which include
              electronic discussion groups; 3) the development of products, such as course
              syllabi and lab materials, which integrate the new gender-friendly scholarship
              into disciplinary and interdisciplinary models; and 4) a national consulting
              service which will provide expert advice to institutions that are in the
              process of reassessing the pedagogy, process, and/or content of their science
              courses.  By the third year, the intent is that the programs will be fully
              self-supporting.
