Title       : Instrumentation Workshop for Two-Year College Chemistry Faculty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1997       
File        : a9653389

Award Number: 9653389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Jones rjones@sinclair.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sinclair Cmty College
	      444 West Third Street
	      Dayton, OH  454021421    513/226-2500

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                       Electronic advancements of recent years have placed a challenge to
              undergraduate chemistry faculty to incorporate the use of modern chemical
              instrumentation into the undergraduate laboratories. To meet this challenge,
              undergraduate faculty members need to understand better the use and
              capabilities of modern instrumentation. This project addresses this need to
              update two-year college faculty in the area of chemical instrumentation. This
              project is a three-year effort which continues a successful Instrumentation
              Workshop currently funded by NSF. We have made modifications to the content of
              some of the workshops to respond to the changing needs of two-year college
              chemistry faculty. The existing coalition consists of East Coast (Northern
              Virginia Community College and George Mason University.), Midwest (Sinclair
              Community College and the University of Dayton), and West Coast (Shoreline
              Community College and Western Washington University). A one-week workshops will
              be offered during the summer. Instruction will focus on undergraduate general
              and organic chemistry, introduction to instrumental analysis and associate
              degree chemical technology course applications. The goal of this project is to
              train a total of 72 chemistry faculty from two-year colleges across the United
              States on the theory, techniques, and laboratory use of state-of-the-art
              chemical instrumentation. Two-year college chemistry faculty will select
              instruction in the following areas: Fourier-transform infrared,
              ultraviolet/visible diode array, gas chromatography/mass spectroscopies, vapor
              phase and high performance liquid chromatography, computerized data acquisition
              and treatment, multimedia approaches to chemical education, and environmental
              chemistry.
