Title       : Elementary Statistics Laboratory Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1996   
File        : a9653442

Award Number: 9653442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67845              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Spurrier spurrier@stat.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students in elementary statistics traditionally see experiments and data merely
              as words and numbers in a text. They plug numbers into formulas and make
              conclusions about briefly described experiments. They receive little or no
              exposure to the important statistical activities of sample selection, data
              collection, experimental design, randomization, development of statistical
              models, etc. In short, they leave the first course without a firm understanding
              of the role of applied statistics and the statistician in scientific
              investigations. Using previous support from the NSF, a successful prototype
              elementary statistics laboratory course has been established at the University
              of South Carolina. The laboratory, which can be taken in lieu of some
              traditional lectures or in addition to the traditional course, allows students
              to work in teams to design and perform experiments, collect and analyze data,
              and make written reports. It is proposed to train a nationwide cadre of
              elementary statistics teachers in the techniques of supplementing traditional
              elementary statistics lectures with meaningful hands-on laboratory experiences.
              Two groups of 24 teachers will be trained. Initial training will involve a
              five-day workshop. The workshops will allow the teachers to experience ten of
              the 17 laboratory sessions. There will also be discussions on effective
              teaching strategies in the laboratory setting, the logistics of obtaining
              supplies and equipment, and different possible formats for using the labs.
              Teachers attending the workshop will be expected to use at least two laboratory
              experiences in an elementary statistics course in the following year and
              encouraged to develop at least one new elementary statistics laboratory
              experiment. An electronic discussion group will be developed to allow for
              interaction among the teachers and the project team after the completion of the
              workshops.
