Title       : Revitalizing the Study of Probability Through Applications, Technology and
               Collaborative Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1997     
File        : a9653267

Award Number: 9653267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Bean mbean@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robb J. Muirhead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over the past ten years, there has been a substantial effort (sponsored by the
              National Science Foundation) to revitalize the undergraduate curriculum in
              mathematics, science, and engineering. While a lot of attention has been
              focused on the reform of Calculus and Statistics courses, very little effort
              has been directed toward the revitalization of Probability courses. At the same
              time, the importance of Probability in many programs has increased
              substantially.   New technology such as the Texas Instruments TI-83 statistical
              calculator and sophis- ticated numeric and visualization software packages like
              Excel and Mathematical now make it possible to present Probability from an
              experimental perspective and to dispense with archaic processes (like using
              tables to evaluate normal distribution functions). At the same time, new
              applications permit the subject to be presented in a more concrete and less
              theoretical way. Unfortunately, there are few instructional materials available
              which are suitable for discovery learning and which incorporate technology in
              an effective way.   The goal of this project is to produce a comprehensive
              textbook/workbook/instructor resource manual/computer lab manual which
              encourages students to learn Probability by discovery and gives them an
              appreciation of the wide range of applications of the subject; which enables
              non-specialist faculty not experienced in collaborative learning and not aware
              of current applications to become knowledgeable in these areas; and which makes
              full and effective use of the technology currently available in a way that
              enables students to learn through visualization and experimentation.   The
              immediate impact of this project on the quality of undergraduate education at
              the University of Michigan will be significant, since all engineering
              undergraduates and a large number of undergraduates in the sciences are now
              required to take probability. The mate- rials developed under this initiative
              will be disseminated widely using both traditional and  electronic means, and
              will provide a basis for revitalizing Probability courses nationwide.
