Title       : The Beta Coalition: Regional Collaboration Between 2-Year and 4-Year Engineering
               Colleges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2000   
File        : a9653209

Award Number: 9653209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Culver rculver@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon B. Fellows  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George D. Catalano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               A regional coalition, the Beta Coalition, is being established to support
              two-year community colleges and small four-year engineering and science
              programs in transforming the innovations based on sophisticated information
              technology-based programs developed by NSF coalitions such as SYNTHESIS and
              ECSEL into a form they can use with limited resources. Furthermore, in small
              programs it is difficult to justify integration of content-based subjects such
              as math and science because requirements tend to be specific to a major.
              However, integration of skill-based subjects such as writing, computer
              applications, graphics, and design can bring students with different majors
              together in a common course sequence. The Watson School of Engineering at
              Binghamton University and Broome Community College have worked together on a
              variety of programs, and faculty at both institutions have experience in
              developing integrated course sequences. This proposal is based on their
              existing collaborative efforts. Funding is sought to develop and present summer
              workshops wherein faculty from other 2-year and small 4-year schools within a
              150 mile radius can be trained and supported in developing integrated courses
              for their own institutions. A model will be created for the needed
              interdepartmental cooperation, while recognizing the special institutional
              problems involved in sharing faculty and resources. Ways will be evaluated in
              which integrated courses can be used to increase access and retention of
              students in engineering and science from under-represented groups, including
              non-traditional students commonly present in community colleges. An assessment
              system will be developed for measuring program effectiveness, particularly
              innovations springing from Beta Coalition activities. Results and materials
              will be disseminated via Internet as well as conferences and journals of ASEE
              and other appropriate professional communications.
