Title       : Investigative Science at Alfred: How the World Works
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9653164

Award Number: 9653164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine R. Grontkowski   (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Blauth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. DeGraff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Johanna L. Crane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michele M. Hluchy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart F. Boersma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon L. Godshalk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alfred University
	      1 Saxon Drive
	      Alfred, NY  148021205    607/871-2863

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                     Courses which satisfy the science requirements for non-science majors at
              Alfred University are typically unrelated and compartmentalized. Techniques in
              one science are not exploited and built upon in others. This confusing approach
              does not efficiently provide Alfred University's students with a general
              science education so necessary in our society. The current approach also makes
              science education less attractive as a career.  To address this problem, a new
              year-long, introductory, interdisciplinary course entitled SCI 123-124: "How
              the World Works", will be taught by the principal investigators. In this
              course, students will experience the fun and creative side of science, so often
              missing from traditional disciplinary courses. An overall theme for the course
              such as "Living in Space" or "Survival on a Greenhouse Planet" will be provided
              each year. Beyond this, the course will be designed by the students as they
              pose questions related to the theme. Their questions will lead to experiments
              that they will design, perform, and interpret themselves with guidance from
              their instructors. As they participate in these self- designed activities,
              students will rediscover the fun of science at the same time that they are
              learning to think and analyze critically, broadening their scientific and
              mathematical backgrounds, and appreciating the interrelationships that exist
              between mathematics and all of the scientific disciplines.                  One
              of the largest potential impacts of this proposal is its promise for improving
              teacher preparation.  All students at Alfred are required to take two semesters
              of science and to also demonstrate mathematics competency.  The PI's expect
              that this course sequence, Science 123-124 (How the World Works) will be used
              by most students not majoring in science to satisfy this requirement. 
              Ninety-five  undergraduates receive degrees in elementary or secondary
              education from Alfred University each year.  Approximately 30 graduate students
              are also annually enrolle d in its education programs.  These future teachers
              of math and science will be learning (hands-on) examples of teaching
              approaches, investigative experiences, cooperative learning, interdisciplinary
              perspective, and quantitative analysis, which can be applied to teaching at all
              grade levels.  These teachers will be scientifically and quantitatively
              literate, and able to pass that knowledge on to their students.            
              This course will have an impact on not only the non-science majors taking the
              course but also on upper level math and science students. Upper level
              undergraduates majoring in math, science, and/or education will be employed to
              act as peer mentors to facilitate classroom activities and, in the process,
              they will learn more about science and the joy of teaching science.
