Title       : Building Bridges in the First Two Years: Making Connections Among Introductory
               Mathematics, Science, and Engineering Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2000     
File        : a9653707

Award Number: 9653707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith E. Miller jmiller@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas K. Kildahl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur C. Heinricher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Studies at WPI and many other institutions have identified a common set of
              faults running through the first two years of science and engineering
              education:   students see introductory mathematics and science courses as
              having little apparent relation to one another or to their professional goals,
              skills essential to academia and to the workplace--communication, problem
              solving,   working in groups, information gathering and synthesis--are not
              consciously nurtured.  Individual disciplines at WPI have begun to address
              these shortcomings through peer-assisted cooperative learning, academic success
              training tied to individual courses, open-ended group projects within courses,
              and integration of computational and instructional technology in courses.  This
              initiative will create connections among these successful individual efforts
              and produce a unique interdisciplinary approach to mathematics, science and
              engineering education.  Cross-disciplinary connections will be established via
              bridge projects that encourage students to carry basic concepts across
              disciplinary boundaries.  The program will rely on WPI's well-developed
              community of interdisciplinary undergraduate Peer Learning Assistants. Although
              WPI's innovative project-oriented curriculum gives our faculty a special
              motivation for this undertaking, the outcomes of this work will be widely
              applicable because they will be built upon a familiar foundation, the usual
              discipline-based introductory courses.  A fabric of enhancements and additions
              that provide educational and intellectual unity among existing courses can be
              woven thread by thread without the risk or expense of a wholesale re-fashioning
              of curricula and courses.
