Title       : Creating Linkages through Institution-wide Reform of the Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1997      
File        : a9653676

Award Number: 9653676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mauri A. Ditzler mditzler@mail.millikin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millikin University
	      1184 West Main Street
	      Decatur, IL  625222039    217/424-6211

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                      Millikin University will engage in a three-year curriculum development
              project  with extensive participation by faculty from the departments of
              biology, chemistry, physics, and mathematics to continue our efforts to link
              the above disciplines.  We will develop a set of introductory science courses
              which:     * Link the sciences to the rest of academe   * Link the sciences
              with each other; and   * Link our students and the courses with the surrounding
              community.     These goals have arisen from challenges we have encountered at
              Millikin.  One challenge is that undergraduates are often not skilled in
              discerning the applicability of fundamental principles across disciplinary
              boundaries.  Millikin has already done much work to bring the sciences together
              within our university community.  However, this task is large and challenging
              as a consequence of the tendency in traditional science courses to mask the
              common methods and purpose shared by all science disciplines.  Hence, much
              remains to be done.  This tendency towards specialization has also tended to
              isolate students from addressing important community problems and issues that
              would benefit from closer attention and assistance from the Millikin students
              and faculty.  Our community needs a stronger partnership with the University.  
                We are engaged in developing a set of introductory science courses which
              allow students to study a specific discipline, to explore fundamental methods
              of inquiry and principles important to all sciences, and to learn how these
              methods and principles are relevant to both the chosen field and also to the
              other science disciplines.  Each course section will focus on a particular area
              of inquiry, such as stars or prairie ecology.  A set of common laboratory
              exercises will be developed by the faculty involved in teaching each of the
              various sections being offered; each exercise will present an interesting
              question drawn from the contributing professor's discipline yet will explore a
              fundamental method of inquiry  or principle important to all fields of science.
               After the students complete each exercise, the illustrated principle or method
              of inquiry will be explored in the context of each section.  Students will also
              develop exercises to present to local school children in grades K to 12.       
                   The planned reform is an integral part of institution-wide planning at
              Millikin University.  It has the broad support of the faculty and the
              administration.  It will build on prior activities of the faculty and
              administration that lead naturally in this direction.  The principal
              investigator, Dr. Mauri Ditzler, lead the development of the "Discovery
              Chemistry" curriculum at the College of the Holy Cross in the early 1990s, with
              support from the NSF.  The Millikin department chairs are wholly supportive of
              this effort.  The chair of the Physics department is developing just in time
              laboratory modules under an NSF ILI award ("Fundamental Constants - Modern
              Physics Laboratory, 9552171).  The chairs of biology, chemistry, and physics
              are currently working under NSF support in "Integrating the Sciences through
              Common Laboratory Experiences," (9555029).  Millikin is successfully raising
              funds for a new science building that will house undergraduate laboratory
              facilities designed to incorporate these methods of instruction and learning. 
              Millikin also conducts a summer research program for undergraduate students.
