Title       : Instructional Computing: Current Issues and Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1997  
File        : a9653405

Award Number: 9653405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lillian N. Cassel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64676              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl J. Klee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc For Computing Mach
	      1515 Broadway, 17th Floor
	      New York, NY  100365702    212/869-7440

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the proposed series of four workshops at four different
              geographical areas is to provide a financially-accessible opportunity for
              faculty, instructional support staff, and instructional computing
              administrators at two-year colleges and the lower-division of small four-year
              colleges to become familiar with current issues and obtain a working knowledge
              of some of the emerging technologies in instructional computing. This purpose
              will be achieved through a series of four two-day workshops and follow-up
              activities involving four groups of thirty participants each. Each workshop
              will focus on three specific topic areas: Emerging Technologies, Resource
              Management, and Instructional Methodologies. Within each topic area, emphasis
              will be placed ol providing detailed, specific, meaningful, applicable,
              realistic, achievable solutions to the issues being addressed. Laboratory
              facilities will be available to practice and reinforce the solutions being
              developed. Through contact with guest presenters, who are experts in the field,
              participants will become informed about the details of working implementations
              of the technology. Upon completion of the workshop activities, each participant
              will be required to conduct a local follow-up seminar to disseminate materials
              and knowledge gained from the workshop. These follow-up activities will provide
              means for participants to interact with local colleagues to discuss
              implementing  solutions at their institutions. The results of the project will
              be presented by participants as professional journal articles and conference
              presentations as well as posted on the World Wide Web. A prototype of the
              proposed workshop series was successfully conducted by the ACM two-year College
              Education Committee on February 16-17, 1996 as a three-part workshop at the
              SIGCSE Technical Symposium in Philadelphia.
