Title       : Faculty Workshops to Promote Interactive Thematic Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1997  
File        : a9653426

Award Number: 9653426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39320              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gisela M. Escoe gisela.escoe@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip K. Way  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9177,9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal represents an effort to effectively disseminate NSF-funded
              interactive and thematic introductory micro- and macro-economics courses
              designed and implemented at the University of Cincinnati. These courses use
              themes to help students from differing backgrounds and disciplinary interests
              learn to apply economic concepts and theories. These classes are taught
              interactively, requiring students to write, speak, solve problem, and analyze. 
                            It is proposed to offer short "tasting workshops" at scheduled
              economics conferences to increase awareness of the thematic and active learning
              approaches; enhance the knowledge, skills, and abilities of a large number of
              faculty at low cost; create a pool of potential attendees for a longer
              workshop; and provide feedback concerning the needs of faculty in the areas of
              active learning and thematic courses. Further, we will assess the effectiveness
              of these workshops in terms of (1) the extent to which interactive and thematic
              methods are used by participants prior to the workshops; (2) participants'
              end-of workshop intentions; (3) longer term follow-up assessments.          
              The primary audience for the workshops is faculty who teach introductory
              economics courses. However, given that standard introductory economics is often
              presented in a format largely disconnected from contexts familiar and important
              to women and minorities, and that the interactive thematic curricula
              specifically addresses this issue, we will give preference to faculty who teach
              more diverse student bodies.               Successful implementation of the
              proposed dissemination project could have a national impact. The problems of
              selective appeal, high enrollments, and limited resources are experienced in
              hundreds of schools throughout the nation and in a variety of departments.
