Title       : Multilayered Learning Program for Problem-Based Learning Classrooms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a9653203

Award Number: 9653203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56876              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah E. Allen deallen@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara J. Duch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold B. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Problem-based learning (PBL), an effective educational strategy mainly used in
              medical and professional schools, can address many of the perceived
              deficiencies in undergraduate education. By working on real-world problems in
              small groups, students learn content in a context that motivates the higher
              order thinking skills often neglected in traditional pedagogy. Furthermore, the
              PBL approach accommodates a variety of learning styles, backgrounds, and
              abilities. In the medical school model, each student group has a dedicated
              expert tutor - a student to faculty ratio impractical at most colleges and
              universities. To deal with this challenge, and as part of a more general
              program of curriculum reform to introduce PBL into undergraduate classrooms, we
              propose to extend our pilot experiences with use of upper-class undergraduates
              as tutors/group facilitators for the problem-solving process. We plan to
              develop and document a new course in Tutorial Methods of Instruction to support
              this middle layer of a multilayered program (the overlapping contributions of
              faculty, graduate and undergraduate peer tutors, and students) for PBL. In
              addition to providing the means for using problem-based instruction at the
              introductory level (where it can have the greatest impact in subsequent
              learning) the program will provide a natural progression for attracting good
              students to teaching careers, and will allow them to gain an overview of their
              chosen major as a culminating experience prior to graduation. For students in
              the PBL courses, these upper-class tutors will assist with the often difficult
              transition between the learning culture and expectations of the high school
              versus college experience, particularly as they relate to the novel challenges
              of PBL. Documentation of the program will include an instructional manual, a
              professionally produced teaching video, and both short and long-term evaluation
              at each layer of the program. Dissemination will be achieved through
              publication in education journals, presentati ons at professional meetings, and
              workshops at our established annual conference on problem-based learning that
              includes precollege teachers.
