Title       : Improving Science Literacy in General Education: An Interdisciplinary Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1997      
File        : a9653090

Award Number: 9653090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandra F. Moore   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul T. Buckley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald M. Brzenk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Meredith E. Newman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Hamilton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hartwick College
	      
	      Oneonta, NY  13820    607/432-4200

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                    Our goal is to improve the scientific literacy of Hartwick College
              students, and in so doing, develop a successful model for reform that might be
              adapted to the needs of other institutions. We will revise our general
              education curriculum so that those students whose desire to do science is
              fueled only by graduation requirements will leave that experience with a much
              fuller appreciation of what science is, how science is done, why science is
              important, and most significantly, a solid understanding of some of the
              important issues in modern science. We hope to engender in students the
              confidence and the ability to make informed decisions about science &
              technology issues. We feel that the most significant barrier to increased
              scientific understanding is the lack of connection between the science courses
              offered to non-science majors. These courses are designed with the assumption
              that students have no prior knowledge of the subject matter and have limited
              mathematical skills. Thus at Hartwick, where students must complete three math
              & science courses to graduate, each faculty member starts from scratch and
              cannot build on the efforts of our colleagues who may have taught these
              students in previous semesters. Additionally, as math is purposefully removed
              from coursework, students see math as a completely separate enterprise, rather
              than as an integral part of science. This approach effectively cheats our
              students of the  thorough science education that they deserve. Furthermore, by
              requiring courses to be distributed across different departments and allowing
              students to take the courses at any time, we make it extremely difficult for
              students to see the connections between the various scientific disciplines. We
              force science to appear fragmented rather than coherent.      We will develop a
              series of three sequenced, thematic, interdisciplinary courses in math and
              science that would satisfy Hartwick's general education requirement. The
              program theme is "The science of the Environment," and will  be staffed by
              members of the departments of mathematics, biology, chemistry and geological &
              environmental sciences. The program targets first-year students who enter
              college as undeclared majors. Thus a secondary goal is to encourage some of
              these undecided students to consider a career in science.
