Title       : Linguistics and the Language Sciences: New Computer Based Methods and Materials
               for Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1997  
File        : a9653366

Award Number: 9653366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61517              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Lust   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard K. Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DUE-9653366  PI:  Barbara Lust  Cornell University - Endowed    Title: 
              Linguistics and the Language Sciences: New Computer Based Methods and Materials
              for Undergraduate Education    This proposal is to conduct a 6-day Workshop at
              the national Linguistic Society of America biennial meeting, to be held in
              Summer 1997, at Cornell University. At this workshop, which is expected to
              attract between 500-700 linguists, including both faculty and students, the
              major goals are to (i) provoke rethinking of current approaches to
              undergraduate education in linguistics; (ii) redirect attention to the
              fundamental properties of linguistics as a science, and as a medium for
              teaching essential concepts of scientific inquiry; (iii) introduce, disseminate
              and exchange current developments involving computer assisted teaching
              materials which foster this essential aspect of the field of linguistics.
              Participants will be able to gain experience with these recent teaching
              materials through the use of a newly equipped network of computer labs at
              Cornell.     Within the last decade, a number of curricular efforts have
              emerged that attempt to utilize linguistics as a vehicle for undergraduate
              science teaching.  This project will bring together a number of these efforts,
              introducing their design philosophy and results to a wider audience.  Three
              current projects will be featured in curricular part of this workshop.  The
              project called "Grammar as Science" started by Professor Richard Larson at
              SUNY-Stony Brook is one of these.  This has reached the point of publishing
              software called Semantica and Syntactica for high school seniors and lower
              division undergraduates, which is available now through MIT Press.      A
              second focal point is the Teacher Training Program at Wheelock College -- a
              participant in the Boston Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher Preparation,
              and one of the largest producers of K-12 teachers in Massachusetts.  This
              program is focused on the objective of discovering how implicit knowledge of
              languag e can be used to develop an explicit grasp of the constructivist nature
              of scientific inquiry.   This is being done by developing the use of
              linguistics as a tool for teaching scientific inquiry to 7th to 11th graders,
              and teaching undergraduates preparing for teaching careers in this method.     
                The third project to be featured will be the Cornell University Network of
              Language Labs in the Cognitive Studies Program, which has been supported by an
              ILI grant from the NSF.  This program is currently seeking to coordinate the
              study of linguistics with related subfields of Cognitive Studies -- psychology,
              computer science, and philosophy, by developing a unified, laboratory-based
              curriculum.
