Title       : Formation of a Claremont Colleges Intercollegiate Program in Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1997     
File        : a9653140

Award Number: 9653140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209862             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan P. Jones ajones@pitzer.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Newton H. Copp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Groome  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard S. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dion Scott-Kakures  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pitzer College
	      1050 Mills Avenue
	      Claremont, CA  917113908    909/607-9108

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Claremont Colleges propose to develop a six college intercollegiate,
              interdisciplinary  neuroscience program. At the core of this program, a new
              interdisciplinary, introductory  neuroscience course will be developed that
              focuses more on the fundamental neuroscientific issues  from a philosophical,
              historical, and methodological point of view than is typically the case. We 
              argue that this approach will be mutually beneficial to the general education
              student, the potential  major in neuroscience, and individuals who have been
              underrepresented in science. Students will  emerge from this course with a
              better understanding of how science progresses and will be better  prepared for
              a general understanding of future scientific developments, if they do not major
              in  neuroscience, or for advanced coursework in neuroscience, if they decide to
              major in neuroscience.      In addition to the introductory course, new upper
              division courses will be developed within  two tracks, representing the
              principal division in neuroscience today: cellular-molecular and  cognitive
              neuroscience. Students selecting to major in neuroscience will elect to
              specialize in one  of the two tracks, which will include several courses in
              common. We will also develop a senior  capstone course that will include
              seniors from both tracks. This course will bring faculty and  students together
              to reconsider fundamental issues raised in the introductory course, but from a 
              more sophisticated vantage-point.      A significant part of the proposed
              program will involve opportunities for students and faculty  to work with
              pre-college students and teachers to develop science education in elementary
              and  secondary schools, which we expect will also encourage college students to
              consider careers in  education.
