Title       : Symmetry Across the Curriculum: Symbolic and Visual Learning In the Arts,
               Mathematics, and Basic Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a9653095

Award Number: 9653095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amir H. Assadi assadi@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gwen A. Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph P. Christy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Palmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of this project is to propose strategies for development of
              multi-disciplinary courses that are streamlined to convey the cumulative impact
              of several subjects, including mathematical analysis and modeling, to address
              and solve a scientific or environmental problem of broad societal interest. The
              objective of this phase of the project is to propose a method for development
              of such new materials by taking advantage of a unifying concept of exceptional
              perceptual appeal and human affinity, namely symmetry. To facilitate widespread
              impact of the project, it is important to address at the same time the related
              problem of updating the existing courses thus, gradually transforming them into
              such multi-disciplinary topics of contemporary relevance. To accomplish the
              above-mentioned objectives, a sequence of course-modules will be developed to
              cover a variety of topics in which symmetry, geometric transformations and
              geometric structures play a key role in an interdisciplinary context. The
              modules will be sufficiently flexible in content and format, and their
              interdisciplinary nature serves to fashion interfaces and links to other
              modules, a factor that will prove essential for ease of assembly and multitude
              of modular combinations. The instructors select a number of modules from the
              Arts, Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, Physics and Psychology to form a
              coherent multi-disciplinary general undergraduate course with their targeted
              audience in mind. By design, such courses emphasize symmetry and geometric
              structures as a unifying underlying theme, thus containing substantial analytic
              and visual content. The modules have two components: (a) text and other forms
              of multi-media materials that convey information regarding the topic at hand ;
              (b) software pieces that encourage the students to experiments hands-on
              computational aspects of the topic, through simplified numerical and symbolic
              computations, and visualization. The purpose of the software components is to
              enhance the lectures in t he course by instructor-supervised computer lab
              sessions that engage the students in the process of discovery and active
              participation to explore the quantitative aspects. The lectures are intended to
              be expository and accessible to a general audience, and when possible, leaving
              in depth exploration as part of projects that should be dealt with in the lab
              component. The modules do not require mathematics and science beyond standard
              high school level, thus aiming to attract primarily the students who have not
              majored in mathematics and the physical sciences. Special emphais will be
              placed to attract future teachers of science and mathematics, and to encourage
              them to experiment with similar course-development ideas, proposing
              modifications of the software and the text to suite K-12 audience that they
              will plan to teach. The evaluation plan includes teaching pilot courses at
              University of Wisconsin (Madison) and Montana State University (Bozeman), and
              Rutgers University (New Ark). In the course of pilot courses, besides
              soliciting standard evaluation responses from the students, instructors, and
              reviewers, assessment of student learning and attitude improvement, creativity
              in lab projects, and facility with computer-assisted quantitative problems will
              be studied (and where applicable, it will be followed up in the subsequent year
              and compared to standard courses.) Further, a number of modules will be
              incorporated in existing courses at the participating institutions: Clemson
              University, UW Madison, UC Berkeley, Montana State University, and Illinois
              Institute of Technology. The dissemination plans include publication of a text
              and accompanying multi-media software through major commercial companies,
              active recruiting of future users through demonstration and training sessions
              that will be organized in conjunction with national and regional professional
              meetings, in particular in Montana and Midwest. The materials will be available
              on the WWW, and much of the software will be developed using platfo
              rm-independent languages such as Java, to encourage wider exposure and
              adoption.  It is expected that the courses resulting from this project would be
              attractve to a wide audience from the arts, humanities and soft sciences as
              alternatives to standard undergraduate requirements for quantitative reasoning,
              and to attract them to develop a stronger background in science and
              mathematics. On the other end of this equation, the modules illustrate how art
              and humanities enrich teaching of hard sciences. In addition, some of the
              course-modules are suitable for adapotion in alternative educational programs,
              e.g. using distance learning or in the context of extended and informal
              education.
