Title       : Integrated Science General Education by "Hybrid" Interdisciplinary Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9653070

Award Number: 9653070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lenard R. Troncale   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly Pomona Fdn, Inc
	      
	      Pomona, CA  91768    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                     This project would result in completion of development of a three-course
              series earning the entire 16 unit science general education requirement for
              1,350 students per year from 30 majors in 4 non-science Colleges at the host
              campus, and likely replication to 22 other campuses in the CSU system. The
              major objective of the courseware would be that non-science students achieve a
              deep understanding of the most important theories and mechanisms of seven
              sciences (Astronomy, Physics, Chemistry, Geology, Biology, Computer Science,
              and Mathematics) presented, not by discipline, but rather by common features
              across the disciplines as advocated by a recent AAAS report. Several years of
              intensive, interdisciplinary pre-integration of the subject matter by faculty
              from the seven sciences would be captured in 60 multimedia modules of 180 hours
              average study time distributed on a Library of Integrated Science General
              Education CD-ROMs. The year of multimedia focuses on 15 systems processes as
              Integrative Themes presenting >100 detailed case studies, each demonstrating
              how the Integrative Process is similar in key processes of each science and
              across the sciences. The multimedia portion would also include >15 hours of
              study on 12 topics of the Scientific Method as compared across the sciences.
              Course methods would be as integrative and interdisciplinary as the
              pre-integrated content by balancing the student-centered, active-learning,
              flexible-time, personal tutoring of the multimedia modules with three scheduled
              face-to-face, cooperative, collaborative learning sessions. Each week of the 30
              week series students would further explore the same topics learned in the
              technological portions with a one-hour small-group discussion session, a
              one-hour skill-training session, and one-hour of interdisciplinary lab
              protocols. In this way the best strengths of computer managed instruction and
              problem-centered group learning are utilized to learn and extend the same
              integrative subject matter while overcoming the s hortcomings of each method by
              their combination in a "hybrid" interdisciplinary methodology. The project
              would result in five products that are easily replicated and could be widely
              disseminated, namely: an Integrated Science Library of multimedia CD- ROM's to
              deliver the pre-integrated, interdisciplinary content; a student Handbook of
              Study Guides to accompany the multimedia lessons; a Workbook of Integrated
              Science Small-Group and Skill-Training Exercises; a unique Labbook of
              Interdisciplinary Protocols; and a series of Workbooks on Dissemination.
