Title       : A New Paradigm for Curriculum Development and Dissemination:The WWW Earth
               Resources Educational Site (ERES)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1996  
File        : a9653193

Award Number: 9653193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Ridky                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181067             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Myers magma@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  In light of the World Wide Web's unique capabilities, this project proposes
              to create the Earth Resources Educational Site (ERES). This site will
              incorporate: 1) multimedia presentations (virtual field trips, interactive Java
              models, 3D interactive models) that illustrate resource mathematical concepts,
              scientific principles and issues; 2) interactive "real-time" case studies; 3)
              teacher notes illustrating successful ways of incorporating these case studies
              in Earth science classes; and 4) Web bulletin boards for resource and
              instructional discussions. To create this active Web site, a Development Team
              is assembled to create the interactive Web programming. Web components will be
              tested by a Beta Team consisting of college Earth science instructors from
              around the nation. These instructors will attend workshops on ERES, use the
              site in their classes, conduct beta testing of the site components for the
              Development Team and help create the case study teacher notes. By disseminating
              knowledge about ERES and creating a Web network of users, the ERES project
              intends to: 1) illustrate the importance of Earth resource issues for modern
              societies; 2) promote communication between Earth science instructors; 3) use
              WWW multimedia presentations to enhance the learning experience; 4) promote the
              use of case studies in Earth science classes; and 5) improve the critical
              thinking, problem solving, quantitative reasoning and computational skills of a
              wide range of students. On a more general scale, it hopes to show that the
              World Wide Web is an effective means to disseminate course and curriculum
              development efforts.           This proposal represents an attempt to explore
              the many possibilities of the WWW with respect to education.  Although teaching
              resource sites are available on the Web, they do not utilize a large portion of
              the Web's capabilities. ERES is being designed so that it is engaging and
              informative and competes with the best business and entertainment sites on the
              Web. Some of the techniques  proposed have been tested in a preliminary but
              limited manner at the University of Wyoming and Lewis-Clark State College.  An
              expanded test of the effectiveness of Web instruction will be accomplished
              through a compelling Web site, developed by a team with the necessary design
              skills, technical abilities, dedication as well as time and resources.      
              Techniques being developed for Web instruction during this project are intended
              to be readily transferable to other sciences.  The socially relevant nature of
              the topic, abundant opportunities for engaging multimedia presentations,
              potential for wide-spread and ongoing dissemination and adaptability suggest
              that this project could have important implications for the way the Web is used
              in future course development projects.
