Title       : A Multimedia Based Laboratory Course for Environmental Engineering Fundamentals
               and Process Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1997  
File        : a9653149

Award Number: 9653149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas H. Howell                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn E. Katz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lenly J. Weathers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  Many undergraduate environmental engineering curricula across the nation are
              being re-designed to emphasize fundamentals of environmental engineering
              process dynamics and to acquire familiarity with the procedures for obtaining
              and determining design parameters for design of full scale systems for
              treatment and remediation of water and wastewater. The  objective of this
              proposal is to build on the P.I.s' previous course development efforts by
              developing and promoting the use of multi-media learning tools for
              undergraduate education.  Specifically, the proposal will focus on the
              development of interactive multi-media laboratory modules for a course titled
              "Pollutant Fate and Transport." The modules will include did actictutorials
              covering process theory and methods for estimating design parameters from
              laboratory data, an interactive video/animated laboratory in which students
              collect data by sampling "bench-scale reactors" displayed in the video, and an
              annotated spreadsheet for analysis of the data collected in the interactive
              video. The module development will be overseen by an advisory committee
              consisting of senior environmental faculty from a number of universities who
              offer similar courses. One of the unique features of the proposed courseware is
              that it will allow institutions that do not have the time, money or other
              resources to develop an environmental engineering laboratory to provide
              students with a visual, active learning experience without the time or expense
              associated with developing and equipping a laboratory.
