Title       : An Integrated Multi-Level Twenty-first Century Physics Learning System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9653145

Award Number: 9653145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Van Heuvelen   (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Stith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Furnstahl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Abstract    The Problem:  The ineffectiveness of lecture instruction in helping
              students acquire conceptual knowledge and real world skills in complex problem
              solving, collaboration, and communication.  This problem exists at the
              introductory level as well as in the upper level courses for physics majors. 
              Objectives:  Implement group-based active learning instructional systems at the
              introductory, and sophomore levels.  Methods:  Using an active group learning
              format, we will build a conceptual foundation leading to the solution of
              complex problems with interesting context.  The instruction will involve tools
              such as:  interactive computer simulation questions and problems; computer
              visualization, modeling and problem solving; and conceptual and more complex
              experiment problems.  Special audiences:  Engineering students, undergraduate
              physics majors, and underrepresented groups in physics, including women and
              domestic minorities.  Collaborations:  Through participation in a restructuring
              program in the College of Engineering, faculty in engineering, math and
              chemistry.  Significance/impact:  The project will develop a teaching approach,
              complete with teaching kits and materials, whose full implementation will
              result in a major modification of first and second-year instruction for
              students in physics, chemistry and engineering.  Through participation in
              restructuring in the introductory engineering curriculum, the pedagogy will be
              disseminated beyond physics.  Dissemination of the materials nationally will
              help promote active learning nationally.  Completion rates for groups
              traditionally underrepresented in physics will improve with no sacrifice in
              learning.  The means for achieving these goals and impacts are described in
              greater detail in the full proposal.
