Title       : Making Biology Laboratories Effective Learning Environments For Students With
               Disabilities: A National Model For Undergraduate Instructors and Grades 7-12
               School
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  2000  
File        : a9653121

Award Number: 9653121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $585000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele G. Wheatly michele.wheatly@wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy S. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen H. Simon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. Vernooy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Ramey-Gassert  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This proposal addresses the problem that students with disabilities in grade 7
              through university do not have equal access to biological laboratories leading
              to under representation in life sciences. The goal is to develop resources that
              can be used nationally to assist biological educators in designing appropriate
              laboratory exercises for students with disabilities. The objectives are: (i) to
              develop a Source Book to assist educators in creating effective learning by
              students with disabilities in any latural/physical science laboratory (ii) to
              develop adaptive laboratory manuals in Biological Sciences (iii) to train
              biological educators (college and grades 7-12) in the use of the Source Book
              and adaptive laboratory manuals. The proposed methods are: (a) Resources will
              be developed by project coordinators, educators, students and external
              consultants. Resources will be tested by educators in the field, and refined
              before dissemination. (b) Biological educators will be trained in the use of
              the resources by attending a 2 week summer workshop and participating in a
              Field Test year at their home institution. Selected educators will develop
              leadership skills to enable them to train other educators. The special audience
              targeted by the project are educators of students with disabilities from 7th
              grade onward. The significance/impact of the proposed project is that students
              with disabilities will be better prepared in laboratory biology starting in 7th
              grade which will increase their representation in life science. Disseminable
              products of this grant will be the Source Book (applicable to any experimental
              science), subject specific adaptive laboratory manuals for Biological Sciences,
              and trained human resources. The project will be evaluated internally,
              externally and within the academic community.
