Title       : General Chemistry Investigations: An Interdisciplinary, Research Team Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1996  
File        : a9653007

Award Number: 9653007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmela Amato-Wierda ccaw@hopper.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher F. Bauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                     This two-year project describes a model for a General Chemistry
              Laboratory for science and engineering majors that enables students to learn
              how to function as practicing scientists and engineers. They will work in teams
              on interdisciplinary, open-ended, inquiry-based projects reflecting current
              technical challenges in the disciplines representing their career goals.
              Faculty from biochemistry, chemistry, and various engineering disciplines
              helped develop the projects and will work with students as instructors and
              consultants. Students will communicate results via scientific papers
              peer-reviewed by other students and via oral poster presentations. A Web
              Journal of General Chemistry will be created in which students can report their
              findings to a national audience. As they work with students, collaborating
              faculty will be challenged to explore student-centered pedagogy through which
              students formulate the investigative questions themselves. Assessment of
              student learning will be based in part on the written scientific papers and
              oral poster sessions.       An Advisory Committee, consisting of faculty
              members from chemistry and engineering at other academic institutions,
              high-school teachers, and industrial scientists, will meet biannually to help
              evaluate student and faculty progress. Formative and summative evaluations will
              be performed by a faculty member in the education department using pre- and
              post-test of science process skills and understanding of science, and
              interviews with students and faculty about their learning experiences. Students
              will be surveyed periodically for up-to five years after completing the course.
              Dissemination routes include the student Web Journal, beta-test sites at St.
              Anselm and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, national meeting presentations,
              commercial publication of the companion/manual and publication in prominent
              journals.
