Title       : The Integration of Science and Mathematics Laboratories intoa Humanities
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1997      
File        : a9653736

Award Number: 9653736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190093             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen S. Lang helen.lang@mail.trincoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity College
	      300 Summit Street
	      Hartford, CT  061063100    203/527-3151

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1526,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In collaboration with nine members of the Departments of Biology, Chemistry,
              Engineering and Computer Science, Mathematics, Physics and Psychology, the
              Philosophy Department at Trinity College is currently developing laboratories
              attached to philosophy courses and modeled on those traditionally found in
              science departments. These laboratories develop specific problem-solving skills
              and techniques in mathematics and science associated with philosophy, including
              problems in physics, astronomy, biology and engineering as well as mathematics,
              including geometry, algebra, and calculus. Our goal is to develop literacy in
              mathematics and the sciences within a humanities setting and for humanities
              students, who will not otherwise achieve such literacy.    These laboratories
              provide an excellent means of achieving this goal. (1) Historically,
              philosophy, mathematics and science have always been intrinsically related,
              e.g., physics was often called "natural philosophy" and current work in
              theories of consciousness is closely related both to developments in
              neuroscience and in A.I. (2) A major part of philosophy's task as a discipline
              is to account for the successes and failures of mathematics and science.
              Laboratories, jointly designed by philosophers, scientists and mathematicians,
              develop specific problem-solving strategies central to mathematics and science,
              while philosophy classes examine the theoretical accounts and justifications of
              these strategies. Thus, laboratories and courses each retain their disciplinary
              integrity while we develop the intrinsic relation between them.
