Title       : A Scientific Research Project for the General Education Program at Southwestern
               College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a9653734

Award Number: 9653734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186810             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Charles Hunter chunter@jinx.sckans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn Herman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwestern College
	      100 College Street
	      Winfield, KS  671562443    316/221-4150

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                          Formulating meaningful public policy in a democracy is difficult if
              the voters and their representatives cannot grapple effectively with scientific
              information that pertains to the issues.  Part of the solution to this problem
              lies in revising our educational system so that science is taught as a process
              in which all citizens are engaged at some level.   In an across-the-curriculum
              research project students will acquire many of the science process skills
              essential to scientific literacy.  While conducting library as well as
              laboratory or field research, students will organize information; form and test
              hypotheses; decide whether data supports a statement; separate correlation from
              cause and effect; modify their hypotheses as the data demands; and regularly
              report on their progress to peers and the community.  The overarching goal is
              to model how scientific research is conducted and used to address real
              problems.   The research project focuses on water quality and the effects on
              ecosystems of poor water quality.  Each course in the freshmen general
              education program is involved in research activity.  After a period of data
              collection, students formulate hypotheses and design experiments to test those
              hypotheses.  Student-generated proposals form the basis of the research
              undertaken by the next class of freshman.  Student-designed research plans will
              also be tackled by advanced courses.  Regular symposia promote sharing and
              synthesis of results between research groups.   This proposal involves all
              first year students in scientific research.  We are especially excited about
              the impact on education students.  The science classes that our future
              elementary school teachers experience must provide them models for how to
              integrate science into their curriculum, or they will be handicapped as they
              attempt that task.  In this approach, elementary education students would
              experience science as related to many general education courses.  We hope to
              provide a model for transforming the role of sc ience in general education
              curricula.
