Title       : Interactive Multimedia for Developing Ciritical Thinking in Biology Based on the
               New Benchmarks Curriculum Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9653034

Award Number: 9653034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Lemons daniel@harold.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph G. Griswold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Human Anatomy and Physiology (A&P) education today is constrained by three
              realities: 1) the area of coverage as defined by the standard texts is large
              and expanding, 2) in- depth understanding of even one body systems takes
              considerable time and skill to develop and 3) most students are poorly prepared
              for the kind of learning that generates in-depth understanding. In our current
              CCD project we have developed a new Benchmarks Curriculum which addresses these
              facts.  It has become apparent that there is significant interest in our
              curriculum, but many instructors find departing significantly from the standard
              A&P curriculum difficult because they cannot offer adequate forms of support to
              their students. Commercial text books have tended to set the de facto
              curriculum standard in A&P because they are the major learning support
              resource. This standard entails extensive but superficial coverage. Now,
              multimedia CD-ROM's are emerging as the central ancillary resource to the
              textbooks. Their design, however, is heavily influenced by the curricular model
              of the textbooks.  We are proposing a new multimedia resource because we would
              like to use the power and appeal of this new medium to help instructors break
              away from the traditional curriculum and choose an alternate pathway. Our new
              Benchmarks Curriculum is such an alternative, fostering the development of
              in-depth content mastery along with the critical thinking and problem solving
              skills students need to successfully apply their A&P knowledge. Without good
              multimedia support, many students will probably be unable to obtain those
              skills. We believe this project has the potential to greatly amplify the impact
              of our new NSF supported Benchmarks Curriculum.  The project has developed
              formal ties with the CUNY project in teacher preparation, an NSF Collaborative
              for Excellence in Teacher Preparation.  Workshops will be conducted for faculty
              to help them incorporate modules produced into courses designed for or
              including students who are preparing to  be teachers.      NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)
