Title       : Mathematics Teaching Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9951419

Award Number: 9951419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24836              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn S. Eoff eoffc@hsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred Worth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Lloyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Henderson State University
	      1100 Henderson St
	      Arkadelphia, AR  719234946    501/246-5511

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Developments in technology have opened a tremendous realm of opportunities for
              the teaching and learning of mathematics.  One of the current imperatives
              within the movement to reform mathematics education is to appropriately utilize
              the power of computer technology to aid students with the synthesis of the
              symbolic, the numerical, and graphical meanings of mathematical concepts.  In
              the project, the mathematics faculty are adapting, implementing, and evaluating
              through class testing, materials developed through the NSF calculus projects
              including the New Mexico Research Projects in Mathematics and the Linear
              Algebra Modules Project (LAMP). They are integrating computer technology into
              the calculus program using Maple V. In addition, preservice teachers are using
              software such as Geometer's Sketchpad to test NSF funded elementary and middle
              school curricula. One of the central goals of this project is to further
              students' insight into the ideas of mathematics and then apply these ideas to
              problem solving.  Making multiple representations of mathematical concepts
              readily available to students through computer technology is providing a
              significant step in this direction. A Mathematical Teaching Laboratory (MTL) is
              providing the technological infrastructure within which the institution can
              implement fundamental changes in the way mathematics is taught.  Computer
              technology is being interwoven into, as opposed to simply added onto, the
              instruction of courses within the mathematics program. Students are being
              actively engaged in the learning process as they experience mathematical
              inquiry and discovery.  Individual and group projects are sharpening students'
              problem solving skills as well as their verbal and written communications
              skills.  Educational software geared towards elementary and secondary education
              such as Geometer's Sketchpad, Logo, and MathView are being utilized in the MTL
              not only to teach mathematical concepts to future elementary and secondary
              teachers, but also to guide them towards pedagogy appropriate for the
              technological teaching aids that will be available to them as they enter
              teaching.
