Title       : Improving Undergraduate Learning Through Use of a Low-Vacuum Scanning Electron
               Microscope with an Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9951390

Award Number: 9951390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel J. Beane rbeane@bowdoin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project optimizes the expert and novice student learning by adapting the
              personal-computer controlled LVSEM/EDS which integrates research and
              discovery-based experiences into undergraduate courses.  Using "hands-on"
              discovery and research experiences to educate undergraduate students implements
              recommendations such as Bonwell & Eisons' (1991) "Active Learning" and
              Tewksbury's (1995) "Strategies fro Moving Away from lectures.   Other
              pedagogical reports emphasize research activities such as NSF's "Shaping the
              Future" and Holliday, etal's (1996) "Straight Talk about Research to Geoscience
              teachers"  Connecticut College, Amherst College and Middlebury College there
              has been success in using the instrument in their courses.  By adapting this
              equipment to uses in undergraduate science and non-science majors courses,
              students are imaging and making chemical analysis of a range of specimens (e.g.
              minerals, microfossils, sea urchins, cell structures, bone tools, and ceramics)
              which are promoting problem solving and communication of discoveries.   We are
              implementing the use of this equipment in laboratories in courses across the
              curriculum (i.e. introductory, intermediate, and advanced courses in geology,
              biology, chemistry, and anthropology) and we share the laboratories and
              outcomes with colleagues within and outside the college. This project is having
              a particular impact on the geology curriculum that is currently rich in field
              experiences, but poor in analytical laboratory experiences by adapting these
              technologies. Undergraduates in geology courses are using the LVSEM/EDS in a
              variety of applications including analyzing minerals to obtain information on
              crystal form and chemistry, and by examining suspended particulate matter to
              understand marine biogeochemical fluxes. The instrument is incorporated into 18
              courses throughout the curriculum. The students  are experiencing discovery,
              acquiring first-hand knowledge in the processes of science (including
              hypothesis generation and data collection), and appreciating the importance and
              significance of science in their lives.
          
