Title       : A Collaborative Computational Sciences Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9951412

Award Number: 9951412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163105             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Sochacki jim@math.jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alade O. Tokuta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dorn W. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles D. Pruett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Ingham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 1502
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              James Madison University (JMU) and North Carolina Central University (NCCU) are
              building a collaborative program in computational science with five broad
              goals: (1) to attract students into a technologically important field, (2) to
              improve the retention of those students who are recruited, (3) to provide
              students with useful skills and the outlook necessary to continue their own
              education, (4) to provide industry with graduates trained in a critically
              needed specialty, and (5) to provide the scientific community with people who
              can work productively on a large class of difficult scientific
              problems.

This project involves three elements: (1) the establishment of a
              parallel-computing capability, (2) course and curricular development in
              computational science including scientific visualization, and (3) the creation
              of a fluid-dynamics laboratory component for the computational science
              coursework.

In the computational science program, we are focusing initially
              on computational fluid dynamics (CFD) for several reasons. Fluid dynamics
              provides a rich source of problems that can be used to demonstrate diverse
              approaches to developing mathematical models. By limiting our scope to problems
              in fluid physics, we can require mathematics majors to take enough physics
              courses to have a firm scientific background in that field without requiring
              them to take what would essentially be a second major In addition to being a
              rich source of physical and computational examples, fluid mechanics provides
              problems that draw on everyday experience and that students can recognize as
              useful and interesting. Well-conceived CFD projects will increase the student's
              physical intuition.

This project is adapting materials and practices from
              advanced work to the undergraduate curriculum.   Although the initial impact is
              on James Madison University and North Carolina Central University, the
              materials and practices developed under this project are likely to have a much
              wider impact.

