Title       : Enhance Electric Machines and Power Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9951391

Award Number: 9951391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78875              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mulchand S. Rathod rathod@et1.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shamala Chickamenahalli  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the critical need of better equipping the emerging
              engineering technologists with technical skills that are current with the
              recent advances in industrial power electronics and machine drives. This in
              turn is expected to help close competency gaps in both technical and
              communication areas. 
	
The multimedia team of the NSF-supported Greenfield
              Coalition (NSF-GC), working with this PI, developed several visualization and
              simulation examples as part of a project in electric machines for a
              manufacturing curriculum. This project enhances several of these multimedia
              components and adapts them into the 'Electric Machines and Power', a
              senior-level core course at the Division of Engineering Technology (DET) at
              Wayne State University (WSU). 

Drive experiments, instead of mere
              characterization studies on individual machines, are to provide
              industry-relevant hands-on experience. Finite element based visualizations are
              to enable observation of fundamental phenomena that cause machine
              functionalities.  Flux distributions due to differing geometry and material can
              be observed. Pspice/Saber-based interactive simulation types of animation
              examples are to be developed further in order to enable concept clarity and
              observation of aftermath of motor faults. Authorware/Flash animation examples
              are targeted towards better student understanding of concepts such as slip and
              power factor correction. Equipping the traditional offering of this course with
              these multimedia components implemented is expected to impart better student
              learning.
 
The impact of the project on the educational community is very
              significant.  All electrical, electromechanical, and manufacturing technology
              students at WSU-DET will benefit from this project. Several of the components
              are to be used during Detroit area K-12 student visits during Engineer's day,
              K-C-P program and Open house. Dissemination includes publications and
              demonstrations at conferences. The provision of the developed material on the
              division's web page is expected to trigger interest from and use by other
              engineering institutions.

