Title       : Establishment of a Web-accessible X-ray Diffraction Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a9951348

Award Number: 9951348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127068             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcus R. Bond c499scc@semovm.semo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jin K. Gong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammed H. Ali  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southeast Missouri State U
	      900 Normal
	      Cape Girardeau, MO  637014753    314/651-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through computerized automation, X-ray crystallography has matured to become an
              important complement to NMR, IR, and other common chemical characterization
              methods. Yet very little instruction in X-ray crystallography occurs at the
              undergraduate level. This latter notion was reinforced by our survey concerning
              the state of crystallography education among undergraduate programs in
              Missouri, Illinois, and Kentucky. None of the schools reported implementing
              crystallography education beyond the minimal level in their curriculum although
              most (by a 2:1 margin) felt that they needed to provide more instruction. To
              promote the widespread implementation of significant undergraduate
              crystallography education, this project is making a single crystal X-ray
              diffractometer accessible to consortium members through the World Wide Web for
              use in undergraduate crystallography coursework and undergraduate research. 
              This project adapts the concept of remote observation that is in place for a
              powder X-ray diffractometer at Indiana University-Purdue University, Fort
              Wayne, a scanning electron microscope at Cambridge University, and a scanning
              probe microscope at Arizona State University.

Members of the consortium
              working with the host institution, Southwest Missouri State University, include
              Central Missouri State University, Eastern Kentucky University, Harding
              University, Southern Illinois University-Edwardsville, Union University,
              University of Arkansas-Little Rock, and the University of Southern Indiana. 
              Instructional use of the instrument consists of a two to three week teaching
              module. Students access video, still images, and data from the diffractometer
              and interact with the diffractometer operator in a "chat-room" environment
              through a Web page in order to monitor crystal alignment and data collection.
              The students then perform the structure determination and download the finished
              data set. Students who need crystallographic data for undergraduate research
              projects, thus enhancing the undergraduate research experience, also use remote
              access of the instrument. A first-come/first served public queue established by
              registration through the Web page insures fair access to all participants, both
              local and remote. The host institution further uses the instrument to develop
              new ways of implementing crystallography education throughout the undergraduate
              curriculum, and to investigate in undergraduate research projects chiral
              organic products, intermediate complexes for the catalysis of CO2 to organic
              molecules, solid-solid phase transitions, copper (II) stereo-chemistry, and
              metal cluster chemistry.



