Title       : Promoting the Transition from Quantum Concepts to Spectroscopic Applications
               throughout the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1999      
File        : a9951392

Award Number: 9951392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35594              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jodi L. Wesemann jweseman@stmarys-ca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth J. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Bachofer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Mary's College
	      Saint Mary's College
	      Moraga, CA  94575    415/376-4411

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The prevalence of spectroscopic techniques in scientific and technological
              fields requires that science students obtain both practical experience with
              spectroscopic instruments and a solid understanding of spectroscopic theory. 
              Many departments introduce UV/Vis, IR and even NMR spectroscopies in
              introductory chemistry courses, using fast, user-friendly instruments to expose
              students to spectroscopic techniques and the information that they provide. 
              Unless this use is accompanied, however, by sufficient background and time to
              explore the link between quantum mechanics, electronic transitions and
              spectroscopy, students will not obtain a thorough understanding of the
              underlying principles of quantization and energy transfer.  Through curriculum
              revisions a UV/Vis photodiode-array spectrometer and a spectrofluorimeter are
              used in general chemistry and throughout the chemistry and biology curricula to
              impart these gains.  This work adapts approaches used at other institutions
              (Lebanon Valley College - DUE 9354642 and DUE 9551199, and Bucknell University
              - College Science Instrumentation Program) into a series of experiments that
              help students make these correlations.  In this series, introductory students
              are not only exposed to modern instrumentation, but use it to explore
              absorption and emission phenomena, to quantify unknowns, and to study reaction
              kinetics.  The improved comprehension and enhanced skills that result are
              reinforced and expanded as IR, NMR, phosphorescence, and bioluminescence are
              covered in subsequent upper-division courses.  This increased focus on quantum
              theory and spectroscopic techniques helps chemistry, biology and health science
              graduates from Saint Mary's College of California gain a deeper understanding
              of the fundamental principles behind the imaging and spectroscopic techniques
              used in their fields and be better qualified to enter the job market,
              professional schools, or graduate programs.  

