Title       : Problem Solving and Lifelong Learning: Developing and Assessing a Course in
               Information Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1999  
File        : a9951418

Award Number: 9951418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Aiken aiken@cis.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nereu Kock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Munir Mandviwalla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This full EMD project addresses the problem of how to motivate students who are
              not majoring in computer and information systems(CIS) to take a second level
              information technology (IT) course in order to provide them with a strong IT
              background to prepare them for future careers.  A framework and comprehensive
              assessment procedure is being developed for a new IT course, "Problem-Solving
              and Lifelong Learning."   

The course provides non-CIS majors the experience
              and conceptual tools needed for the effective use of IT in problem-solving in
              the framework of lifelong learning.   The course uses a case study pedagogical
              approach to lead students through the solution of complex research problems
              that integrate 1) domain-specific knowledge and logic, 2) general scientific
              problem-solving strategies, 3) IT methods, and 4) the coordinated use of a
              number of IT tools.  This second level course, which goes beyond the typical
              first level IT course focusing on computer operation and use of tools, helps
              students to use IT to solve problems required by higher level
              discipline-specific courses.  

This project also contains the following
              teacher preparation components 1) preservice math and science teachers are
              being encouraged to take the proposed IT course, 2) teacher educators are part
              of the advisory board to help develop and assess the course,  and 3) the PI's
              are working with the local NSF Collaborative on Excellence in Teacher
              Preparation project to develop a specialized workshop for teacher educators and
              pre-service teachers.

In addition to implementing and evaluating a prototype
              course to a diverse population of students at Temple University, the project is
              developing the framework for creating such a course at any institution.   The
              framework delineates guidelines for 1) developing challenging
              discipline-specific case studies,  2) providing the foundation needed for
              embedding hands-on use of IT in different complex information rich
              environments, and 3) assessing the resulting course in the context of a
              particular curriculum.  

Dissemination of the framework and sample case
              studies is being accomplished by the involvement of faculty from other
              institutions on an advisory board, by the presentation of papers and workshops
              at national conferences, by the creation of an Internet repository and
              electronic discussion group of interested faculty, and by possible publication
              of a book containing the framework and a set of case studies. 


