Title       : Algorithmic Approaches to Interactive Composition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9951354

Award Number: 9951354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew P. Bernat                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63153              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rhys Price Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Povall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Computer Science Program at Oberlin College and the TIMARA (Technology in
              Music and Related Arts) Department of the Oberlin Conservatory of Music are
              working collaboratively to develop educational materials to support imaginative
              applications of computer science to musical creativity.   This is an innovative
              adaptation that combines work done in the computer graphics field using fractal
              geometry with properties of computer algorithms such as hierarchical structure
              and recursion.  It gathers the best work in visualization and sonification and
              adapts it to an interdisciplinary pedagogical approach.  It implements
              user-friendly software that encourages experimentation and a deeper
              understanding of both the scientific and artistic ramifications.  

A new
              junior-senior level undergraduate course, Algorithmic Approaches to Interactive
              Composition, is being developed to be a model for interdisciplinary study
              between the sciences and art.   The course provides a new focus for computer
              science majors and an opportunity to work with music students to apply their
              skills and knowledge of abstract algorithmic ideas to the creative enterprise
              of music composition.   An on-site evaluation expert using a variety of
              evaluative techniques, including individual student case studies, is assessing
              the impact on student learning, the curriculum and  the institution. A
              description of the model course and the evaluation results will be made
              available at the completion of the project.
