Title       : San Joaquin River Parkway Science Learning Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1999      
File        : a9951383

Award Number: 9951383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74976              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ethelynda E. Harding   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry H. Gump  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Somma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Grubbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Tannenbaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fresno Fdn
	      4910 N. Chestnut Ave
	      Fresno, CA  93726    559/278-0840

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A learning community course cluster in which students learn biology, chemistry,
              mathematics, and political science while performing community service is to be
              developed. 

This proof of concept project includes the production of
              documentary materials, including instructors' guides and laboratory manuals.
              The laboratory manual allows students to easily access techniques in biology
              and chemistry that are useful for environmental studies. An instructors' guide,
              including materials on coaching student teams, allows the laboratories to be
              taught by teaching assistants. 

Faculty development workshops at the annual
              California State University Teacher Scholar Summer Institute are one avenue for
              system-wide dissemination. To disseminate nationally information regarding his
              project, the project team is to submit the results of summative analyses
              (student attitudes and student learning outcomes) for publication in science
              teaching journals such as the Journal of College Science Teaching and American
              Biology Teacher. 

The project is based on the prevailing theory of learning,
              which suggests that students build their own knowledge through active
              participation in learning. Learning communities and service-learning is used to
              increase student engagement. As supported by motivational theory, students are
              to apply science and mathematics to complex, real-world problems as they
              learn.

Assessment instruments will be administered to measure science
              literacy, attainment of general education goals, and student ability to make
              connections among key science concepts across the science disciplines and to
              apply mathematical concepts to new situations. Interviews and/or surveys of
              students and faculty will be conducted to ascertain student and faculty
              perceptions about the new courses and about community service.

