Title       : Implementing the Workshop Model and other Research-based Instructional
               Strategies in Physics & Mathematics Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9951402

Award Number: 9951402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81207              (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Sanjay Rebello   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon Beal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J.Ivan Rhode  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Ivan Rhode  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen D. Bolinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon L. Challener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarion U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Clarion, PA  16214    814/226-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project adapts and implements technology,  research-based instructional
              strategies, and curriculum developed elsewhere, in physics and mathematics
              courses.  These courses are conducted in a physical learning environment
              adapted from the Workshop Physics model (Laws)  integrating laboratory and
              lecture, and using computer-based data collection and analysis tools.
              Innovative research-based techniques such as the Learning Cycle (Karplus), Peer
              Instruction (Mazur) via ClassTalk and Socratic Dialog Inducing Procedures
              (Hake) are adapted and implemented in this workshop setting for several
              introductory physics courses.  Research based materials such as Interactive
              Physics, Physlets, VideoPoint, Visual Quantum Mechanics are integrated into the
              introductory courses making the necessary implementations to adjust the
              instructional units for undergraduate students in the target physics courses.  
              The Pre-Calculus, Calculus, Differential Equations, and Mathematical Modeling
              courses adapts Multimedia Mathematics (Dunbar) and web-based Math Archives from
              the University of Tennessee.  CBLs and TI calculators are used in conjunction
              with Maple, Graphical Analysis and Interactive Differential Equations.
              Instruments measuring students' conceptual understanding, attitudes, and
              expectations as well as ability to integrate mathematics its applications form
              the basis of the evaluation.  Project results are disseminated through papers
              in refereed journals and presentations at conferences attended by physics
              educators, to serve as a template for reform and revitalization in other
              institutions.





