Title       : Improving Introductory Chemistry Using an Interactive Studio Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9951346

Award Number: 9951346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33303              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucille B. Garmon lgarmon@westga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Harper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : State Univ of West Georgia
	      
	      Carrollton, GA  30118    404/834-1311

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Chemistry is actively pursuing reform throughout the
              undergraduate curriculum, particularly at the introductory level.  We are
              developing a unique model for interactive learning adapting a studio approach
              that integrates the laboratory and lecture portions of a chemistry course into
              one seamless experience through the use of web-based instruction.  This
              approach represents a radical departure from the traditional "blackboard style"
              lecture format, and emphasizes a hands-on, learn by doing, approach that is
              structured around a series of activities.  Computers are being used for both
              communication during class meetings and for data acquisition using the
              multifunctional computer-interface module called LabWorks, which allows a
              beginning student to design experiments, acquire data, and interpret results. 
              Communication is by means of a course web page that students follow during
              class meetings to obtain instructions and acquire additional
              background.

This project most closely adapts the studio approach developed
              for chemistry at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and California Polytechnic
              State University.  The project also adapts elements of the guided inquiry
              approach used at Franklin and Marshall College, the Workshop Chemistry peer-led
              team learning approach developed by the Chemistry Initiative led by CUNY City
              College, and the modular approach developed by the ChemLinks Chemistry
              Initiative led by Beloit College.

Students also use the computers for
              electronic homework and for accessing the huge array of free educational
              software available on the world-wide web.  We believe that the cumulative
              effect of the studio approach will promote learning and also increase student
              enthusiasm for chemistry.  This model can be easily transferred and improved
              upon at practically every institution that imparts instruction at the
              undergraduate level.  It also should be transferable to high school chemistry
              classes, especially those on block scheduling. 
