Title       : Distributed Expertise in Teaching Computer Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9951352

Award Number: 9951352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew P. Bernat                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lillian N. Cassel cassel@acm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deepak Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Modern communication and resource sharing mechanisms make possible new ways of
              Assuring high qualitv education at locations where faculty expertise does not
              cover all topics appropriate to core courses. This project, using Computer 
              organization/Architecture as a test case, explores the possibilities of
              distributed expertise applied in support of high quality course offerings. In
              this case, the course is considered to be of a traditional format: local
              faculty with complete control over the content of the course, assignments, and
              expected performance will benefit from the availability of materials developed
              by others and from the support of experts in topic areas of the course. The
              project brings together experts in content and in pedagogy to consider the best
              resources and the best ways to support teaching faculty. The minimum outcome of
              this project will be a report on the current curriculum recommendations
              relative to Computer organization/Architecture, an analysis of the state of the
              course around the world (including topics most commonly taught and topics that
              are most challenging), and a report on the recommendations of several groups on
              the application of distributed expertise to widespread course support. The
              results of these investigations will be applied in carefully monitored pilot
              offerings of the course and that experience will be reported at appropriate
              conferences. If results are promising, a plan for further development of the
              concept will be produced.


