Title       : Implementation of Research Oriented Laboratories in the Biology General
               Education Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9951371

Award Number: 9951371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11641              (Estimated)
Investigator: Isaure de Buron   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Converse College
	      580 East Main
	      Spartanburg, SC  293021931    803/596-9000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to implement a progressive series of laboratories in
              an introductory cellular biology course at Converse College, an all-women's
              college serving the state of South Carolina and much of the Southeast United
              States.  The introductory course is now a part of the general education program
              (GEP) because the Biology Department felt a need to offer such a course to its
              students preparing to be K-12 teachers.  As in all of GEP courses, this
              introductory level course serves education majors and will satisfy the
              biological science requirement that prospective teachers must meet for
              certification.  Further, this course serves an introductory course in the
              biology majors' curriculum and is a prerequisite for upper level biology
              classes.  The main focus of the project is to improve the laboratory portion of
              the course by providing support to emphasize an experimental and investigative
              format in the laboratory.  This format is adapted from the "guided inquiry"
              approach described by D'Avanzo and McNeal in Student-Active Science:  Models of
              Innovation in College Science  (Saunders College Publishing).  Throughout the
              laboratories, students are using the same novel model of study (a parasitized
              caterpillar) so that they perceive a progression in their studies.  Students
              are asked to observe, formulate, and test hypotheses concerning different
              aspects of the model of study rather than to simply apply a technique for the
              sake of doing so.  In this way students become more familiar with the
              scientific process, are exposed to more sophisticated, yet commonly used,
              technologies, and explore various important biological concepts ranging from
              homeostasis to cell-cell communication.  The addition and completion of
              experimental work in this course will help those students who spend their
              careers teaching students in grades k-12 to better understand the scientific
              process while becoming familiar with new and basic technologies in cell
              biology, a subject that is becoming increasingly important in public school
              education.  These exercises also guide biology majors towards potential
              independent research projects that they initiate during their sophomore or
              junior years.  The model of study is engaging, safe, fascinating, and rather
              inexpensive to maintain.  As a result, this model has the potential to be taken
              to the k-12 classroom in South Carolina.  It is believed this investigative
              approach will improve pre-k-12 students' attitudes toward science and,
              therefore, the impression of science that they will give to their own students.
               
