Title       : Physiology Course Material Developed for On-Line Use: Harvey Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9951384

Award Number: 9951384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Stephenson rstephe@sun.science.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stamatina E. Ziemba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to build a community of practice to create highly
              interactive, web-based materials for teaching human physiology. The Harvey
              Project is a collaboration of educators, physiologists, medical professionals,
              illustrators, Java and JavaScript programmers, instructional designers and web
              designers. Project participants are donating their time to develop materials
              for an entire introductory human physiology course which will be made freely
              available to all educational institutions. The project seeks to integrate the
              best non-commercial physiology teaching materials now available with new
              material, including animations, video clips, simulations, 3-D models,
              interactive problem solving and online performance evaluation. These online
              materials would not constitute a course by themselves, but would allow a
              physiology teacher without special Internet skills to develop a complete,
              customized lecture or distance learning class. Because they are customizable,
              the Harvey Project lessons could be adapted for undergraduates, medical
              students, or even high school AP students. They can also be used as part of a
              lecture or for self-study. Materials which exploit the digital medium fully
              have been shown to lead to more student involvement in learning and better
              learning outcomes, but their creation requires a team with diverse skills and
              thousands of hours of effort. The Harvey Project's participants bring together
              the necessary skills and are working for free. The model of the Harvey Project
              is easily generalizable to other disciplines, and may impact the teaching of
              fields far from physiology.



