Title       : REU: What Regulates Assimilation of Inorganic Nitrogen by Heterotrophic Bacteria
               vs. Phytoplankton in the Euphotic Zone?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1994     
File        : a9103842

Award Number: 9103842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kirchman kirchman@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Although it is well known that both phytoplankton and                          
              heterotrophic bacterioplankton assimilate ammonium in the                      
              euphotic zone, the controls on bacterial uptake are unclear.                   
              Little is known about factors controlling the great variation in               
              relative ammonium uptake by bacterioplankton (10- 60% of total                 
              ammonium uptake) and nothing about nitrate uptake by bacteria.                 
              Nitrogen uptake by heterotrophic bacteria can greatly impact our               
              understanding of new versus regenerated production, which has                  
              emerged as an important variable in global carbon and nitrogen                 
              models.  In the subarctic Pacific, for example, about 50% of the               
              new production can be explained by changes in nitrogen use by                  
              heterotrophic bacteria.  In order to understand dissolved                      
              inorganic nitrogen uptake (DIN . which includes ammonium,                      
              nitrate, and nitrite), this research project will examine uptake               
              by both phytoplankton and bacteria in relationship to biomass,                 
              biomass production, and dissolved organic matter uptake.                       
              Improved methodologies will be utilized to examine algal and                   
              bacterial dissolved inorganic nitrogen (DIN) uptake and the                    
              researchers will carry out the project in collaboration with                   
              ongoing process oriented studies in Oregon coastal waters,                     
              particularly the California Current system off Oregon.  Previous               
              results indicate that an extensive range in nutrient                           
              concentrations, biomass, and production will be encountered.  As               
              a result of this variation, the researchers expect to observe and              
              eventually understand changes in DIN uptake by bacteria and to                 
              provide insight into how the activity of both bacteria and                     
              phytoplankton should be incorporated into realistic models of                  
              nitrogen cycling and carbon cycling in the euphotic zone.
