Title       : Integration Of Perceptual Grouping Modules With 3D Interpretation Modules In
               Computer Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1994      
File        : a9103143

Award Number: 9103143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233401             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anil K. Jain sdass@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The intermediate stage of visual processing consists of general                
              purpose perceptual organization modules and 3D interpretation                  
              modules.  This research is concerned with the computational and                
              algorithmic models of the intermediate processing modules, and                 
              the interaction of these modules with each other.  It will study               
              the integration of a number of perceptual grouping modules with                
              3D interpretation modules.  If the integration is done across                  
              levels as proposed here, the specific knowledge about the                      
              physical world provides a powerful set of constraints with which               
              to combine the outputs of the grouping modules.  The project                   
              involves the development and implementation of a subset of the                 
              possible visual processing modules in an integrated manner.  The               
              goal of this project is to demonstrate that when the results of                
              lower and intermediate level modules are interpreted within the                
              context of 3D modules, that is, when feedback is provided from                 
              the higher level modules, the results obtained are more robust                 
              and well defined.  The specific modules that this proposal                     
              concentrates upon are: (1) the proximity and smoothness grouping               
              modules integrated with symmetry detection modules. (2)  the                   
              grouping modules integrated with 3D line labeling modules.  (3)                
              the symmetry detection module integrated with shape from contour               
              modules.  Algorithms will be tested on real images of cluttered                
              scenes of opaque, piecewise smooth objects and the usefulness of               
              the grouping algorithm and the integration process in analyzing                
              these images will be assessed.
