Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Analysis of Reactive Multi-Phase Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1991       
File        : a9103551

Award Number: 9103551
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro Embid   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In this project the principal investigator will employ                    
              analytical and numerical methods to study the behavior of                      
              solutions of the system of partial differential equations that                 
              describes combustion phenomena in a reactive multi-phase flow.                 
              In particular, he will look at the following three inter-related               
              problems for reactive multi-phase flows:  the transition to                    
              detonation, the structure of detonation waves, and the modelling               
              of phenomena at low Mach number,i.e., subsonic flow.  A                        
              substantial part of the project involves replacing the complex                 
              set of equations with simpler, asymptotic versions whose                       
              solutions still retain the essential physics of the phenomena.                 
              The goal is to increase our understanding of the complex physics               
              that governs the formation and evolution of flames in combustible              
              granular flows.                                                                
                   Combustion phenomena form a visible and important  part of                
              everyday life.  Understanding the complex physical and chemical                
              processes that occur when liquids and gases burn is therefore of               
              interest to a host of scientists and engineers.  Much of the work              
              on combustion phenomena today is experimental and/or numerical,                
              but the complexity of the problems often defeats even the largest              
              supercomputer.  And experiments at high temperatures are often                 
              too difficult or too expensive to perform.  In this project the                
              principal investigator will use asymptotic methods to simplify                 
              the complicated set of nonlinear equations that governs                        
              combustion in gases.  He will then analyze this simpler set of                 
              equations in order to develop a better understanding of the                    
              propagation of flames in a granular flow.
