Title       : Coordination of Vertically Integrated, Multi-Plant Companies: VPW
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1991       
File        : a9103229

Award Number: 9103229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137064             (Estimated)
Investigator: Candace A. Yano yano@ieor.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 5514,
Abstract    :
                Production and transportation control strategies for multiple                
              plants in a vertically integrated company will be investigated,                
              emphasizing settings with complicating factors such as setups                  
              (machine changeovers), transportation delays between plants,                   
              uncertain yields, and uncertain production lead times.  The primary            
              motivating example is the electronic industry.  The goal is to                 
              develop approaches to improve coordination so as to reduce the                 
              manufacturing response time while keeping transportation and                   
              production costs low.  Analytical models will be developed to study            
              groups of complicating factors, to understand their interactions,              
              and then to develop control strategies that encourage coordination             
              in view of these factors.  Project results will be used to                     
              appropriately adapt an existing production planning model at the               
              host department, to account for these factors.                                 
                This project addresses production control methodology for                    
              vertically integrated companies, is extremely relevant to the                  
              semiconductor and electronics industries, and has applicability to             
              a much broader range of problems.  The project furthers VPW program            
              objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance their                 
              careers in science or engineering through research, and to                     
              encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas through the             
              investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the host                  
              campuses.  In this project, the proposed activities which                      
              contribute to the second objective include:  teaching two lecture              
              courses (one undergraduate and one graduate), advising on projects             
              for Master of Science students, presenting at least one guest                  
              seminar, and informal mentoring and counseling and role modeling               
              (there are no full-time female faculty in the host department).
