Title       : Early/Late Maastrichtian Climatic History of the South Atlantic and Indian
               Oceans (Marine Geology): VPW
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1993   
File        : a9103312

Award Number: 9103312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Enriqueta Barrera   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1620,
Abstract    :
                Contrary to previous suggestions of uniform, warm and equable                
              climatic conditions during the Late Cretaceous, foraminiferal                  
              isotopic results from deep-sea and onshore sequences reveal                    
              progressive cooling, and significant climatic and oceanographic                
              variability during the Maastrichtian.  Episodes of marked                      
              increase in forminiferal values correlate with decreases in                    
              specified oceanic values, documented sea level regressions and                 
              increases in seawater 87Sr/86Sr ratios in the early to late,                   
              and latest Maastrichtian.  The coincidence of these events, and                
              the similarity between Maastrichtian benthic foraminifera                      
              values and those of middle Eocene age associate with ice-rafted                
              debris, suggest that these variations might be related to                      
              glacioeustatic phenomena.  The research proposed will                          
              investigate and document the climatic and oceanographic history                
              of the early to late Maastrichtian in the high and mid latitude                
              South Atlantic and Indian Oceans based on foraminiferal oxygen                 
              and carbon isotope measurements, and foraminiferal quantitative                
              analyses.  Biostratigraphic correlation of deep-sea sections                   
              will be enhanced by integration of biostratigraphy,                            
              magnetostratigraphy and chemostratigraphy.  Evidence of                        
              substantial continental ice accumulation in the Maastrichtian                  
              will have significant implications for modeling of Cretaceous                  
              climates as well as interpretations of climatic history in                     
              general.                                                                       
                This project should lead to better paleooceanographic                        
              reconstructions, relevant to climatic evolution, suggesting                    
              when and how certain changes developed.  It furthers VPW                       
              program objectives to provide opportunities for women to                       
              advance their careers in science or engineering through                        
              research, and to encourage other women to pursue careers in                    
              these areas through the investigators' enhanced visibility as                  
              role models on the host campuses.  In this project, the                        
              proposed activities which contribute to the second objective                   
              include:  teaching a course in chemical-biotic relations in the                
              fossil record; giving lectures in geologic topics to                           
              universities, colleges and high schools near Princeton                         
              University to encourage women students to pursue scientific                    
              careers; co-teaching a departmental seminar each semester.
