Title       : Studies with Defined Deoxyribonucleic Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1993   
File        : a9103942

Award Number: 9103942
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Wells   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Agricul Exp Sta
	      The Agriculture Program
	      College Station, TX  778432147    979/845-4761

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In vivo and in vitro investigations are proposed on non-B DNA                  
              structures including intramolecular triplexes and other non-B                  
              right-handed conformations at oligopurine.oligopyrimidine tracts.              
              Studies will be conducted on naturally occurring pur.pyr sequences             
              to attempt to establish biological functions in prokaryotic and                
              eukaryotic cells.  Also, systems will be investigated where                    
              synthetic pur.pyr tracts are cloned specifically at certain loci to            
              attempt to elucidate biochemical behaviors.  Biological systems                
              include replication and transcription.  Direct determinations will             
              be established to evaluate the existence and properties in vivo of             
              non-B DNA oligopurine.oligopyrimidine structures in plasmids and               
              chromosomes.  Several probes will be utilized including UV                     
              photofootprinting, KMnO4, and methylase expression systems.                    
                                                                                             
              In vitro emphases include:  elucidation of other types (non-                   
              triplex) of non-B DNA structures at pur.pyr tracts; conditions which           
              stabilize these structures and their mechanisms of formation;                  
              enzymes (such as methylases, restriction enzymes) as conformational            
              probes; the effect of flanking sequences on thermodynamics,                    
              kinetics, and structures; the effect of methylation of C residues;             
              and the isolation and characterization of proteins that                        
              specifically bind these non-B conformations.                                   
                                                                                             
              These studies should provide significant insight into the                      
              biological and chemical properties of pur.pyr tracts which are found           
              in a variety of biologically important systems.
