Title       : VPW: Effect of Intraspecific Variation in Plant Quality on the Population
               Structure of Herbivores (Population Biology)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9103471

Award Number: 9103471
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136159             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon Y. Strauss   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1123,9225,
Abstract    :
                The adaptation of populations to environmental change can                    
              occur at extremely fine scales.  Plants growing on heavy-metal                 
              soils can be genetically differentiated from neighboring plants                
              growing only meters away on normal soils.  Such genetic                        
              isolation is the result of strong selective pressures by metals                
              in the soil coupled with selection for reduced gene flow                       
              between plant populations that span mine boundaries.  In this                  
              proposal, it is asked whether the same processes that have                     
              given rise to population differentiation in plants can also                    
              cause differentiation in herbivore populations that use these                  
              plants.  The importance of herbivore mobility, feeding                         
              specialization and exposure to metals to the presence or                       
              absence of local adaptation will be examined.  Eight different                 
              insect species (4 specialist feeders and 4 generalists feeders                 
              - with difference dispersal abilities) that occur on plants                    
              both on and off mine tailings will be selected.  Egg progeny                   
              of female insects, from both mined and normal sites, will be                   
              collected for each species.  Eggs from these females will be                   
              split into two batches:  one batch will be placed on plants                    
              growing on heavy-metal soil while the other will be placed on                  
              nearby plants growing on normal soils.  Such reciprocal                        
              transfer experiments will allow determination if progeny from                  
              insects collected on metal soils  fare better than progeny of                  
              insects collected from normal soils on metal-contaminated                      
              plants.  If this is the case, then local adaptation has                        
              occurred.                                                                      
                If herbivores capable of using metal-containing plants are                   
              genetically-differentiated from those on nearby plant                          
              populations, then it is possible that herbivore populations in                 
              general may exist as patches of locally-adapted individuals                    
              that are responding to small scale changes in plant quality.                   
              This project furthers VPW program objectives to provide                        
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigators'                       
              enhanced visibility as role models on the host campuses.  In                   
              this project, the proposed activities which contribute to the                  
              second objective include:  teaching two courses, Evolutionary                  
              Ecology, and a seminar in the History and Role of Women in                     
              Science; giving lectures on personal research in the                           
              departmental Entomology and Plant Science seminar series;                      
              collaborating with a phytochemist and evolutionary ecologist                   
              in the Entomology department.
