Title       : Thermochemical and Reactivity Studies of Basic Transition Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1993     
File        : a9103948

Award Number: 9103948
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Angelici angelici@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Many transition metal complexes behave as bases as illustrated                 
              by their reactions with protonic acids to give metal hydrides.                 
              There is evidence that this basicity also influences other                     
              types of reactivity of these complexes.  To understand these                   
              reactivities, basicities of a variety of transition metal                      
              complexes will be determined by measuring their heats of                       
              protonation calorimetrically with triflic acid.  Series of                     
              mononuclear complexes with a variety of ligands will be studied                
              systematically in order to establish quantitative relationships                
              between the metal basicity and the natures of the ligands                      
              attached to it.  Electronic and steric effects of monodentate                  
              ligands will be examined, and basicity changes caused by                       
              distortions of reactant and/or product structures induced by                   
              chelating ligands will be studied.  Also, factors which affect                 
              basicities of dinuclear and cluster complexes, where                           
              protonation occurs on a metal-metal bond, will be investigated.                
              In order to understand how metal complex basicities influence                  
              other types of complex reactivity, rates of a variety of                       
              oxidative-addition reactions will be determined and correlated                 
              with the enthalpy values; such linear free energy correlations                 
              should be extremely useful guides to understanding a broad                     
              range of transition metal complex reactivity.                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and                            
              Organometallic Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Robert J.                
              Angelici of Iowa State University will continue thermochemical                 
              and reactivity studies of a variety of transition metal                        
              complexes.  It is possible that a limited set of thermochemical                
              data may allow accurate predictions of a large range of                        
              chemical reactivities, a predictive capability that could prove                
              very useful in the design of certain catalysts.
