Title       : A Theoretical Analysis of the Character Concept in Systematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1991    
File        : a9103325

Award Number: 9103325
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. O'Hara   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1353,
Abstract    :
              Phylogenies of organisms are inferred on the basis of characters,              
              the observational data gathered by systematists.  Unlike many other            
              systematic concepts, however, the concept of 'character" has                   
              received almost no attention from systematic theorists.  With this             
              postdoctoral fellowship, Dr. O'Hara, a systematist, is working with            
              Dr. Elliott Sober, a philosopher of science, to develop a                      
              conceptual analysis of the character concept of systematics.                   
              Starting from his own definition, developed in his doctoral                    
              dissertation research in 1989, of a character as an observed                   
              difference from which we infer an evolutionary event, Dr. O'Hara               
              is developing arguments to show that: (1) although "character" is              
              an inherently comparative concept, the entities being compared in              
              character descriptions have not always been clearly specified;  (2)            
              the "character problem" in systematics (how are characters                     
              recognized in practice, and how should they be scored for cladistic            
              analysis) maps directly onto what may be called the "event problem"            
              in philosophy; and that (3) it is possible to identify the specific            
              points in this mapping process at which all the uncertainty in our             
              estimates of phylogeny is introduced.  As a result of this study,              
              the language of character descriptions in systematics should become            
              more precise, and the epistemological foundations of our knowledge             
              of evolutionary history should be better understood.
