Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Knots, Framed Manifolds, and Jet Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1991      
File        : a9103556

Award Number: 9103556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandru I. Suciu alexsuciu@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This research project involves three different areas of                   
              topology:  knot theory, manifold theory, and homology of groups.               
              The problems considered are handled by a variety of techniques,                
              coming from differential topology (cutting and pasting,                        
              transversality, transformation groups), homotopy theory (homotopy              
              groups of spheres, plus construction, S-duality), and algebra                  
              (homological algebra, combinatorial group theory, symmetric                    
              forms).                                                                        
                   Part 1 is an investigation of certain classes of higher-                  
              dimensional knots.  The first class consists of knots which are                
              not determined by their complements.  Only recently has it been                
              proved that such knots do not occur in 3-space.  On the other                  
              hand, the investigator has since shown that such knots do occur                
              in at least a quarter of all higher dimensions.  He intends to                 
              find inequivalent knots with the same complement in the missing                
              dimensions.  The second class consists of certain knots whose                  
              complements have cyclic fundamental group.  The classification of              
              such knots will be pursued by means of algebraic invariants                    
              associated to their complements.  The third class consists of                  
              knotted higher-genus surfaces in 4-space.  That this is a much                 
              richer collection than that of ordinary knotted 2-spheres will be              
              shown by an analysis of the  peripheral structure of the knot                  
              groups.                                                                        
                   Part 2 concerns a special class of closed manifolds -- those              
              obtained by spinning lower-dimensional ones about framed                       
              submanifolds of spheres.  Using a generalized Pontrjagin-Thom                  
              construction, the investigator will carry out the homotopy                     
              classification of such manifolds in certain cases.  Applications               
              to the bordism classification of homology spheres will be given.               
                 Part 3 describes an ongoing program with S. Jekel for                       
              computing the homology of the classifying space for codimension-               
              one real analytic singular foliations.  The investigator outlines              
              the calculation of the homology of discrete groups of jets of                  
              local diffeomorphisms, and of some related nilpotent groups.                   
              In short, the investigator will apply himself on the one hand, to              
              some very concrete geometric problems concerning higher                        
              dimensional knots and symmetries of manifolds, and on the other                
              hand, to enlarging the scope of algebraic tools for attacking                  
              such problems.
