Title       : Mechanisms of Anoxic Tolerance in Heart Muscle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9103158

Award Number: 9103158
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald C. Jackson Donald Jackson@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald G. Lawler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The physiological and biochemical adaptations of animals to               
              environmental stresses will be studied.  The major project                     
              concerns the tolerance of freshwater turtles to anoxia and                     
              acidosis similar to what they experience during their winter                   
              hibernation period.  In addition, the respiratory and metabolic                
              responses of bats during daily torpor, a normal occurrence in                  
              these animals, has recently been studied.                                      
                   Earlier work on whole animal responses, particularly                      
              metabolic and blood acid-base responses, found that long-term                  
              survival without oxygen is possible mainly due to a drastic                    
              reduction in energy metabolism, and to a lesser extent to                      
              effective buffering of accumulated acids by release of calcium                 
              carbonate from the shell.  Recent research has been directed to                
              the turtle heart in vitro, using perfused hearts either in a                   
              conventional tissue bath or in an NMR spectrometer.  These                     
              studies have revealed that the isolated heart can maintain near                
              normal levels of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and mechanical                   
              function for many hours of anoxia, but when anoxia and acidosis                
              are combined, the heart fails mechanically.  One current                       
              objective is to learn whether this is really 'failure' or whether              
              instead it is an adaptive arrest of function that enables                      
              survival under these conditions.  Other current objectives                     
              involve defining cellular mechanisms of acid-base control, ion                 
              balance, and metabolic regulation that underlie the extraordinary              
              behavior of these animals.
