Title       : Agencies of Change: The National Science Foundation and Federal Patronage of
               Biology (History and Philosopy of Science): VPW
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1991      
File        : a9103323

Award Number: 9103323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149618             (Estimated)
Investigator: Toby A. Appel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 1353,9225,
Abstract    :
                The investigator is completing a book on the National Science                
              Foundation and federal patronage of the biological sciences in                 
              the period of 1945-1975, viewed as a case study for the                        
              illumination of broader themes on science and public policy.                   
              The existing study is a good agency history, showing that                      
              individual decisions as well as institutional dynamics have                    
              shaped NSF patronage of biology in a pluralistic system of                     
              federal support of science.  To reshape the manuscript so that                 
              it can become a significant work in the history of science,                    
              alternative points of view using sources other than NSF need                   
              to be incorporated.  Among the issues to be investigated are:                  
              tensions between basic and applied research and between biology                
              and medicine; strategies of supporting basic biology in the                    
              context of a pluralistic system of federal funding agencies;                   
              competition with National Institutes of Health; elitism versus                 
              support of the infrastructure of science; and the role of                      
              federal "science managers."  With past concentration on agency                 
              records, through new research in the recent history of biology                 
              and in the history of science and education policy, the                        
              investigator will incorporate a broader range of perspectives.                 
              Four areas of biology, each with different patterns of federal                 
              support, will be examined in order to address the key issue of                 
              how the development of biological ideas and institutions                       
              relates to patterns of federal patronage, namely: (1) the                      
              revolution in molecular biology; (2) photosynthesis; (3)                       
              systematic biology; and (4) ecology.                                           
                This effort is to transform a narrative heavily based on                     
              institutional records into a case study for illumination of                    
              broader themes of science and public policy.  Thus, in                         
              attempting to integrate the agency history with the history of                 
              biology, the question of what difference did NSF make to the                   
              biological sciences will be addressed.  The project furthers                   
              VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for women to                   
              advance their careers in science or engineering through                        
              research, and to encourage other women to pursue careers in                    
              these areas through the investigators' enhanced visibility as                  
              role models on the host campuses.  In this project, the                        
              proposed activities which contribute to the second objective                   
              include:  teaching courses on Women and Science, the Social                    
              History of American Science, and the History of Medicine;                      
              giving seminars; organizing a symposium on women and science                   
              in conjunction with the Women's Studies Program; developing an                 
              exhibit on early women scientists in Florida; and counseling                   
              women students.
