Title       : Development of New Techniques for Meiotic Research (Genetics): VPW
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1991       
File        : a9103448

Award Number: 9103448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry Ashley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1116,
Abstract    :
                The project aims to transfer techniques for mitotic labeling                 
              of DNA sequences for light and electron microscopy to both                     
              meiotic chromosomes and nuclei.  "Labeling" will include                       
              replication labeling with BrdU of zygotene DNA (zygDNA) semi-                  
              conservative replication and pachytene (PDNA) repair synthesis.                
              In situ hybridization of L1 and B2 sequences which hybridize                   
              to G- and R-bands, respectively, offer an opportunity to "band"                
              pachytene chromosomes so that they can be individually                         
              identified and the relative involvement of R- and G-chromatic                  
              in synapsis and recombination can be directly studied.  The                    
              research will significantly increase the resolution of meiotic                 
              studies, provide powerful new tools for study of 3-D                           
              arrangement of chromatic within presynaptic nucleic to provide                 
              an understanding of how homologous chromosomes "find" one                      
              another.  In addition, it will allow study of the role of                      
              specific DNA sequences in initiation and progression of                        
              synapsis and recombination while determining where these                       
              sequences are located with respect to R- and G-bands of                        
              mammalian chromosomes.                                                         
                The project focuses upon gene making and chromosome                          
              structure.  It furthers VPW program objectives to provide                      
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigators'                       
              enhanced visibility as role models on the host campuses.  In                   
              this project, the proposed activities which contribute to the                  
              second objective will include:  developing and coordinating a                  
              series of guest lectures by women in genetics, jointly                         
              sponsored by the Department of Human Genetics and the Office                   
              for Women in Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, with                
              time allocated for female graduate students to meet with the                   
              lecturers and discuss careers in science; teaching a graduate                  
              course on Meiosis and on Chromosomes, Speciation, and                          
              Evolution; and participating in the departmental Journal Club                  
              presentations by faculty, and the Recombination Journal Club,                  
              as well as other departmental activities, including the yearly                 
              departmental retreat for students and faculty.
