Title       : Mathematical Sciences: A Neural Network, Modeled by a Nonlinear Dynamical System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1991 
File        : a9103575

Award Number: 9103575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia A. Noonburg Noonburg@Hartford  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Hartford
	      200 Bloomfield Avenue
	      West Hartford, CT  06117    860/768-4635

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   This project studies the properties of a continuous neural                
              network that has already been shown to successfully solve certain              
              problems in pattern classification.  The mathematical model for                
              this network was derived using only the most basic assumptions;                
              namely, that a neural network is a collection of interacting                   
              elements, each one affected positively or negatively by some                   
              subset of the others, and such that the system as a whole is                   
              capable of adapting its behavior over time.  The resulting                     
              mathematical model is an autonomous system of ordinary                         
              differential equations, and can therefore be analyzed by known                 
              analytic and numerical techniques.  For appropriate values of the              
              parameters it can be shown that an N-cell network will have N                  
              stable attractors.  One of the major goals of this project is                  
              the determination of the attractive basins of these attractors                 
              and a description of their dependence on the various system                    
              parameters. This information will then be used to determine the                
              properties of a neural network having these N-cell networks as                 
              components.                                                                    
                   Neural networks are currently being applied to certain                    
              kinds of problems that have not yielded to traditional techniques              
              of artificial intelligence, for example speech recognition and                 
              computer vision.  As yet, there is no general agreement on                     
              which neural network architectures work best.  It is possible                  
              that hybrid systems, consisting of interconnected components                   
              with different architectures, may be one solution.  It is in this              
              spirit that the network proposed here is being studied.  It has                
              some useful properties not possessed by other networks; for                    
              example, it automatically identifies the component of an input                 
              vector that is most distinct from all of the others, whether it                
              is smaller or larger.  As one of the few models in which the                   
              weights vary continuously in time as a function of the activity                
              levels, it has in these weights a built-in short-term memory                   
              capability.  A careful comparison of this model with other neural              
              networks in current use needs to be made, to determine whether it              
              has properties that make it significantly better in particular                 
              applications.
