Title       : Three-Dimensional Radiative Heat Transfer Including Polarization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1991      
File        : a9103971

Award Number: 9103971
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199403             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred L. Crosbie crosbie@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dwight C. Look  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With the development of the laser the problem of the                           
              interaction of a polarized beam of monochromatic radiation                     
              with a scattering material has gained considerable importance                  
              in the heat transfer community.  Lasers are now used as                        
              diagnostic tools to probe hot combustion gases as well as the                  
              atmosphere, and to measure the radiative properties of packed-                 
              beds, thermal insulations, ceramics, and human tissue.  Laser-                 
              based micromachining systems abound in the microelectronics                    
              industry and hold great potential in the fabrication of                        
              micromechanical structures.  The medical applications of                       
              lasers range from treating heart disease and cancer to                         
              dentistry and eye surgery.  The use of laser beams as                          
              "tweezers" to seize and manipulate bits of living cells is                     
              being considered as a way to improve gene-mapping methods.                     
              Most of these applications must be classified as                               
              multidimensional because of the finite size of the laser beam                  
              which is linearly polarized, and they often involve multiple                   
              and anisotropic scattering.  A definite need exists to develop                 
              a theoretical model for radiative transfer that can                            
              incorporate all these factors and to develop guidelines and                    
              approximate procedures for handling polarization effects.                      
                                                                                             
              This project is a theoretical and experimental study of three-                 
              dimensional radiative heat transfer including polarization and                 
              multiple scattering.  Specifically, the effects of multiple                    
              scattering on a laser beam of known polarization (linear,                      
              circular, or elliptical) are under investigation.  The laser                   
              beam is incident perpendicular to the top, flat surface of a                   
              cylindrical scattering medium.  The scattering centers are                     
              homogeneous spherical particles which are randomly distributed                 
              within the medium.  A theoretical model is being developed                     
              based on the three-dimensional vector transport equation for                   
              the Stokes parameters.  The usual scattering phase function                    
              will be replaced by a 4x4 phase matrix.  The transport                         
              equation will be reduced to a one-dimensional form using the                   
              double Fourier transform method, and the resulting equation                    
              will be solved by Ambartsumian's method.  The back-scattered                   
              radiation will then be calculated using a double inverse                       
              Fourier transform.  The theoretical analysis will be first                     
              carried out for small spherical particles, i.e., Rayleigh                      
              scattering.  A series of carefully controlled experiments will                 
              be conducted with latex microspheres suspended in pure water                   
              to validate the theoretical model.  The concentration of the                   
              microspheres will be varied so that the optical thickness of                   
              the scattering medium will range from thin to thick.  The                      
              results of this research will provide insight into a number of                 
              practical problems involving the interaction of a polarized                    
              laser beam with a scattering medium.  The development of a                     
              more realistic radiation model should have a significant                       
              impact in many fields where lasers are utilized including heat                 
              transfer, manufacturing, and medicine.
