Title       : Workshop on Visual Database Systems for the Marine Sciences,San Francisco,
               California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1992    
File        : a9103043

Award Number: 9103043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter W. Arzberger                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16692              (Estimated)
Investigator: Welton L. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : W L Lee & Assoc Inc
	      6600 Mokelumne Ave
	      Oakland, CA  946052213    415/635-5830

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A workshop is proposed to investigate the potential application of             
              visual database systems to research in marine biology.  Visual                 
              database systems link relational databases with extensive video or             
              image libraries.  Such systems can be used to construct a generic              
              resource of combined factual and visual information about marine               
              organisms and about their environments.  Such a resource could                 
              support a range of research, environmental assessment, and                     
              educational applications in the marine sciences.                               
                                                                                             
              At this time there is a logistics crisis in the management of                  
              visual information relating to taxonomic work needed to support                
              marine research.  Much visual information has already been                     
              collected, but is essentially inaccessible.  The amount collected              
              by various automated and remotely operated vehicles is increasing.             
              Furthermore, it is getting increasingly difficult to process                   
              existing and new collected material.                                           
                                                                                             
              Prototypes have shown the technical capabilities of visual database            
              systems meet perceived needs in the marine sciences.  A window of              
              opportunity currently exists to use visual database systems to deal            
              with the above problems.  Decisions have to be made about the                  
              visual database system features which will result in the "best                 
              conomically possible format" allowing transfer of information                  
              between user sites, about the priorities of development, and the               
              logistics of continued maintenance.                                            
                                                                                             
              Input from potential users of such systems will allow development              
              of a comprehensive resource and workstation delivery environment               
              to be guided by immediate and future application criteria.
