Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Torsion Invariants and the Algebraic K-Theory of von
               Neumann Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1992        
File        : a9103327

Award Number: 9103327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Serge Ochanine ochanine@ms.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Kentucky
	      University Station
	      Lexington, KY  405060001    606/257-9000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In the first project, "Torsion Invariants and Algebraic K-                
              theory of von Neumann Algebras", a new topological invariant is                
              defined for a Riemannian manifold with a proper cocompact action               
              ofa countable discrete group G by isometries.  It generalizes                  
              classical notions of Reidemeister torsion.  One goal is to find a              
              better understanding of the weak K-theory of the von Neumann                   
              algebra of G, where the invariant lives.  The principal                        
              investigator wants to show by computation that the invariant                   
              carries a lot of information in interesting cases, including                   
              homology 3-spheres, hyperbolic manifolds, crystallographic                     
              manifolds and symmetric spaces.  Another problem is to give an                 
              analytic interpretation in terms of the spectral theory of the                 
              Laplace operator.                                                              
                   The other project, "Surgery Transfer and a General Signature              
              Formula for Fibre Bundles," is devoted to the study of the                     
              surgery transfer of a fibre bundle of manifolds.  An algebraic                 
              description was developed by the principal investigator and                    
              Andrew Ranicki.  It will be used to make explicit calculations,                
              to prove vanishing results, which have geometric meaning and                   
              applications, and to establish a general signature formula for                 
              fibre bundles.                                                                 
                   The first project is a joint project together with Professor              
              Melvin Rothenberg of the University of Chicago, the second with                
              Professor Andrew Ranicki of the University of Edinburgh.  Both                 
              combine topology, analysis, and algebra in genuine synthesis.                  
              Their principal value may be generating new tools for                          
              understanding manifolds and their symmetries.  Manifolds are, of               
              course, very basic geometric objects and arise almost everywhere               
              one looks in mathematics and physics, often as solutions of                    
              systems of ordinary or differential equations.
