Title       : PRF: Ecological Consequences of Floral Mimicry by a Fungus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1991      
File        : a9103799

Award Number: 9103799
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Roy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1121,
Abstract    :
                   Rust fungi are some of the most devastating plant pathogens.              
              Research efforts have therefore focused on the genetic basis for               
              resistance to the pathogens and on other methods of control.                   
              However, by focusing on the hosts, we have learned very little                 
              about the pathogens themselves.  The proposed research uses an                 
              extraordinary case of rust induced floral mimicry to explore the               
              consequences of insect mediated gamete transfer by these fungi.                
              Because this system appears to be highly evolved, it is ideal for              
              studying the importance of insect-interactions for the evolution               
              of the rust fungi.  First, whether the mimicry is an evolved                   
              system, or whether it is merely the result of an accidental                    
              combination of host morphology and fungal hormones, will be                    
              examined.  Next how important this extreme case of mimicry is for              
              these particular fungi, that is, does the mimicry increase                     
              visitation by insects, and does increased visitation matter to                 
              the reproductive success of the fungi, will be assessed.  Insects              
              are known to transfer gametes of rusts, but how necessary they                 
              are under natural conditions is not well understood.  Finally,                 
              the possibility that these flower-mimic fungi may affect the                   
              reproductive success of co-occurring true flowers, either by                   
              competing for pollinators or by attracting a larger pollinator                 
              population will be explored.
