Title       : Surface-Mediated Electrophilic Additions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1993  
File        : a9103153

Award Number: 9103153
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Kropp kropp@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A study will be made of the effect of silica gel- and alumina-                 
              mediated electrophilic addition reactions to alkenes and alkynes.              
              In order to obtain a better understanding of the mechanistic                   
              features of this synthetically useful technique, a systematic                  
              study of the interaction of organic substrates with alumina and                
              silica surfaces and the effects of those interactions on                       
              electrophilic additions to the substrates will be made. Particular             
              attention will be given to delineating previously observed                     
              differences between alumina and silica gel surfaces in mediating               
              electrophilic addition reactions, including differences in the                 
              steric demands of the active sites, and to developing techniques               
              for effecting selective addition to one double or triple bond in               
              the presence of another. A major study of the effects of polar                 
              substituents on surface-mediated electrophilic additions to                    
              alkenes and alkynes will also be undertaken, with special                      
              attention to directive effects of the substituents which may                   
              induce chemo-, regio-, or stereoselective additions of                         
              hydrohalides, halogens, water, hydrazoic acid, and hydrogen                    
              cyanide.                                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              research of Professor Paul J. Kropp at the University of North                 
              Carolina. Preliminary studies by Dr. Kropp have shown that                     
              surfaces of alumina and silica gel can dramatically affect the                 
              addition of various compounds to double and triple carbon-carbon               
              bonds. In the present study, the intimate details of alumina and               
              silica gel mediated addition reactions will be investigated. The               
              size of substituents bonded to double and triple carbon-carbon                 
              bonds, as well as the electron density in these multiple bonds,                
              will be studied with regard to the possible courses that the                   
              addition reaction may take. The results of these studies will lead             
              to important applications in synthetic methods for the preparation             
              of organic molecules.
