Title       : Development of a Triple-Axis Neutron Spectrometer at the University of Missouri
               Research Reactor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1994        
File        : a9103383

Award Number: 9103383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Rhyne rhynej@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel A. Werner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Constantine Stassis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Through this collaborative project between the University of                   
              Missouri-Columbia and Iowa State University, the triple-axis                   
              neutron spectrometer at the University of Missouri Research Reactor            
              (MURR), will be replaced with a newer, higher intensity (3X),                  
              triple-axis neutron spectrometer (Triax), and a double-axis                    
              diffractometer having 1.8X the intensity of the present                        
              diffractometer.  Triax, now located at Oak Ridge National                      
              Laboratory, is owned by the Ames Laboratory.  Triax will allow use             
              of a 4 inch high, vertically-focussing monochromator crystal.  The             
              calculated flux on the sample will be competitive with the H4M                 
              triple-axis instrument at HFBR reactor at Brookhaven National                  
              Laboratory, and the BT4 machine at the NBSR reactor at the National            
              Institute of Standards and Technology.  Relocation of Triax will               
              provide needed neutron scattering capability at a working facility             
              to a broad group of scientists in the Mid-west region of the                   
              country, and will serve to train  and educate students.  Triax will            
              be available to outside users about thirty-percent of the time. o              
              Operation and maintenance will be provided by MURR.                            
              %%%                                                                            
              Research efforts which will benefit cover areas of materials and               
              solid state physics including: inelastic scattering in disordered              
              systems; magnetic semiconductors; elastic diffraction from metallic            
              superlattices; spin density and charge density waves in binary                 
              alloys and multilayers; magnetic, electric, and dynamic properties             
              of solids; and polarized neutron scattering experiments.
