Title       : Diagenesis of Sandstones in Foreland and Piggy-back Basins, Northern Apennines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9103985

Award Number: 9103985
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Earle F. McBride   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,5920,
Abstract    :
                   The northern Apennines, Italy, have excellent exposures of                
              these two types of basins in close proximity and is the type area              
              of piggy-back basins.  Rock type and geometry; distribution of                 
              cements and pores with respect to bedding planes, faults, and                  
              shales; sandstone/shale ratio; and burial and tectonic history are             
              major features that will be compared.  Diagenetic features will be             
              studied using polarized light, scanning electron microscopy,                   
              cathodoluminescence, electron probe microanalysis, fluid                       
              inclusions, stable isotope geochemistry, heavy mineral composition,            
              vitrinite reflectance, apatite fission-track data in addition to               
              outcrop relations.                                                             
                   The purpose of this project is to compare and contrast                    
              cementation and other diagenetic aspects of age-equivalent                     
              sandstones from two different types of sedimentary basins, piggy-              
              back and foreland, in order to isolate causes and effects and to               
              identify the relative importance of the many variables controlling             
              diagenesis.  Understanding sandstone diagenesis in sedimentary                 
              basins has an important applied use in assessing hydrocarbon and               
              water reservoir quality of sandstones and in assessing the role of             
              rock-water interactions in sandstones used for toxic waste                     
              disposal.  Understanding diagenesis in sandstones also is essential            
              to interpreting the post-depositional history of sandstones, the               
              sources and sinks of chemical components, and interpreting the                 
              provenance of sandstones.                                                      
                   This is a cooperative study involving four Italian sedimentary            
              geologists (Universities of Modena and Bologna) and four                       
              sedimentary geologists from the University of Texas at Austin.  The            
              reasons for doing the study in the northern Apennines are: 1) there            
              are excellent exposures of coeval rocks deposited in two different             
              types of basins in a small geographic area (200 x 150 km), 2) the              
              stratigraphy and sedimentology of the rocks and structural history             
              are known, and 3) opportunity for international cooperation on a               
              project for which the Italian team has obtained support.
