Title       : U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research: Partial Differential Equations & Several
               Complex Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1991 
File        : a9103833

Award Number: 9103833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10560              (Estimated)
Investigator: Francois J. Treves treves@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5913      BRAZIL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1266,
Abstract    :
              This award supports cooperative research on partial differ-                    
              ential equations and complex variables between Dr. Francois                    
              Treves of Rutgers University and Dr. P. D. Cordaro of the                      
              University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.  The work will                     
              investigate the existence of local solutions in the differ-                    
              ential complexes originating from commuting systems of                         
              complex vector fields (on a smooth real manifold).  Recently                   
              Cordaro and Treves have obtained general necessary conditions,                 
              at least when the rank of the characteristic set is . 1.                       
              Cordaro & Treves are currently  investigating the possibility                  
              of proving sufficient conditions, in particular in the                         
              important case of Cauchy-Riemann structures.  There is a                       
              natural conjecture that awaits proof, in the case of top-degree                
              forms:  local solvability ought to hold if the Levi form is                    
              not definite (positive or negative) at any point.                              
                                                                                             
              This type of result is an essential part of the completion of                  
              the theory of hypo-analytic structures that has been building                  
              for the last ten years, through the efforts of Treves and his                  
              collaborators.  The award will allow Cordaro & Treves to get                   
              together at regular intervals to work on this project.                         
              Cordaro has funds from CNPq NSF's corresponding agency in                      
              Brazil to visit Rutgers University.  Treves and a graduate                     
              student will visit Sao Paulo in return.
