Title       : Leaching of Nickel-Copper-Iron Sulfidesin Cupric Chloride Media, Award in Indian
               Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1991     
File        : a9103106

Award Number: 9103106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C K. Gupta   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bhabha Atomic Res Center
	      
	      Bombay, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This project is for support of cooperative                       
              research by Dr. Renato Bautista of the Department of Chemical                  
              and Metallurgical Engineering at the University of Nevada,                     
              Reno and Dr. C.K. Gupta of the Extractive Metallurgy Division                  
              of the Bhabha Atomic Research center (BARC) in Bombay,                         
              India.  The project is to characterize the application of                      
              cupric chloride leaching to complex nickeliferous sulfide                      
              ores where the nickel is mainly present in the minerals                        
              millerite (NiS) and pentlandite (NiFeS).  Experimental work                    
              will be done at BARC and mathematical modeling will be                         
              developed by the U. of Nevada team.  The effect of different                   
              parameters on the rate of leaching of the nickel sulfides                      
              will be examined.  The rate of dissolution of both millerite                   
              and pentlandite will be developed from the experimental data,                  
              including their rate constants and activation energies.  The                   
              mathematical model will cover the leaching reactions and the                   
              simultaneous reactions in the solution phase.  The                             
              information derived from the experimental work and the model                   
              will be applied to an indigenous nickel-copper sulfide                         
              concentrate.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Scope:  the project brings together two experienced                            
              scientists from India and the U.S. to work on a problem that                   
              has significant importance to the material processing                          
              industry in the U.S. and India.  This collaboration meets the                  
              objective of the U.S.-India Cooperative Program.
