Title       : Desertification, Soil Nitrogen Mineralization, and the Fractal Nature of Soil
               Spatial Variation in J. Occidentalis Communities of Central Oregon (Ecosystem
               Studies): VPW
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1991       
File        : a9103615

Award Number: 9103615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100046             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia A. Jones geojulia@attbi.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1124,
Abstract    :
                The proposed research tests three hypotheses relating                        
              decertification to changes in the fractal nature of soil                       
              properties and to soil food webs in big sagebrush/bluebunch                    
              wheatgrass communities in central Oregon which are grazed and                  
              being invaded by Juniperus occidentalis subsp. occidentalis.                   
              The hypotheses will be tested by sampling soils in two sites,                  
              with and without J. occidentalis, according to a fractal                       
              sampling design; analyzing samples for organic carbon, total                   
              nitrogen, moisture content, pH, soil fauna, and nitrogen                       
              mineralization rates; calculating the fractal dimension of the                 
              data by fitting straight lines to log-log semivariograms; and                  
              comparing the shapes of the semivariograms and their fractal                   
              dimensions between the sites.  The research is significant                     
              because it tests a hypothesis developed in deserts of the                      
              southwest U.S. stating that decertification may occur as                       
              invasion of wood plants in grassland ecosystems as the result                  
              of grazing, which increases the spatial heterogeneity of soil                  
              water and nutrients, but recognizes the fractal nature of soil                 
              spatial variation, i.e. that they have self-affinity and detail                
              as a wide range of spatial scales, and attempts to relate the                  
              patterns of variation to the structure of soil food webs.                      
                The results of this research will contribute to understanding                
              of geographical and ecological processes affecting the long                    
              term use of semi-arid ecosystems.  The project furthers VPW                    
              program objectives to provide opportunities for women to                       
              advance their careers in science or engineering through                        
              research, and to encourage other women to pursue careers in                    
              these areas through the investigators' enhanced visibility as                  
              role models on the host campuses.  In this project, the                        
              proposed activities which contribute to the second objective                   
              include:  teaching a course entitled, "Soil spatial Variability                
              and Forest Ecology;" leading reading and discussion groups;                    
              advising; and organizing a series of guest seminars to be                      
              presented by women scientists working in fields related to the                 
              subject of soil spatial variability and forest ecology.
