Title       : Party Organization as Party Coalition Building (Political Science): VPW
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1991       
File        : a9103298

Award Number: 9103298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79597              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah M. Morehouse   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 1371,9225,
Abstract    :
                Coalition building as an appropriate measure of party                        
              organization is the focus of this study.  Aspects include                      
              examining how prospective gubernatorial candidates form                        
              coalitions in order to win their party's nomination.  This                     
              involves the people they ask to join their campaign for the                    
              nomination, the resources these people have, the strategies                    
              they use to win and the results.  This research will help                      
              reveal the circumstances under which parties are unified or                    
              divisive in the performance of this function, and the type of                  
              organization which is associated with unity or division.                       
              Collegial interaction at the Institute for Governmental Studies                
              will aid in the analysis of the data and the conclusions which                 
              arise from them.                                                               
                The major objective of this research is to discover the role                 
              of the political party in the nominating process.  The project                 
              furthers VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for                   
              women to advance their careers in science or engineering                       
              through research, and to encourage other women to pursue                       
              careers in these areas through the investigators' enhanced                     
              visibility as role models on the host campuses.  In this                       
              project, the proposed activities which contribute to the second                
              objective include:  leading a seminar on comparative state                     
              politics which engages students, faculty and guests in a                       
              systematic examination of a problem (the capability of state                   
              parties to recruit and nominate candidates for public office);                 
              teaching a course in political science; and interacting with                   
              other visiting scholars at the Institute of Governmental                       
              Studies.
