Title       : Chemotaxis to aromatic acids by Gram-negative bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1993  
File        : a9103860

Award Number: 9103860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline S. Harwood   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1112,
Abstract    :
              Aromatic compounds are abundant in the biosphere as a major                    
              polymeric component of plants (lignin) and as toxic by-products of             
              human industrial activities.  Although a reasonable amount is known            
              about how aromatics are degraded by bacteria, not much is known                
              about how bacteria detect the presence of aromatic compounds in the            
              environment. Several genera of motile bacteria, including                      
              Pseudomonas, have a strong behavioral attraction to aromatic                   
              compounds.  This project will study the mechanistic basis for                  
              chemotaxis to the aromatic acid, benzoate, by Pseudomonas putida.              
              Our intent is to understand how the receptor that detects these                
              aromatic acids functions and to elucidate the relationship between             
              attractant recognition and biodegradation.  Genetic and biochemical            
              experiments are planned to identify the genes necessary for                    
              specific behavioral responses to benzoate, and to express and                  
              characterize the proteins encoded by these genes.  The regulation              
              of the chemotaxis genes and of selected benzoate degradation genes             
              will also be analyzed, with a particular focus on defining DNA                 
              sequences and regulatory proteins that are required for gene                   
              expression.  Since chemotaxis is an important prelude to                       
              metabolism, the proposed work could lead to the development of                 
              improved strategies for the biodegradation of selected toxic                   
              compounds.  The receptor protein for benzoate may also have                    
              distinctive structural characteristics.
