Title       : Possibility Theory in Expert Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1994       
File        : a9103925

Award Number: 9103925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Y. T. Chien                             
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163404             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Yager ryager@iona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iona College
	      715 North Avenue
	      New Rochelle, NY  108011830    914/633-2000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This is the first year funding of a three year continuing grant.             
              This research focuses on the development of a formal system, based             
              upon possibility thoery for the representation and manipulation of             
              uncertainity in expert systems.  The use of Possibility theory                 
              allows a natural representation of linguistic information as well              
              being an appropriate setting for handling partial matching.  One               
              emphasis of the research is the development of tools for the                   
              general representation of imprecise functional information.  Here              
              use is made of the ability possibility theory to interact with                 
              other knowledge representation formalisms such as default reasoning            
              and probability theory.  A second emphasis of this research is the             
              development of a tool to help in the validation of knowledge-based             
              systems containing uncertain information.  Particular attention is             
              paid to the discovery of potential inconsistencies in a knowledge              
              base.  The approach used is based upon the idea of reflecting back             
              on the input.  A very fundamental uncertainty principle is the                 
              specificity-correctness tradeoff.  What this principle says is that            
              in providing information we generally must make a tradeoff.  What              
              this principle says is that in providing information we generally              
              must make a tradeoff between being very specific and running the               
              risk of being incorrect or being unspecific and in turn assure                 
              ourselves of being correct.  In most expert systems one desires                
              both correctness and specificity.  In this research the measure of             
              specificity is extended to environments in which their exists as               
              underlying similarity relation.  The significance of this research             
              is that it provides tools for builders of expert systems which can             
              be used to formally and systemically include uncertainty in their              
              systems.
