Title       : PRF: The Evolution of Parental Care, Mating Systems, and Associated
               Morphological Characters in Neotropical Cichlid Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1991   
File        : a9103719

Award Number: 9103719
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Wimberger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
                   Almost all of the parental care behaviors and mating systems              
              seen in the Cichlidae, a family noted for its diversity in these               
              characters, are present in the subfamily Geophaginae.  Sequences               
              of two mitochondrial genes (cytochrome oxidase II and one other)               
              will be determined for geophagine species and outgroup                         
              representatives, and used to derive a phylogeny.  With the                     
              phylogeny, the following questions will be addressed:  1)  In                  
              what sequence do the varied parental care behaviors evolve and                 
              how evolutionarily labile are they? 2) Do particular modes of                  
              parental care precede particular mating systems or vice-versa?                 
              3) Do novel behavioral traits always precede the evolution of                  
              related morphological characters?  4) How does the area cladogram              
              for geophagines compare to those of other neotropical fish                     
              groups? 5) How general among cichlids is the accelerated rate of               
              cytochrome oxidase II gene evolution seen in Geophagus                         
              steindachneri?  With this single phylogeny, questions of great                 
              interest will be answered to those working in such diverse fields              
              as behavioral ecology, molecular and morphological evolution,                  
              fish systematics, and neotropical biogeograhy.
