Title       : PRF: Algal Community Responses to Landscape Disturbance and Nutrient Dynamics
               along Land-Inland Water Ecotones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1991      
File        : a9103680

Award Number: 9103680
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Heath J. Carney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1124,
Abstract    :
                   The principal objective of the proposed research is to                    
              describe and explain how community composition and nutrient                    
              limitation of aquatic primary producers (especially algae) are                 
              influenced by land use and ecotonal complexity in the Andean                   
              Altiplano.  The four large-scale nutrient flux treatments to be                
              compared are:  ancient raised fields currently under                           
              rehabilitation vs. flat pastures and fields (now more common),                 
              and complex littoral ecotones (shallow slopes) vs. simple                      
              ecotones (steeply sloping shorelines).  Several hypotheses                     
              derived from the "big perturbation" of anthropogenic land-use                  
              changes are constructed as tests.  Field sampling and                          
              measurements will take place in stream surface water between                   
              agricultural fields and the lake, and in nearshore zones of                    
              several drainage systems.  Analyses will be primarily for the                  
              major forms of nitrogen and phosphorus, bioassay studies of                    
              nutrient limitation, and aquatic biological responses.  Thus,                  
              nutrient-algal relations will be tested with both large-scale                  
              landscape treatments and more controlled bioassay experiments.                 
              These studies will be coordinated with ongoing field                           
              investigations by other scientists of: nutrient dynamics in                    
              agricultural fields, remote sensing and GIS-based modeling of                  
              land-water interactions, and archeological and paleolimnological               
                                                                                             
              studies of land use history.
