Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topology and Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1993  
File        : a9103033

Award Number: 9103033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dusa McDuff dusa@math.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lowell E. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Professor McDuff has recently concentrated her attention on               
              4-dimensional manifolds, using and developing techniques first                 
              introduced by Gromov.  She has shown that a large class of                     
              minimal symplectic 4-manifolds (those containing "nice"                        
              symplectically embedded 2-spheres) carry a unique symplectic                   
              structure in each cohomology class.  She intends to continue                   
              this work: for example, to see if she can extend the above result              
              to manifolds which contain a symplectically embedded surface of                
              higher genus, or to see if she can find a 4-manifold which                     
              supports different symplectic and Kahler structures in the same                
              cohomology class.  The class of symplectic 4-manifolds lies                    
              between the class of Kahler surfaces and the class of smooth 4-                
              manifolds, and, if it turns out that symplectic 4-manifolds                    
              behave nicely enough, one might be able to use information on                  
              their structure to obtain information on the class of 4-manifolds              
              itself.                                                                        
                   Professor Jones will continue his joint research with F. T.               
              Farrell.  One of their most recent results states that the                     
              surgery L-groups and the rational algebraic K-groups for the                   
              group ring ZG can be computed in a simple way from the L-groups                
              and rational K-groups of group rings ZG', where G' is any                      
              virtually cyclic subgroup G' in G provided G is a co-compact                   
              discrete subgroup of a virtually connected Lie group.  In the                  
              next three years they hope to prove this same result for more                  
              general groups G.                                                              
                   Symplectic manifolds arise in the study of mechanics, both                
              classical and quantum.  Lie groups are also ubiquitous in                      
              mechanics.  It would seem that mathematics and theoretical                     
              physics are not entirely distinct subjects at this level.
