Title       : Regulation of Manganous Superoxide Dismutase in Yeast (Genetics): VPW
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1991       
File        : a9103465

Award Number: 9103465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102487             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Pinkham jlp@osprey.astro.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1112,9225,
Abstract    :
                All respiring cells must solve the problem of oxidative                      
              stress, since respiration results in potentially toxic level                   
              of reactive oxygen species.  Therefore, respiring cells contain                
              the enzyme, superoxide dismutase, to catalyze the conversion                   
              of superoxide anion to hydrogen peroxide and molecular oxygen.                 
              Manganous superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) is found in the                         
              mitochondria of all multi-cellular eukaryotes, and is present                  
              in the yeast S. cerevisiae.  The gene encoding MnSOD in yeast                  
              is called SOD1.  Since the structural gene encoding MnSOD is                   
              well conserved and MnSOD enzymatic activity is essential for                   
              respiring cells, some features of SOD1 regulation in yeast are                 
              likely to be similar or identical to MnSOD gene regulation in                  
              more complex eukaryotes.  Understanding SOD1 regulation,                       
              therefore, will contribute valuable information to the field                   
              of oxidative stress response.  The investigator's objectives                   
              are to lay the ground work for understanding oxidative stress                  
              in yeast first, by finding mutants which specifically do not                   
              transcribe the SOD1 gene using an SOD1-lacZ fusion gene to                     
              identify these mutants, and standard genetic techniques to                     
              characterize them.  The second objective is to complete a                      
              deletion analysis of the SOD1 promoter region of the SOD1-lacZ                 
              fusion gene by standard techniques.  Included in the                           
              characterization of both the mutant strains and the promoter                   
              deletion will be a comparison of the expression of SOD1-lacZ                   
              in cells grown under anaerobic conditions, normal and higher                   
              than normal O2 conditions.                                                     
                This effort concerning the regulation of yeast manganous                     
              superoxide dismutase by oxygen and heme will broaden the                       
              knowledge of DNA binding proteins and their regulation and                     
              function.  The project also furthers VPW program objectives to                 
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              science or engineering through research, and to encourage other                
              women to pursue careers in these areas through the                             
              investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the host                  
              campuses.  In this project, the proposed activities which                      
              contribute to the second objective include:  teaching a                        
              graduate level course entitled, Stress Responses in Eukaryotic                 
              Cells; organizing a workshop called, Getting There from Here                   
              about careers in biological science; and teaching a seminar                    
              course for undergraduate women in biological sciences entitled,                
              Finding a Way:  Women, Careers and Modern Biology.
