Title       : VPW: Role of Impurities in Compositional Changes in Copper Sulfides During
               Anodic Dissolution (Manufacturing Processes)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1992    
File        : a9103321

Award Number: 9103321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63648              (Estimated)
Investigator: KNona C. Liddell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1467,9225,
Abstract    :
                Synthetic samples of copper sulfides will be prepared                        
              containing controlled amounts of impurity elements in order to                 
              investigate the effects impurities have on the anodic                          
              dissolution of these materials.  Specimen composition will be                  
              determined before and after reaction by electron microprobe and                
              x-ray diffraction.  Reacted sulfide disk electrodes will be                    
              sectioned normal to the exposed surface so that composition                    
              changes can be measured as a function of depth, applied                        
              potential, and reaction time.  The composition of a partially                  
              reacted copper sulfide is know to be a function of applied                     
              potential, reaction time, and sample origin, and it is                         
              hypothesized that there is a composition gradient with distance                
              from the exposed surface and that the composition is also                      
              related to the impurities present.  Electrochemical techniques,                
              including differential capacitance, resistivity, and cyclic                    
              voltammetry, will be used to characterize the electrical                       
              properties of the sulfides and to identify electroactive                       
              surface species involved in the dissolution reactions.  Peak                   
              height data from the cyclic voltammograms will be collected at                 
              intervals over an extended period and integrated in order to                   
              determine whether the number of electrons transferred in the                   
              dissolution reactions is constant over time; this quantity is                  
              already know to be potentially dependent.  Rotating ring disk                  
              electrodes with demountable sulfide disks will be used to                      
              measure the concentrations of soluble conducts, Cu(I) and Cu                   
              (II), so that the rate of formation of these species can be                    
              correlated with composition changes in the solid and with the                  
              impurities present.                                                            
                This research effort to examine the electrochemistry of                      
              semiconducting copper sulfides which contain controlled amounts                
              of various impurities is of technological interest because of                  
              similar reactions occurring in hydrometallurgical processing,                  
              and is of scientific interest because little work has been                     
              published on the kinetics of the electrochemistry of                           
              semiconductors that undergo chemical-composition changes.  The                 
              project furthers VPW program objectives to provide                             
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigators'                       
              enhanced visibility as role models on the host campuses.  In                   
              this project, the proposed activities which contribute to the                  
              second objective include:  conducting a seminar course, and                    
              informal mentoring of undergraduate and graduate women students                
              enrolled in engineering or interested in careers in the field.
