Title       : Presidential Young Investigator/Development of Chiral, Self-Replicating
               Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1995       
File        : a9157002

Award Number: 9157002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott D. Rychnovsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,9227,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Self-reproduction is a central feature of living systems but is                
              almost unprecedented in simple chemical systems.  A promising                  
              system to be studied to initiate the development of such                       
              capacity in a chemical system is the reaction of an achiral                    
              alpha-heteroaldehyde with a dialkylzinc reagent.  Dialkylzinc                  
              addition to aldehydes is normally a very slow reaction but can                 
              be catalyzed by the zinc alkoxides produced in the reaction and                
              thus these systems show autocatalytic behavior.  Recent studies                
              showed that the ethylzinc salt of (R)-1-phenylpropanol (70%ee)                 
              catalyzes the addition of diethylzinc to benzaldehyde,                         
              producing (R)-1-phenylpropanol (17%ee).  In this system the                    
              chiral catalyst generates its own enantiomer from achiral                      
              starting materials as it must to reproduce itself, but the                     
              reaction's low enantioselectivity leads to mainly a racemic                    
              mixture; much better enantioselective catalysts have been                      
              developed for the addition of diethylzinc to benzaldehyde.                     
              They all incorporate a second coordination site in the                         
              alkoxide, usually a nitrogen. The goal of this work is to                      
              design a system where an achiral aldehyde substrate leads to a                 
              chiral alkoxide which is an efficient, enantioselective                        
              catalyst for its own formation.  One of the most remarkable                    
              features of the aminoalcohol catalyst systems is that they show                
              a positive nonlinear effect. The monomeric alkoxides are the                   
              active catalysts, but they will dimerize in solution to give                   
              inactive dimers.  The racemic dimer which is the most stable,                  
              is in effect removed from the catalytic system, thus increasing                
              the enantioselectivity.  Monomeric and dimeric structures of                   
              the catalysts will be designed and modeled to produce a                        
              positive nonlinear effect by this mechanism.  A successful                     
              reaction system will produce a chiral alkoxide with increasing                 
              enantiomeric excess as the reaction proceeds.                                  
                                                                                             
              Dr. Scott Rychnovsky is being given the Presidential Young                     
              Investigator Award from the Synthetic Organic Chemistry Program                
              to support his research to develop chiral, self-replicating                    
              molecules.  This work has the potential to revolutionize how                   
              the complex chiral molecules will be synthesized in the future                 
              and completely change the nature of the strategic plans that                   
              are developed by the chemist in attacking new structures.
