Title       : Presidential Young Investigators Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1995       
File        : a9157089

Award Number: 9157089
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah L. Crawford                     
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. Kahn jmk@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9218,9227,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              I will perform experimental and theoretical studies of                         
              optical communication systems and of related                                   
              supporting technologies.  Topics to be addressed in                            
              this program will include, but will not be limited to,                         
              the following representative areas:  (a) Coherent                              
              Optical Communications:  this work will explore the                            
              limits of receiver sensitivity and of electrical and                           
              optical bandwidth efficiency that can be achieved                              
              through advanced coherent detection techniques.                                
              Initial studies will attempt to demonstrate homodyne                           
              detection using monolithic semiconductor lasers, as                            
              well as heterodyne detection of quadriphase-shift-                             
              keyed optical signals.  (b) Free-Space Infrared                                
              Communications for Wireless Local-Area Networks:                               
              this research will seek to develop technologies for                            
              high-speed digital communication using free-space                              
              infrared propagation.  Initial studies will include                            
              measurement of infrared multipath indoor                                       
              propagation and analysis and simulation of the                                 
              performance of various modulation and demodulation                             
              techniques.  In following studies, I hope to                                   
              demonstrate a working high-speed local-area network                            
              that provides wireless access using this technique.  (c)                       
              High-Performance Optical-Fiber Networks:  this work                            
              will investigate how advanced optical communication                            
              technology can be used to construct networks having                            
              capacities up to three orders of magnitude larger than                         
              the emerging networks of today.  One initial study                             
              will address a hybrid approach to multimedia                                   
              networking, combining lumped electronic ATM                                    
              switching with distributed circuit switching based on                          
              subcarrier or optical-frequency-division multiplexing.                         
              (d) Optical Interconnects in High-Performance                                  
              Digital Systems:  This work will explore the                                   
              application of optical interconnects to high-                                  
              performance digital systems such as computers.                                 
              Initial research topics will include clock distribution                        
              within multi-chip modules and data communication at                            
              the back-plane level.
