Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award/Catalytic Antibodies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1995  
File        : a9157440

Award Number: 9157440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent L. Iverson biverson@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9119,9183,9227,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the investigation of new                         
              approaches for the design and production of catalytic                          
              antibodies. In general, antibodies raised to compounds that                    
              resemble transition states of a desired reaction are expected                  
              to use binding forces to lower the energy of a real transition                 
              state in the analogous chemical transformation. Catalytic rate                 
              enhancements as high as one million-fold over background have                  
              been observed using this strategy. Exquisite substrate                         
              specificity, including stereospecificity when appropriate, is                  
              always observed, and this specificity can be programmed into                   
              the antibody by the structure of the original immunizing                       
              haptens. There are three major projects, all designed to                       
              exploit this programmable specificity of catalytic antibodies.                 
              In each case, standard hybridoma techniques for production of                  
              monoclonal antibodies in mice enhanced by new molecular biology                
              methods will be used. The first project will probe the use of                  
              catalytic antibodies to manipulate chemical protecting groups                  
              during organic synthesis. The second project involves testing                  
              the utility of metal cofactors in antibody catalyzed reactions.                
              The third project seeks to generate an antibody-based system                   
              that can reproduce some of the essential features of                           
              photosynthesis.                                                                
              %%%                                                                            
              With this Presidential Young Investigator Award, the Synthetic                 
              Organic Program of the Chemistry Division will support the                     
              research of Dr. Brent Iverson of the Department of Chemistry                   
              and Biochemistry at the University of Texas at Austin on                       
              catalytic antibodies. These antibodies, produced by challenging                
              the immune systems of mice with compounds that resemble high                   
              energy or transition states of desired reactions, frequently                   
              are capable of providing catalytic rate enhancements as high as                
              one million-fold. Thus these antibodies resemble enzymes in                    
              being catalytic proteins, but function to catalyze reactions                   
              for which no enzymes exist.
