Title       : Nonlinear Shape Oscillations in Compact Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0140274

Award Number: 0140274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei Ludu ludua@nsula.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern State Univ
	      350 Sam Sibley Drive
	      Natchitoches, LA  714970001    318/357-5222

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PHY-0140274
Ludu

This 2-year research plan is focused on modeling and
              understanding some classes of nonlinear phenomena at the surface of fluid
              objects, namely large amplitude shape oscillations like solitary waves on
              compact surfaces. Solitary waves are the only singular traveling stable
              excitations known in quantum field theory. However, the existence of such
              special solution on compact (sphere-like) objects is still an open question.
              These topics are related with PI's long experience in nonlinear physics,
              especially with the successful introduction of the "roton" model in order to
              explain spontaneous alpha- and cluster-decay of heavy ions (Phys. Rev. Lett. 80
              (1998) 2125). The aim here is to extend this theoretical model and to apply it
              to any compact (almost spherical) system, in order to explain and predict its
              shape, modes, patterns, and its strange nonlinear behavior. In nonlinear
              science, finding an exact solution, or even formal classification of possible
              evolution paths of a system, is rather the exception than the rule. This is the
              basic reason to investigate such new exact solitary wave solutions for
              spherical objects, of different space scales from heavy nuclei, atomic
              clusters, biological cells, macroscopic liquid drops, shells, bubbles to
              neutron stars. Last but not the least, these results will be applied to the
              recently discovered new form of matter, Bose Einstein-Condensates (BEC drops).
              All in all we'll try to predict the evolution of such systems, their modes of
              motion, possible catastrophes, break-up processes, fission, etc., beyond the
              limits of linear approximation. This will be described theoretically in terms
              of causal fluid equations (also called Hamiltonian systems). Exact traveling
              singular stable solutions will be investigated (soliton theory) and later on
              the equations will be solved numerically using large computer codes.

The
              behavior of the free surface of such compact fluid systems, that is drop-like
              objects or fluid layers is of special interest in many natural and industrial
              processes, from cell division in biology or spraying and atomization to exotic
              nuclear shapes, exotic radioactivity, or impact between stellar objects.  The
              basic aim in the study of such nonlinear collective modes is the understanding
              of the interaction of the bulk with the boundaries. Another aim is the
              understanding of the transitions between different modes and patterns. A
              generalized KdV equation, valid for different geometries, including
              viscoelastic properties and damping is introduced and solved. The theoretical
              tools used in this research will have a certain degree of novelty, since there
              will be used self-similarity techniques in order to solve such NPDE. This
              research is expected to impact the teaching and learning enterprise through the
              student research, and through building international collaborations.

