Title       : Forms in Many Variables over Local Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0140544

Award Number: 0140544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60633              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Knapp mknapp@math.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The investigator studies conditions under which systems of 
homogeneous
              polynomials in many variables have nontrivial zeros in p-adic 
completions of
              the rational numbers.  A conjecture usually attributed to 
Artin states that
              if the coefficients of the polynomials are all integers, 
then such zeros
              exist in all p-adic completions provided that the number 
of variables is
              large enough when compared to the degrees of the 
polynomials, and gives a
              bound on the required number of variables.  While 
the first part of this
              conjecture has been shown to be correct, the 
conjectured bound is false in
              general.  However, the bound is correct if 
the prime p is sufficiently large.
               This leads to the questions of what 
the correct general bound should be and
              also how large the prime p needs 
to be for Artin's bound to hold.  The
              investigator studies these questions 
in general, and also when the
              polynomials are restricted to being additive 
(i.e. having no cross-terms). 
              These questions are studied both when the 
degrees of the polynomials are all
              equal and when they may vary, and are 
also studied in the more general
              setting where the p-adic completions of 
the rational numbers are replaced by
              extensions of these fields.


     Since the time of the ancient Greeks, a
              fundamental question in 
number theory has been to find solutions of (systems
              of) equations in 
which all of the variables are integers.  When attempting to
              show that 
such solutions exist, it is often first necessary to obtain
              information 
about the so-called "local" solutions.  These are solutions in
              the number 
systems of "p-adic integers," where p may be any prime number.  In
              fact, 
it turns out that if there is even one prime p for which the system
              does 
not have a solution in p-adic integers, then it has no solutions in
              
ordinary integers either.  There are also some special situations in which
              
the converse holds: if the system has solutions in p-adic integers for
              
every prime p, then it automatically has a solution in regular integers. 
              
Hence it is an interesting problem to attempt to determine when equations
              
have p-adic solutions.  Such questions are also interesting apart from
              
their connection to integral solutions of equations, since they provide
              
insight into the nature of p-adic numbers, and how they differ from
              
ordinary real numbers.

