Title       : A New Complex Mixing Index Based on Entropy for Polymer Process Control and
               Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0140412

Award Number: 0140412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ica Manas-Zloczower ixm@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Miron Kaufman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Mixing is an important component of most processing operations. Blending and
              compounding also play a major role in the development of new materials.  Thus
              better understanding of mixing phenomena and development of new criteria to
              assess mixing quality are of paramount importance.  In previous work we have
              defined dispersive and distributive mixing criteria for process control and
              optimization and for machine scale-up.  However, we expect additional
              fundamental insight and enhanced applicability can be gained by defining a new
              complex mixing index based on entropy, which synthesizes both dispersive and
              distributive mixing components.  Entropy is a rigorous measure of disorder or
              system homogeneity used in several sciences such as statistical mechanics and
              information theory.  This new index can be applied in a variety of technologies
              in polymer processing including fabrication of nanocomposite materials. 
              Furthermore, understanding the influence of machine geometry and processing
              conditions on mixing as reflected through correlations between flow features
              and the new complex mixing index can point out to new directions in equipment
              design.  The proposed mixing characterization methodology can be applied in
              other engineering processes beyond the polymer processing industry.  

This
              research is an interdisciplinary effort involving a chemical engineer whose
              expertise lies in polymer processing and a physicist with expertise on
              statistical mechanics. This collaboration between Case Western Reserve
              University and Cleveland State University  will enable application of concepts
              from theoretical physics to problems relevant to the manufacturing engineering
              community. Moreover, such collaborative efforts have also an educational impact
              with the potential of inducing student interest for interdisciplinary research
              projects dealing with complex problems. Students at both the graduate and
              undergraduate levels will benefit from this collaborative research project.
              



