Title       : Foldamers with Heterogeneous Backbones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0140621

Award Number: 0140621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel H. Gellman gellman@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               The objective of this work is to prepare foldamers (unnatural oligomers or
              biopolymers) that adopt defined and predictable conformations.  They will
              synthesize and conformationally analyze a number of heterogeneous oligomers
              where one type of monomer (such as alpha amino acids) provides functional
              diversity while another type of monomer (cyclically constrained beta or gamma
              amino acids) provides conformational specificity and stability.  Homogeneous
              oligomers containing just gamma amino acids will also be synthesized and
              analyzed as will oligomers that are heterogeneous due to monomer
              stereochemistry variations.  Once new oligomers are identified that adopt
              specific conformations in aqueous solutions, they will be tested for stability
              to proteolytic degradation and for their ability to move across membranes of
              living cells.

 With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
              Program is supporting the research of Dr. Samuel H. Gellman of the Department
              of Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin.  Dr. Gellman will explore the
              synthesis of new proteins using combinations of natural and unnatural amino
              acids.  These proteins will then be screened to look for those which adopt
              specific conformations (shapes) in aqueous (water based) solutions.  Those
              which do fold into specific and predictable shapes will be screened for their
              affinity to biomolecular targets.  In particular, they will be screened for
              their ability to disrupt other protein-protein interactions.  Controlled
              disruption of protein-protein interactions has possible future biomedical
              science applications in cancer prevention.  Students trained as a result of
              working on this project will gain experience in bioorganic and supramolecular
              organic chemistry, hence they will have skills needed by the pharmaceutical and
              speciality chemicals industries.
