Title       : Nanoscaled deformation and fracture processes in nanolayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0140317

Award Number: 0140317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott X. Mao smao@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jorg M. Wiezorek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0140317
Mao
Nanoscale multilayers, composed of sub-micrometer thick layers of
              two or more species of materials are of significant interest for
              high-technology applications and devices in many fields of industry, including
              microelectronics, magnetic recording, optics, and micro-electro-mechanical
              systems. The physical performance and reliability of these devices depend on
              the structural integrity of the multilayers. Hence, there is considerable
              worldwide research interest in the mechanical response of multilayers,
              including the deformation and fracture behavior. The development of viable
              novel devices based on these advanced multilayer systems and their further
              improvement requires a basic understanding of the fundamental processes that
              are the agents of the macroscopic deformation and fracture performance. 

The
              main goal of the proposed project is the investigation of the processes of
              micro-plasticity involved in the fracture of carefully selected model nanoscale
              multilayer systems by dynamic in-situ straining TEM experiments as well as
              static post-mortem TEM. This research will produce new insights regarding
              dislocation mobilities and interactions with interfaces and their relationship
              to crack growth in multilayers. Hence, the fundamental relationships between
              processes of plasticity, local flow and fracture in Cu/Ni, Cu/Cr and Cu/TiN
              multilayers with selected interfacial structure and layer thickness will be
              elucidated.  The project objectives are:

to investigate the deformation and
              fracture process of metal/metal (Cu/Ni, Cu/Cr) and metal/ceramic (Cu/TiN)
              multilayers by in-situ straining transmission electron microscopy.  

to
              predict the fracture resistance and the effect of interfaces on crack tip
              stresses in the nanolayers as a function of layer thickness, and crystal
              orientation using a dislocation-interface interaction model.

Both in-situ
              TEM fracture experiments and dislocation based modeling of the deformation and
              fracture processes in the nanolayers will be performed. Two graduate students
              (one in materials science and one in mechanical engineering) will be trained
              during the project as the follows: 

Student 1:  in-situ TEM experiment on
              microplasticity and fracture in nanolayers (Dr. Wizorek)
Student 2: 
              dislocation based modelling on the deformation and fracture process (Dr.
              Mao).

Dr. Mao will be responsible for the design of the in-situ straining
              experiments and dislocation-based modeling. Dr. Wiezorek will be responsible
              for the performance of TEM characterization and in-situ TEM testing. Because of
              the comprehensive and interdisciplinary nature of the proposed research, the
              involvement of students in the project will provide effective means for
              training of the new generation of materials scientists for the new century.

