Title       : Uniaxial and Hydrostatic Stress on Group III-nitride Heterojunctions and
               Schottky Barriers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0140164

Award Number: 0140164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marshall I. Nathan nathan@ee.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              P.Paul Ruden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract-0140164
M. Nathan, U of Minnesota-Twin Cities

Devices based on
              III-nitride semiconductors have great potential for many applications in
              optoelectronics and power electronics. Polarization effects in these materials
              provide new opportunities for new device designs and raise challenges for
              existing ones. At present, while a qualitative understanding of these effects
              exists to some extent, a complete quantitative model and experimental
              characterization is lacking. The main thrust of this proposal is directed at a
              quantitative understanding of polarization effects in III-nitride
              compounds.

Polarization effects and nitride-based devices are inextricably
              connected with dominant effects in heterojunction FETs, heterojunction bipolar
              transistors, and lasers. Consideration of spontaneous and piezoelectric effects
              is therefore imperative in device design. In addition to high-power,
              high-temperature electronic devices, we envision possible applications of these
              phenomena in stress (or force) sensors, such as those needed for accelerometers
              and seismic detectors intended to operate in caustic environments.

We
              propose a coordinated experimental and theoretical investigation of electric
              polarization effects in III-nitride heterostructures and Schottkv barriers. Our
              study will address lattice polarization effects on charge carrier transport at
              heterojunction interfaces in structures with currents either parallel or
              perpendicular to the interfaces. Examples of structures to be fabricated and
              tested will include n- and p-channel single heterostructures,
              metal/semiconductor Schottky contacts on III-nitrides, and n+- and
              p+Si/III-nitride Schottky contacts. To avoid possible surface contamination,
              Al/III-nitride and Si/III-nitride contacts will be fabricated in situ, i.e.
              without removing the samples from the ultra-high vacuum environment. For
              reasons discussed in this proposal, we view these latter structures (with the
              non-polar/polar interface grown in situ following III-nitride epitaxy) as
              particularly promising for the study of III-nitride surface polarization
              charges. We will measure the uniaxial and hydrostatic stress dependences of the
              electrical characteristics of these structures. Exploring different stress
              geometries will advance the understanding of piezoelectric effects in
              III-nitride compounds. Our physical model development will address band
              structure and electric polarization effects and their consequences for the
              terminal characteristics of the devices under uniform and non-uniform, uniaxial
              and hydrostatic stress. The characterization and modeling work builds on
              capabilities developed by the PIs over the last 11 years in the context of
              their past and ongoing joint exploration of piezoelectric effects in
              conventional III-V heterostructures. The crystal growth for this program will
              performed by Professor Hadis Morkoq's group at Virginia Commonwealth
              University.

The proposed research will involve both graduate and
              undergraduate students, and will enhance the PIs ongoing course development
              with focus on large gap semiconductor materials and devices.

