Title       : U.S.-Czech-Hungarian Collaboration on Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical
               Computer Science Involving DIMACS-DIMATIA-Renyi Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a0140431

Award Number: 0140431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155949             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred S. Roberts froberts@dimacs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 5915,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This U.S.-Czech-Hungarian research project involves three teams led by Fred
              Roberts of Rutgers University's Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical
              Computer Science (DIMACS) with partners in Prague and Budapest.  His
              counterparts are Jaroslav Nesetril of the Czech Center for Discrete
              Mathematics, Theoretical Informatics and Applications (DIMATIA) at Charles
              University and Gyula Katona of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences' Alfred Renyi
              Institute for Mathematics.  Their collaborative research plan involves the
              formation of multinational "working groups" in research areas of discrete
              mathematics and theoretical computer science. These "working groups" will
              consist of a complementary mix of expertise from each center and include
              graduate students as well as senior and junior faculty.  New members may be
              added as projects progress. Some participants may be drawn from other
              institutions, when appropriate.  Additionally, smaller team collaborations
              resulting from working group interaction will be fostered through a visit
              program that allows researchers and graduate students from the partner centers
              to work together more intensively, with emphasis on a senior researcher in one
              center and a junior researcher or student at another. 

The topics to be
              studied include: 1) extremal combinatorics, 2) graph colorings and their
              generalizations, and 3) algebraic and geometric methods in combinatorics.  Our
              knowledge of the interactions between algebraic geometry and combinatorics will
              be extended through examination of power series, hidden convexity phenomenon,
              and combinatorial characterizations of algebraic sets.  Results should lead to
              advances in discrete mathematics which may be applicable to problems in group
              testing, communications, and statistical physics.  Additionally, the
              involvement of outstanding junior researchers in this international network of
              excellence should have a significant and long-lasting influence on human
              resource development in all three countries.  

This international project
              linking three leading mathematics research centers fulfills the program
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United
              States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research
              resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. 
