Title       : Geometry of Moduli Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0140520

Award Number: 0140520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80279              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gavril Farkas farkas@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental problem in algebraic geometry is the study of the 
nature of the
              moduli space M(g) of curves of genus g as an 
algebraic variety. It is known
              that for low g this space behaves 
very much like a projective space which
              means that one can 
describe explicitly most curves of given genus. However
              for g 
large the nature of M(g) changes completely and the investigator
              
studies this transition by constructing new loci in the moduli 
space, which
              are of a completely different nature than those 
studied by previous
              mathematicians. The geometry of these new 
loci strongly suggests  that the
              transition in the nature of 
M(g) appears much earlier than the leading
              conjecture in the 
field has predicted. The technical machinery developed by
              the 
investigator to solve this problem is also employed to study 
some open
              problems about vector bundles on general curves of 
genus g.  A different
              project concerns the moduli space of 
pointed curves of genus 0.  Obects of
              striking beauty, these 
spaces are important because of their pivotal role in
              new 
developments in enumerative geometry and because often 
statements about
              curves of arbitrary genus can be reduced to 
questions about pointed curves of
              genus 0. The investigator 
studies several invariants of these spaces and the
              proposed 
approach has been succesful in low dimensional cases. 

Algebraic
              curves are ubiquitous objects in mathematics. They 
appear in complex analysis
              (as Riemann surfaces), in algebra 
(as field extensions) and in algebraic
              geometry (as curves in 
projective spaces).  The most important problem in
              algebraic 
geometry is to classify algebraic varieties. For one-dimensional
              
varieties (that is, for algebraic curves) this problem is 
approached by
              considering the moduli space M(g) of all curves of 
given genus. This is the
              universal parameter space for curves of 
fixed genus and interest in its
              geometry comes from fields as 
diverse as algebraic geometry, theoretical
              physics, number theory 
or coding theory. By understanding this space not only
              can we 
learn about families of curves but quite often the moduli space
              
itself has beautiful geometric and arithmetic properties which 
one cannot
              expect to find on an arbitrary space.  

