Title       : Thermal Fatigue of Solder Joints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0140605

Award Number: 0140605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114312             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Palmer mpalmer@kettering.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kettering University
	      1700 West Third Avenue
	      Flint, MI  485044832    313/762-9790

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Funding is provided under this RUI award to permit 8 teams of
              undergraduate
students over the course of a two-year period to participate in
              a continuous
research project evaluating the thermomechanical fatigue of
              solder joints. To
make this experience successful it is proposed to create a
              unique learning
experience  which is a combination of innovative classroom
              instruction and
research. A master's student will assist in this project, and
              by doing so have a
unique master's level experience designed to require the
              evaluation of the work
of others, the synthesis of their work with that of the
              undergraduates and the
development of leadership skills. There are research
              and teaching  components to
this proposed project.

Research:
              Thermomechanical fatigue (TMF) is the leading cause of solder joint
failure in
              electronic assemblies. TMF of solder joints is difficult to model as
there are
              many complex and interacting factors effecting the progression of
damage to
              the joint. Because of the high homologous temperatures (0.8 or
              higher)
significant microstructural evolution occurs during TMF, changing the
              properties
of the material as TMF progresses. An experimental
investigation
              will be conducted to 1) identify those more readily measured
              material
properties most likely to affect TMF resistance, 2) evaluate the
              various
acceleration factors used in TMF testing, and 3) evaluate the role of
              wetting in
TMF failures.

As a result of this research much insight into TMF
              failure will be gained - 1)
progress will be made toward the development of an
              experimentally verified
energy model, and 2) the role of wetting in adhesion
              will be assessed. This
means that those considering using lead-free solder
              alloys will be able to use
diagnostic "tools" not currently available -- the
              combination of material
properties which correlate to TMF
              resistance.

Teaching: To enable undergraduates to participate in a
              continuing research
program, a unique "classroom" experience will supplement
              the research. These
class sessions will embrace interactive learning
              techniques, and expose the
undergraduates to 1) the necessary theoretical
              background, 2) the status of the
project, 3) necessary lab techniques
              including statistical analysis, 4) oral and
written communication skills, and
              5) broader issues including ethics and
economic impact. All of these subjects
              will be context based. The philosophy of
this course is that upper level
              undergraduates need to perform at the synthesis
level of Bloom's Taxonomy, and
              their experience is designed to enable them to do
so.

The master's student
              will be required to perform at the evaluation level of
Bloom's Taxonomy
              (evaluating the work of the undergraduates) and synthesize this
work with
              their own study on wetting, thus participating in a unique
              integrating
experience. Additionally the student will develop leadership
              skills, and
possibly be persuaded to pursue a doctoral degree and develop a
              desire to teach.
The master's students experience may also encourage the
              undergraduates to pursue
a graduate degree.

It is felt that this
              comprehensive plan will maximize the chances for success
and serve as a
              demonstration project for others desiring to incorporate research
into the
              undergraduate experience and developing a novel masters program.

Impact: It
              is felt that this program can significantly impact undergraduate
education by
              serving as a proof of concept in the development of research
oriented courses,
              generating an appreciation of life-long learning, and
demonstrating the value
              of undergraduate research to the outside community. This
work  complements the
              current work of the PI and lays the foundation for his
future plans.


