Title       : Groups and Algebraic Geometry at the Centre de Recherches Mathematiques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2002     
File        : a0140239

Award Number: 0140239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Dummit dummit@math.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 This award will fund U.S. graduate students and post-doctoral 
fellows
              attending the Centre de Recherches Mathematiques in
Montreal  for periods of
              several weeks during a semester of
activities centered on the theme of Groups
              and Algebraic Geometry
during Spring, 2002.  The activities planned include a
              strong
component of training, including 1) a four day workshop on
Hilbert
              Modular Varieties and Forms, 2) a one week Winter school
on Computations in
              Coxeter Groups, 3) a one week workshop on
Group Actions on Rational Varieties,
              4) a two week workshop on
Invariant Theory, 5) a one-month concentration
              period on the
Langlands Program for Function Fields, 5) a two week workshop
              on
Computational Lie Theory, and 6) a one week workshop on
Algebraic
              Transformation Groups.
     The Centre de Recherches Mathematiques in Montreal
              is one of 
Canada's three research centers in the mathematical sciences, and
              
has a broad mandate covering all of the various aspects of
development of
              the discipline, with activities comprising theme
years in various topics, a
              general conference program, an
industrial program, a publications program in
              partnership with
the American Mathematical Society, as well as activities
              devoted
to education.  The themes cover some of the most exciting areas
of
              the mathematical sciences and typically alternate between pure
and applied
              disciplines.  This award will provide support for
U.S. students and
              postdoctoral fellows so that they can attend
the events during the Spring 2002
              semester.  This semester is
thematically devoted to Groups and Algebraic
              Geometry, a
difficult area of research in which few, if any, universities
              can
offer coverage by advanced courses which allow for adequate
graduate
              student preparation. This award will allow students to
take advantage of an
              exceptional opportunity for education and
training by the world's leading
              experts in areas that have seen
significant numbers of recent breakthroughs.
