Title       : Innovative Signal Analysis Techinques for Health Monitoring Systems and Sensing
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0140710

Award Number: 0140710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265695             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jann N. Yang jnyang@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              One important link in the health monitoring system is the data processing
              techniques, including the corresponding theory and algorithms, to extract
              relevant information for a rapid assessment of the state of the structure from
              a large amount of measured data. Such a link has been pointed out during many
              conferences as one of the weakest link in the sensor-based health monitoring
              system of civil infrastructures. This project is aiming at the development of
              innovative and efficient data processing techniques, based on the Hilbert-Huang
              spectral analysis, for the damage detection, condition assessment and integrity
              evaluation of civil infrastructures. New and efficient methodologies will be
              developed for: (i) damage detection and system identification of linear
              structures, (ii) determination of the optimal placement of sensors, (iii)
              damage detection and system identification of nonlinear structures, including
              conservative (elastic) and nonconservative (hysteretic) nonlinear structures,
              and (iv) preliminary assessment of structural damages after an extreme event,
              such as strong earthquakes, all based on the Hilbert-Huang spectral analysis.
              Further, Hilbert-Huang spectral analysis computer software modules for
              incorporating into the sensor-based monitoring systems of civil infrastructures
              will be developed.
This proposal is a part of an integrated collaborative
              research effort among U.S.A., Hong Kong and P.R.C., under the US-China Protocol
              for Scientific and Technical Cooperative Research on Earthquake Engineering and
              Hazard Mitigation. Basically, advanced health monitoring system research for
              civil infrastructure systems will be conducted at Hong Kong Polytechnic
              University (HPU); advanced sensor technology will be developed at Harbin
              Institute of Technology (HIT), China; sensing materials for sensors will be
              investigated at Institute of Engineering Mechanics (IEM), China; advanced and
              smart damping and devices will be developed at University of Notre Dame (UND);
              and novel data processing techniques will be developed at the University of
              California, Irvine (UCI). In addition, Dr. N. E. Huang of NASA Goddard Flight
              Center, who is the pioneer of the Hilbert-Huang spectral analysis, will
              collaborate with us in the proposed research efforts to develop novel data
              processing techniques for sensor-based monitoring systems for civil
              infrastructures.
The research proposed herein is unique, which is different
              from all the data analysis techniques currently available. The Hilbert-Huang
              spectral analysis can be used to develop powerful techniques with which
              intrinsic nonstationary and nonlinear characteristics of the measured response
              signals can be extracted. The results of this research are expected to have a
              significant impact not only on the state-of-the-technology in data analyses for
              the sensor-based health monitoring systems of structures but also on the sensor
              technologies to be developed by the collaborative research institutions in
              U.S.A., Hong Kong and China.


