Title       : Gas Phase Ion Chemistry: Conformation and Energetics of Biopolymers and Solvated
               Salt Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a0140215

Award Number: 0140215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $830470             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Bowers bowers@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Bowers will conduct research on the ion mobilities of
              molecules, clusters, metal ions, peptides, oligonucleotides, and other
              biomolecules. Specifically, work will be done on the energetics and mechanism
              of solvation of salt crystals, as well as on the conformations of
              polypeptides/proteins and DNA/RNA oligonucleotides. The energetics associated
              with their folding, hydration and interaction with metal ions will be
              investigated. These systems will be studied in the gas phase in order to avoid
              complications due to a solvent effect.

This research attacks fundamental
              problems on the mobilities of ions and biomolecules in the gas phase. The
              results of these studies will be correlated with theoretical modeling. Graduate
              and undergraduate students as well as postdoctoral research associates will
              participate in this research. They will receive training in one of the
              forefront areas of contemporary physical chemistry and be thus prepared for
              advanced studies, or employment in industry, academia, or government
              laboratories.

