Title       : Analytical and Geometrical Aspects of Non Linear Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0140338

Award Number: 0140338
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $698514             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luis A. Caffarelli caffarel@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              March 11, 2002.
PI: Luis Caffarelli [caffarel@math.utexas.edu], University of
              Texas, Austin
DMS-0140338

Abstract:

Our research focus in a series of
              phenomena that bring together
different areas of non linear PDE. For instance,
               a flame front propagating in a layered medium brings together the interaction
              of the fast phase transition at the edge of the flame, with the linking of
              large scales (front speeds) and small scales (possibly random , thin
              layering).
Recent models of front formation, bring together the interaction
              of
optimal allocation,that provides the " variational framework" for
              front
formation (the Monge Ampere equation ) with the issue of how vorticity
              is
transported within, and affects the front. Finally, problems in financial
              engineering, bring together fully non linear equations ( for instance as
              "extremals" or intervals of
"trust" when only rough bounds on volatility and
              correlations are
available) with issues of phase transition , when trading
              strategy
changes discontinuously at certain values of the parameters,or there
              are
constraints on the range of trading, and  homogeneisation, when
              the
underlying space changes randomly.

We plan to study several  models
              from different sciences  that bring
together interactions of complementary non
              linear phenomena.
A good example would be flame propagation in a thinly
              layered
material: Observed at short range, the flame front will "wiggle",
              moving
faster in some of the layers, depending on their composition.
From far
              away, the flame will appear as a homogeneous front.
Its speed , though, will
              depend in a very subtle way from both the nature
of the ignition process at
              the edge of the flame ( free boundary
problem) and the properties of the very
              fine, ( possibly randomly
organized, as it usually occurs in nature) thin
              layering.
Another example has to do with the formation of weather fronts:
              according
to some models, globally the front organizes itself trying to "
              spread its
energy" in an optimal way, and within, vorticity ( the
              "rotational
component" of wind) is transported in an interactive way with the
              front
organization. A third example comes from financial engineering when
              seeking optimal ( or
safest) trading strategies, but , as in most cases, only
              a rough knowledge
is available of the way different ways in which different
              components of
the portfolio, or parameters ( interest rates, exchange rates,
              etc
) interact.This rough or incomplete knowledge, gives rise to non
              linear
strategies, that couple with constraints in the trading
              range,
discontinuous trading strategies, etc.  



