Title       : Application of Statistical Physics Concepts and Methods to the Study of Science
               & Technology Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0140554

Award Number: 0140554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Derek L. Hill                           
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99199              (Estimated)
Investigator: H. E. Stanley hes@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 8804      SCIENCE & ENGINEERNG INDICATRS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The definition and implementation of Science & Technology (S &T) policies
              requires information that is timely, reliable, and clear.  Because of the
              character of the production of intellectual knowledge, the development and
              measurement of S&T indicators is an extremely complex problem.  Namely, there
              are many difficulties in developing indicators that are general and robust and
              can be applied across (i) the different S&T fields, (ii) for different
              aggregations levels (from research groups to entire countries), and (iii)
              equally well for input and output measures.  Specifically, fields where
              advances are slower or where the resources involved are not too large are much
              easier to quantify and manage than, for example, the life sciences where
              Federal investment is nowadays very large and for which the pace of change is
              staggeringly fast. 

The goal of this interdisciplinary proposal is to
              address this challenging research problem by using recent concepts of
              statistical physics, namely, scaling and universality.  This research has
              already been applied in other areas, such as identifying common growth
              characteristics of countries on the basis of the size of their economies.  In
              addition, preliminary work by these researchers in S&T systems suggests that
              S&T systems exhibit common universal physics characteristics.  The project will
              try to identify robust, universal, characteristics of the evolution of S&T
              systems using a variety of input and output measures at varying levels of
              aggregation.  For example, the project will investigate whether national
              research systems exhibits similar statistical physics characteristics, based on
              their level of research and development expenditures, and will compare
              publishing output of European and U.S. university departments using 
              bibliometric data. 

