Title       : An International Perspective on the Role of Algebra in Elementary School
               Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a0140104

Award Number: 0140104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Finbarr C. Sloane                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61872              (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Kaput jkaput@umassd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Carraher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass, Dartmouth
	      285 Old Westport Road
	      North Dartmouth, MA  02747    508/999-8953

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Algebra Problem: US Mathematics Education has an increasingly difficult in
              Algebra
Problems to solve. The standard indicators of student achievements
              international comparisons, NAEP
and other national measures, as well as state
              test results all point in the direction of lower achievement
as grade levels
              increase. Well-known TIMSS analyses of US curricula point in the direction of
              repetition
of elementary skill building and superficiality of topic coverage
              as important contributors to the problem,
combined with tell-and-drill
              pedagogy that puts students in overly passive position as learners. And,
              of
course, high failure rates in first year algebra courses contribute to
              alienation on the part of students and
low morale among teachers. Responses
              involve a wide variety, but largely ineffective tactics involving
middle and
              early high school curricula: pre-algebra courses of various kinds, screening
              and diagnostic
tests, district and state mandates that all students take
              Algebra I, lengthened courses, modifying the
definition of if algebra, 
              creating different versions of if algebra, end-of-course exams, among
              others.
Each adjustment produces small improvements, although, since the
              tactics tend to be ad hoc and
implemented independently, improvements do not
              accumulate or multiply. NCTM recommendations for
integrating the development
              of algebraic reasoning across K-12 are implemented only in a few of
              the
standards-based curricula, and these mainly at the middle school
              level.
Research Towards Solutions: Several research teams studying the
              development of algebraic
reasoning in the early (K-5) grades, who are
              represented in this proposal, have formed an informal
research collaborative,
              renewing a prior collaboration funded by the US DoE OERI in the
              early/mid
1990. These researchers share broad hypotheses regarding the large
              positive potential of building
algebraic reasoning in the context of
              elementary mathematics, the need to exploit untapped student
learning
              capacities among younger students, the powerful role of generalization and
              formalization in
deepening students experience and understanding of elementary
              mathematics especially arithmetic
and the potential for using changes in the
              curricular relationships between algebra and elementary
mathematics as a
              catalyst and vehicle for faculty development of elementary teachers. These
              researchers
are engaged in several complementary lines of work focusing on
              different aspects of the challenges
student learning, classroom practice,
              curriculum development, professional development, capacity
building, and so
              on.
Proposed Combination of Travel, Conferences and Monograph: The
              collaborating researchers
have all been invited to present papers to an
              important conference to be held December 8-15, 2001, in
Melbourne, Australia
              on The Future of the Teaching and Learning of Algebra which is being
              sponsored
by the International Commission on Mathematics Instruction.
              Professor Kaput has been designated to
Co-Chair the Early Algebra Group at the
              conference. We request funds to exploit, in 3 ways, this unique
opportunity to
              bring an intensely international perspective to bear upon our active research
              program: (1)
To support travel to the international conference. (2) To hold
              two meetings in the US, one prior to and
one following the Melbourne
              conference, involving a slightly larger group of mathematics educators
working
              in this area. (3) To write and publish a monograph expressing our findings in
              order to inform
policy makers, curriculum developers and assessment builders
              of the latest developments in this rapidly
changing field. Hence we also
              request a small amount of funding for editorial work to pull together
              and
publicize the monograph, which in turn will point to additional web
              resources illustrating relevant
research.

