Title       : Development of Procedures to Analyze Queueing Models with Heavy-Tailed
               Interarrival and Service Times
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0140232

Award Number: 0140232
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299741             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Gross dgross1@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Shortle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This study is concerned with developing procedures for modeling queues with
              heavy-tailed distributions for interarrival and/or service times.     These
              type of probability distributions decay much slower than exponential.
              Distributions of this type render queueing analyses very difficult, in that the
              Laplace-Stieltjes transforms (LSTs) of interarrival and/or service times, which
              play such a crucial role in analytical queueing theory, often do not have
              closed form.  Previous researchers, to get around this, have approximated these
              heavy-tailed distributions by families of exponentials. The approaches proposed
              herein avoid the problems and pitfalls of finding approximating distributions
              by using the actual heavy-tailed distributions themselves. One method
              approximates the LSTs needed to produce the output measures (waiting-time and
              system-size distributions) of interest by directly approximating the LSTs using
              a discretized version of the heavy tailed distribution itself (transform
              approximation method [TAM]). Another method avoids using the LST directly by
              solving an integral equation involving the complementary cdf of the
              heavy-tailed distribution (level crossing method [LC]). While discrete-event
              simulation is an alternative to analytical queueing analyses, this also has its
              limitations in that it usually can only produce mean measures of output
              performance. It also has difficulty simulating certain of the heavy-tailed
              distributions, especially with large coefficients of variation (standard
              deviation divided by mean). New procedures for discrete-event simulation
              involving quantile estimators are also proposed.

The usual assumptions that
              made queueing analyses so productive (Poisson arrivals and exponential-type
              holding times) clearly do not hold when arrivals and holding times are
              heavy-tailed.  These distributions are important, however, in modeling some
              important situations. The impact of this research can benefit a variety of
              areas where heavy-tailed distributions come into play, such as the analysis of
              extreme events in insurance claims and risk models and some Internet traffic
              situations. Developing analytic/numeric queueing theoretic procedures and
              better ways of simulating traffic congestion for general distributions
              (heavy-tailed as well as any other type) can provide very effective additional
              tools in the queueing modeler's arsenal. 

