Title       : Euler Systems and Elliptic Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0140378

Award Number: 0140378
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234474             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl C. Rubin rubin@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and his coworkers study elliptic curves, special values
of
              L-functions, and related topics.  Some of the most interesting open
questions
              and conjectures in arithmetic algebraic geometry relate
arithmetic invariants
              with special values of L-functions.  Iwasawa theory
and Euler systems have
              proved to be among the most successful tools for
attacking these problems, by
              serving as a bridge between the algebraic
world and the analytic world.  The
              investigator continues to pursue this
approach, by extracting additional
              information from Euler systems and
their "derivative" Kolyvagin systems.  In
              another direction, the
investigator and his colleagues study ranks of elliptic
              curves,
especially the asymptotic distribution of ranks in families of
              quadratic
twists.

Elliptic curves play a central role in many parts of
              mathematics
including its most applied areas.  For example, elliptic curves
              are used
in algorithms to encrypt data for transmission, and for efficient
              digital
signatures.  In its most basic form, an elliptic curve is a special
              kind
of polynomial equation in two variables.  Historically number
              theorists
are interested in finding solutions of these equations in which
              the
variables take values which are either whole numbers, or fractions. 
              The
rank of an elliptic curve is a basic invariant which measures the size
              of
the set of solutions.  The investigator and his coworkers study ranks
              of
elliptic curves and their interrelations with other mathematical
              objects
and concepts.  These questions are related to the
              cryptographic
applications of elliptic curves, which come about by
              considering
solutions in which the variables take values in finite fields.
