Title       : Quantitative Analysis of Retroviral Gene Delivery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0140401

Award Number: 0140401
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424144             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin L. Yarmush ireis@sbi.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Morgan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project is an unsolicited submission.  The goal of this project is to
              develop strategies to enhance the efficiency and utility of retrovirus-mediated
              gene transfer.  Retroviruses are a widely utilized vector system in current
              gene therapy clinical trials, which has resulted in the rapid advancement of
              retroviral vector technology.  Despite this, retroviral gene transfer
              efficiency has remained disappointingly low, hampering the emergence of
              retroviral gene therapy as an effective clinical tool.  It has been found that
              charged molecules greatly influence the efficiency of the gene transfer
              process.  Specifically, positively charged compounds have been shown to enhance
              gene transfer, whereas negatively charged compounds inhibit the process.  This
              project seeks to accomplish the following: (1) to investigate in detail the
              mechanism of charged compound enhancement and inhibition of the retroviral gene
              transfer process, (2) to develop a mathematical framework for analyzing the
              effect of charged compounds on virus transport and transduction, and (3) to
              compare gene transfer efficiency in an animal model using ex vivo and in vivo
              gene therapy protocols optimized to enhance the electrostatic interaction
              between the retrovirus vector and target cell. To achieve these goals, the
              investigators will utilize a complementary set of enzymatic and
              immunohistochemical assays, molecular imaging techniques, and cytofluorometric
              analyses to quantitate various steps of the retroviral gene transfer process. 
              Engineering analysis of the resultant biomolecular transport and kinetic
              reaction data will be used to facilitate the construction of an integrative
              model of retrovirus transport.
