Title       : Containment, Equivalence, and Related Problems for XPath Expressions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0140493

Award Number: 0140493
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196510             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Suciu suciu@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              . A large class of applications access XML data through XPath expressions and
              need to make routine decisions based on a simple test: whether one XPath
              expressions is contained in another, meaning that the answer to the first is
              always is subset of the answer to the second.  Examples of such applications
              include query optimization, query rewriting, semantic caching, XML-based
              content routing.  Despite its apparent simplicity, the containment problem
              turns out to be surprisingly difficult to analyze when XPath expressions
              include wild-cards, descendant axes, and predicates.  Previous work has focused
              on only toy fragments of XPath for which the containment problem is in PTIME,
              but these simple results fail for more realistic fragments. This project
              studies the containment problem for a large fragment of XPath.  During initial
              investigations for the project it was established that the containment problem
              for XPath expressions that contain wild-cards, descendant axes, and filters  is
              co-NP hard, suggesting that a complete and efficient containment algorithm is
              impossible to find.  In light of that, several algorithms will be designed in
              order to explore the tradeoff between efficiency and completeness.  One goal of
              the project is to design a complete algorithm that always returns the correct
              answer, runs in exponential time in general, but runs efficiently on special
              instances of XPath expressions.  Another goal is to design a heuristic
              algorithm that always runs efficiently, but that may return false negatives in
              certain cases.  Both algorithms will be analyzed formally, in order to provide
              a full insight into what performance or precision guarantees they offer.  The
              most promising algorithm will be implemented and made available in the public
              domain. 
