Title       : Self Assembly of Biological Lipids and of Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0140500

Award Number: 0140500
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Schick schick@phys.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This theoretical project will study several important biological problems
              utilizing powerful methods from polymer physics.  This is possible because the
              hydrocarbon chains of biological lipids, which make up all membranes within the
              body, are short chain polymers.  One such problem is the study of "rafts," high
              density islands of sphingolipids and cholesterol in the phospholipid sea;
              islands which attract, inter alia, signalling proteins.  Although there is
              unusual excitement about this phenomena, as it requires significant revision of
              the standard view of membranes, there is little molecular theory on the unusual
              ordered fluid phase typical of the raft.  This is a phase in which the chains
              have fewer gauche bonds than the normal liquid crystal phase, yet is without
              the translational order characteristic of the gel phase.  Several methods,
              including self-consistent field theory, will be utilized along with a realistic
              description of the lipid chains to understand the factors which encourage, or
              inhibit, the formation of rafts.

A second problem of great importance is
              that of membrane fusion, a process necessary for viral infection,
              fertilization, and most intra-cell trafficking.  The process is not understood.
               This group has carried out simulations of this process utilizing models which
              have proved of great use in the study of polymers.  These simulations reveal a
              very different fusion mechanism than that commonly accepted.  These studies
              will continue in order to elucidate the pathway which is followed during
              fusion.  The potential impact is great given the connection between fusion and
              infection, and fusion and fertilization.  

Another project of note is that
              concerning the study of crystallization of membrane proteins.  The structure of
              these important proteins is not known, in general, as most of them have not
              been crystallized, a prerequesite for x-ray analysis.  Rather recently
              crystallization of such proteins was accomplished using cubic lipid phases. 
              Why such unusual phases should bring about crystals of proteins is not
              understood.  This problem fits well with the techniques used by this group,
              which successfully predicted the existence, and non-existence, of various
              bicontinuous cubic phases in block copoloymers, and have extended these
              techniques to include interaction between lipid membranes and proteins.  If the
              basic principles underlying this process can be understood, it could lead to an
              increase in the number of such proteins whose structure can be
              analyzed.
%%%
This theoretical project will study several important
              biological problems utilizing powerful methods from polymer physics.  This is
              possible because the hydrocarbon chains of biological lipids, which make up all
              membranes within the body, are short chain polymers.  The projects studied
              illustrate the great potential of bringing methods of polymer physics to bear
              upon important problems in the biological sciences.
***

