Title       : Local Theory of Operator Spaces and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0140067

Award Number: 0140067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157563             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhong-Jin Ruan ruan@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Ruan

The operator space theory is a natural quantization of
              functional analysis. The major difference between operator spaces and Banach
              spaces is that one must consider operator matrix norms and completely bounded
              maps in the category of operator spaces. This was first realized by William
              Arveson in 1969 and was characterized by the PI in his Ph.D thesis in 1987.
              Since then the theory has been quickly developed into a very exciting research
              area in modern analysis.  This remarkable development is mainly due to the
              contributions of D.Blecher, E.Christensen, E.Effros, M.Junge, E.Kirchberg, C.Le
              Merdy, G.Pisier, V.Paulsen, H.Rosenthal, R.Smith, A.Sinclair and the PI. 
              Recently, the PI's research has been mainly centered on the 'local theory' of
              operator spaces and their applications. One of his main goals is to find the
              appropriate quantization of classical results in Banach space theory, and to
              apply these results to C*-algebras and von Neumann algebras, as well as to some
              other related areas such as non-commutative harmonic analysis and locally
              compact quantum groups.  In this proposal, the PI plans to continue his
              investigation in this direction and proposes the following four research
              projects.  (1)  Investigate the local properties of non-commutative Lp spaces
              and their applications to operator algebras.  (2) Investigate the local
              structure of the operator preduals of von Neumann algebras and the operator
              duals of C*-algebras.  (3) Investigate the further applications of operator
              spaces to Kac algebras and locally compact quantum groups.  (4) Investigate the
              geometric structure of the 'matrix unit balls' of operator spaces, and
              investigate the possible applications of operator spaces to non-commutative
              probability and free probability.



The most profound distinction between
              classical and quantum mechanics is Heisenberg's principle that one should
              represent the basic variables of physics by operators rather than functions.
              The work of J. von Neumann emphasized that it is important to pursue the
              'quantized' forms of mathematics. Collaborating with F.J. Murray, von Neumann
              succeeded in quantizing integration theory during the 1940's. Since then,
              mathematicians have tried to quantize many other areas of mathematics such as
              topology, differential geometry, analysis and probability theory.  The theory
              of operator spaces is a natural quantization of functional analysis, which is a
              very important field in modern analysis. During the last fifteen years, the PI
              together with his colleagues has established the foundation of operator space
              theory and has also discovered a number of far-reaching applications to some
              related areas in mathematics. In this proposal, he plans to continue his work
              on operator spaces and their applications. He expects that the solutions the
              proposed research projects will make important contributions to related
              fields.
 

