Title       : Quantum Coherence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0140377

Award Number: 0140377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yakir Aharonov   (Principal Investigator current)
              Pawel O. Mazur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeeva S. Anandan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental aspect of quantum phenomena is the non-local coherence of
              the
quantum wave that describes the state of a particle, which is called
              the
wave-particle duality. A consequence of this is the Heisenberg
              uncertainty
principle according to which there is a minimum to the product of
              the
uncertainties of the position and momentum or time and energy of the
              particle
that is given by the Planck's constant. We plan to investigate the
              latter
uncertainty principle in relation to the general relativistic
              gravitational
field, using our earlier work that obtains this uncertainty
              relation using only
measurements intrinsic to the system under investigation.
              We shall also use new
non-local quantities that we have introduced, called
              modular variables, to study
the non-local quantum coherence of the wave
              function. This will be used to
investigate the Aharonov-Bohm effect
              (discovered by the PI), which is the
non-local interaction of the wave
              function with the electromagnetic field. Some
new aspects of scattering due to
              the Aharonov-Bohm effect will be studied. The
latter work is relevant to a
              wide class of problems involving surface waves and
polarized light propagating
              in optical fibers, where various impurities may be
present.

The quantum
              coherence of the wave function also opens up the possibilities for
secure
              communication using quantum systems and the construction of a
              quantum
computer. Computations which would take a present state-of-the-art
              computer more
than the life-time of the universe to do would be done in less
              than a second by
a quantum computer. We shall try to use the weak measurement,
              discovered by the
PI, to obtain better quantum communication. We shall also
              try to use the geometric phase discovered by the PI and a co-PI towards
              constructing a quantumcomputer.


