Title       : Development of New Diagnostic Techniques for Preliminary and in Situ
               Characterization of Advanced LIGO Optical Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0140110

Award Number: 0140110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321907             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Reitze reitze@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Tanner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guenakh Mitselmakher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1252      SUPPORT OF LIGO RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A research program carried out by scientists at the University of Florida and
              the Institute in collaboration with the Institute of Applied Physics of the
              Russian Academy of Sciences to investigate how high power laser beams can
              distort precision optical components in gravitational wave detectors through
              absorption and heating.  Methods will be developed for remotely measuring
              optical path distortions on the order of one billionth of a meter.  In
              addition, novel methods for isolating back-propagating high power laser beams
              will be developed to prevent interactions with sensitive, phase-stabilized
              lasers.
         
This research will play a major role in facilitating the
              operation of ground-based gravitational wave detectors such as the Laser
              Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO).  The detection of
              gravitational waves by large-scale high power laser-based interferometers will
              open a new window on the universe through the detection of cataclysmic
              astrophysical phenomena such as black hole-neutron star collisions.  To enhance
              the sensitivity of future interferometers, highly sensitive measurement
              techniques such as those developed here are crucial for sensing the operational
              state of these interferometers, the most sensitive instruments ever
              constructed. 
