Title       : A Hybrid Atomic/Continuum Model for Mechanical Behavior of Multiwalled Carbon
               Nanotubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0140568

Award Number: 0140568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Qing Jiang qjiang@engr.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Carbon nanotubes have long been expected to be the ultimate fibers
              because of the theoretical predictions that their elastic modulus along the
              tube axis is about five times larger than that of steel. These fibers are not
              only expected for applications as constituents in composite materials but also
              as components in nanoscale instruments, such as the GHz molecular oscillator
              recently predicted by the PI and reported by the Scientific American
              (<http://www.sciam.com/news/012302/2.html>). These expected applications have
              led to numerous investigations, both experimental and theoretical, on
              determination of the mechanical properties of carbon nanotubes. The
              experimentally determined values of the elastic modulus of carbon nanotubes are
              not only often inconsistent with theoretical predictions but also scattered in
              a wide range. All the experimental measurements to date are indirect because
              the difficulties associated with handling such samples of extremely small
              diameters have prevented researchers from obtaining reliable data through
              direct measurements. The primary causes for the wide scattering of measured
              values of mechanical properties and the inconsistency with theoretical
              predictions are the quality variations of experimental samples and the
              inaccuracy of the mechanics theory used in deriving these values from the
              measurements. The carbon nanotube samples usually contain defects, which
              inevitably affect the mechanical properties, and there have been intensive
              efforts towards further understanding and improving the current synthesis
              methods and developing new methods, which are expected to lead to nanotubes of
              increasingly superior quality. Most theoretical studies to date are computer
              simulations based on either molecular dynamics or atomistic modeling. These
              studies have provided many insights into some experimentally observed
              fascinating phenomena, such as super-flexibility of carbon nanotubes in
              bending, but they are severely limited by the system complexity of multiwalled
              carbon nanotubes. Physicists have recently turned to the continuum theories of
              beams, shells and columns for effective modeling, and the predictions based on
              the continuum theories and the molecule dynamics are compared amazingly well
              for a few mechanical phenomena, namely buckling instabilities and bending
              instabilities. However, the general applicability of the continuum theories of
              mechanics to multiwalled carbon nanotubes is not possible because of the strong
              evidence that the intermolecular interactions between adjacent walls in
              multiwalled carbon nanotubes have a crucial effect on the mechanical behavior
              of these nanotubes. The primary objective of this investigation is to develop a
              hybrid atomic/continuum inter-length-scale model to characterize the mechanical
              behavior of multiwalled carbon nanotubes. In this model, each wall is modeled
              as a continuum with their mechanical behavior being characterized by their
              effective mechanical properties determined by the atomistic and molecular
              models, and the interactions between adjacent walls are characterized using the
              existing theories of intermolecular interactions. A detailed analysis for a
              multiwalled carbon nanotube, subject to tension/compression, torsion and
              bending as well as their combinations, will be carried out and comparisons with
              experimental measurements will be made using the available data in the
              literature and through a collaborative experimental program.



