Title       : Dissertation Research: Between Politics and Pedagogy: Constructions of
               Theoretical Physics in Imperial Germany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2002  
File        : a0140149

Award Number: 0140149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7530               (Estimated)
Investigator: Angela N. Creager creager@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project provides a cultural history of theoretical
              physics in Imperial Germany (1871-1918). The general problem considered is that
              of examining and describing the development of the "discipline", from its
              multiple origins to the beginnings of its "golden-age." Within the boundaries
              set by this general framework, the project deals in turn with three major
              problems: that of defining theoretical physics; that of determining the
              importance of a single understudied research school (the Sommerfeld School);
              and that of exploring the complex interlinkages between classical and modern
              physics. The dissertation is divided into three corresponding sections. NSF
              funding provides support to collect data for two of these sections. In the
              first, the researcher seeks to define the term "theoretical physics" in the
              fin-de-siecle, a time when the "discipline" was not yet coherent, when it
              lacked research or pedagogical centers, central texts and common histories. By
              focusing on the debate over the so-called "failure" of the mechanical
              world-view, the researcher will elucidate the practice of theoretical physics
              research, while a concentration on the teaching of the subject in both
              universities and Technische Hochschulen will provide a novel insight into the
              importance of both industrial applications and pedagogy on the growth of what
              would become the most prestigious scientific field of the twentieth century.
              This latter work will require the examination of course listings
              (Vorlesungs-Verzeichnisse), lecture notes and examination questions at
              university and Hochschule archives in Aachen, Berlin, Dresden, Karlsruhe and
              Munich. In Section 2 the focus is narrowed, as attention turns to the means by
              which disciplinary coherence was achieved. The central part of the project
              involves a detailed study of the Sommerfeld School, looking both at
              Sommerfeld's own research as well as his pedagogical style. Research for this
              section will be centered on the Sommerfeld archive at the Deutsches Museum,
              Munich, and will include not only a technical analysis of the work done by both
              Sommerfeld and his students in Munich, but also a similar examination of
              research content for his students early on in their own professional careers.
              

