Title       : Modeling the Frictional Contact Geometry in Machining Using Fractals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2002     
File        : a0140557

Award Number: 0140557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shivakumar Raman raman@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant will research friction at the tool-chip interface in machining and
              will attempt to quantify the extents of seizure and sliding islands. 
              Preliminary analysis conducted through a prior exploratory grant will be
              extended to better examine the non-Euclidean nature of frictional contact. The
              role of cutting conditions, tool and work materials, tool preparation and
              atmospheric oxidation will be determined in evaluating map areas and
              perimeters.  The primary objective of this research is to develop a fractal
              model of the frictional contact geometry at the tool rake face in machining. 
              The physics and mathematics of friction will be investigated using a fractal
              geometric approach, to determine relationships for cutting variables such as
              area of contact, cutting forces, energy consumed, tool temperatures and wear,
              extending on preliminary work.  These models will be validated and improved
              with data obtained from conventional as well as specialized experiments. 
              Seizure will be examined at a fundamental level and the role of physical
              mechanisms in its creation and extinction at the interface quantified. Seizure
              will be studied by varying tool surface preparation, oxidation, controlled tool
              coatings, work material prior processing and tool wear.  The material and
              cutting conditions leading to different fractal dimensions will be physically
              modeled and validated experimentally.  Issues of similarity, scaling and
              stationarity will be suitably studied to develop predictive models of the
              cutting process.
This project is expected to lead to improved models of the
              cutting process and consequently to its imminent automation.  This research
              will be useful in cutting tool design, tool coating evaluation, and process
              optimization. The scalability of frictional models to finer scales of machining
              will also result from this treatment.  
