Title       : Mathematical Problems Inspired by String Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0140172

Award Number: 0140172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114278             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lev A. Borisov borisov@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator studies IIA and IIB superconformal field theories on 
a
              Calabi-Yau variety in an attempt to give a rigorous mathematical 
definition
              of the vertex algebra of the theories. This algebra is 
expected to be a
              deformation of the cohomology of the chiral de Rham 
complex constructed by
              Malikov, Schechtman and Vaintrob. The second 
aim of the project is to extend
              the definition of IIA and IIB models 
to some singular varieties. The most
              pressing question is to connect 
two existing definitions of elliptic genus of
              singular varieties, 
which is a generalization of cohomological McKay
              correspondence. The
third part of the project focuses on problems from number
              theory that
arise in connection with the concept of elliptic genus and are
              related
to products of Eisenstein series.

String theory in its various
              flavors is a leading candidate for the
``theory of everything'' in
              mathematical physics. Its development 
has led to rapid growth in several
              areas of mathematics, in particular
algebraic geometry, which concerns itself
              with spaces of solutions of 
polynomial equations. Unfortunately, there is
              still a lack of rigorous 
understanding of some of the underlying rich
              mathematical structures,
which the project aims to rectify. Such mathematical
              understanding is
important, because it may be a necessity for future
              development of 
string theory which in turn may yield a more coherent picture
              of the
basic processes and forces of our universe. A separate part of the
              
project deals with certain number-theoretical questions inspired 
by string
              theory. These are related to long-standing mathematical
problems in the theory
              of elliptic curves. The theory of elliptic
curves is a crucial part of the
              proof of Fermat's Last Theorem and 
has practical applications to
              cryptography.  

This project is jointly funded by the Algebra, Number
              Theory, and 
Combinatoric Program and the Topology and Geometric Analysis
              Program.
