Title       : Probing Neutron Star Superfluidity with Gravitational Wave Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0140138

Award Number: 0140138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Comer comergl@slu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Einstein theory of general relativity predicts the existence of
              gravitational waves, which are literally ripples of curvature in the fabric of
              space and time that are generated whenever massive objects oscillate.  Among
              the best sources for gravitational waves are neutron stars, which are the
              remnants of supernovae, the spectacular explosions that result when the cores
              of heavy stars collapse after they have exhausted their nuclear fuel.  After a
              few months of cooling, the core of a neutron star is predicted to become
              superfluid, a special state of matter that can flow with no friction and can
              rotate only by forming a dense array of Ultra-thin vortices --- very skinny
              tornados --- that thread the star.  This project will develop computer-based
              models of the oscillations of superfluid neutron stars and the gravitational
              waves that they emit.

Because of the special properties of superfluid
              matter, the modes of oscillation of a superfluid neutron star should be very
              different from those of an ordinary fluid star.  Consequently, the
              gravitational waves that are created from their oscillations should carry a
              distinct signature of superfluidity.  Suitably advanced gravitational wave
              detectors should be able to extract this signature from the gravitational wave
              data.  Because of their extreme mass (on the order of the same mass as the Sun)
              and compact size (about 20 kilometers in diameter), neutron stars represent a
              form of matter that cannot be created in Earth-based laboratories.  Direct
              detection of gravitational waves thus allows neutron stars to become, in
              effect, astrophysical laboratories for the study of matter under the most
              extreme conditions.

