Title       : SGER: Custom Reagents for Flavonoid Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0140114

Award Number: 0140114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49848              (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia Walbot walbot@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Flavonoids are metabolites produced exclusively by plants that are well known as
              the blue, red, and purple pigments in flowers, fruits, and leaves.  As such,
              these compounds are important for attracting pollinators and seed dispersers. 
              However, flavonoids are also used by plants for a large number of other
              purposes, such as protecting exposed tissues from UV radiation, as signaling
              molecules, and as part of the chemical arsenal against pathogens, predators,
              and other challenges.  Although all higher plants synthesize flavonoids, these
              compounds clearly participate in distinct processes in different plants. 
              Therefore, it is important to understand how flavonoids are synthesized in
              different plant species.  Our laboratories study the organization and
              regulation of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway in plant cells, how the
              products are transported to their final destination inside the cell, and how
              this system has developed over the course of plant evolution.  Despite the
              success of genetic and biochemical analysis of flavonoid synthesis, current
              studies into detailed mechanisms are hampered by the extraordinarily expensive
              reagent costs and the lack of radiolabeled compounds, while analysis of enzyme
              levels and localization are confounded by the lack of adequate antibody
              reagents.  This project is aimed at assembling a standardized collection of
              flavonoid compounds and antibodies.  These reagents will be stored at specific
              locations for distribution among the group and, if feasible, to other
              publicly-funded groups working on flavonoid synthesis.  The project will
              immediately impact the quality of the work that is done in our laboratories and
              at the same time open up entirely new avenues of investigation.  


