Title       : GOALI: Polarization Mode Dispersion Compensation in the Spectral Domain Using
               Liquid Crystal Modulator Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0140682

Award Number: 0140682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew M. Weiner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              High-speed fiber optics plays a key enabling role in today's information
              technology revolution by providing a means for high bandwidth communications. 
              Commercial optical transmission bandwidths are increasing at an impressive
              rate. In light of these advances, new effects which were previously considered
              insignificant are now viewed as key limiting factors in high performance
              lightwave systems.  In order to sustain the growth in bandwidth, new
              technologies are needed to compensate new transmission impairments that arise
              with rapidly growing data rates.  One such impairment, which has become a key
              factor limiting transmission rates and distances in high-speed fiber systems,
              is an effect called polarization-mode dispersion (PMD).  PMD arises due to
              small, spatially varying random birefringences in optical fibers, which lead to
              decorrelation of the input and output polarization states and pulse spreading
              in the time domain.  The latter effect can cause errors in digital
              communication systems. This problem is especially acute in the embedded fiber
              base where many fibers exhibit strong PMD.  

This proposal describes a
              university-industry collaborative project which aims to demonstrate a novel and
              advantageous method for compensation of PMD.  The concept is to exploit and
              extend technology developed in the field of ultrafast optical pulse shaping to
              compensate PMD of wide-band optical signals in parallel on a
              wavelength-by-wavelength basis and under computer control. This improves on
              current approaches that only allow compensation of so-called first order PMD
              for a single wavelength and which do not apply to situations with wide-band
              optical signals where the distortion caused by PMD varies substantially across
              the optical bandwidth.

This research project will encompass several aspects.
               One goal is to perform experiments demonstrating the validity of the proposed
              new PMD compensation scheme.  Research will also target programmable generation
              of PMD for use in test equipment.  Both of these activities will be backed up
              by numerical simulations.  Additionally, new PMD measurement strategies will be
              devised in order to provide the data necessary to suitably control the proposed
              wavelength-by-wavelength PMD compensators.  This should also result in a major
              advance in instrumentation for state-of-polarization sensing applicable to
              multiple-wavelength systems.

