Title       : Diffusion and Kinetics of Reaction Models: Theory and Selected Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0140094

Award Number: 0140094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel ben-Avraham qd00@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research will be conducted into models of diffusion-limited reactions and
the
              method of empty intervals which we introduced originally for the 
treatment of
              coalescence, A + A -> A.  We have extended the method of 
intervals to
              annihilation, A + A -> 0, the branching- and double 
branching-annihilating
              process, and the q-state Potts model in the T=0 limit. 
The method yields
              detailed information: we derived explicit expressions for 
the n-point
              correlation functions of coalescence and annihilation, for all n.
Different
              research groups have recently adopted the method of intervals  for 
the
              analysis of models not amenable to the complementary method of free
Majorana
              fermions.

Research will be conducted into several abstract open questions,
              including
the kinetics of reactions with anomalous, subdiffusive transport;
              exactly 
solvable models of nonuniversal kinetic phase transitions; and the
              shielding 
effect in coalescence, as a basis for more exact solutions and for
              novel 
approximation methods. 

Research will be conducted also into a
              number of practical questions motivated 
by our work so far.  These include:
              (1) A new method, due to Fokas, for
solving PDEs in convex domains with
              arbitrary boundary conditions; (2) Speedy 
computer algorithms for the
              simulation of reaction-diffusion systems; 
(3) Stability of networks, such as
              the Internet, in the face of random failure 
or a coordinated attack; (4)
              Mechanisms of signal transduction in eukaryotic 
cells; and (5) Statistical
              physics interpretation of various experiments in 
contemporary chemistry.  

              
The project is particularly well-suited for educational purposes. One student
              
has completed a M.Sc. in physics and another is graduating with a
              Ph.D.
degree. Several undergraduate students have already been involved
              (mainly with 
computer simulations), and their effort has resulted in at least
              three
publications in refereed journals.  We forsee many more opportunities
              for 
students involvement.

