Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Hydrophilic/Hydrophobic Membrane Development via
               (TIPS) Thermally Induced Phase Separation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0140603

Award Number: 0140603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Lloyd LLOYD@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0140603
Lloyd

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Douglas Lloyd at the University of Texas, Austin and
              Professor Hideto Matsuyama of the Kyoto Institute of Technology in Japan.  The
              researchers will undertake a study of hydrophilic/hydrophobic membrane
              development via thermally induced phase separation (TIPS). A great deal of
              valuable research has been done on the thermodynamics of polymer systems that
              undergo phase separation.  However, a more thorough understanding of the
              kinetics of phase separation and structure development is necessary to complete
              the picture and allow membrane manufactures to control the porous
              characteristics of the membranes.  Specific goals are to:  1) conduct kinetics
              studies of membrane structure formation;  2) to form a series of membranes
              using TIPS with various copolymers and diluents; and  3) to measure performance
              parameters such as flux and solute rejection. 

The project brings together
              the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
              capabilities. The U.S. scientists have considerable expertise in membrane
              formation and the kinetics of structure development and the Japanese
              researchers have a greater mastery of membrane characterization techniques,
              especially in terms of fouling and protein adsorption.  In addition, the U.S.
              group has the optical microscopy equipment to do some of the kinetics
              experiments and the Japanese group has the light scattering equipment to extend
              the studies into the range of smaller domains and earlier times in the phase
              separation process.  It is anticipated that the results of this research will
              enable membrane manufactures to control the microstructure of the membranes
              (that is, pre size and pore size distribution).  Through the exchange of ideas
              and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and
              promote international understanding and cooperation.  The project advances
              international human resources through the participation of a graduate student. 
              The researchers plan to make their research results available to membrane
              scientists through the open literature, oral presentations at meetings of
              professional society meetings, and Professor Lloyd's web site. 

