Title       : Studies of the Microscopic Structure of Hadrons and Hadronic Corrections to
               Fundamental Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0140116

Award Number: 0140116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Dytman dytman+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Mueller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir Savinov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Pittsburgh group studies spectroscopy of subatomic particles (size less than
              1 femtometer) in a variety of ways.  They come in two kinds, baryons (e.g.
              proton) and mesons (e.g. pion).  By measuring the masses, widths (effectively
              lifetime)and decay brancing fractions to the possible final states for each
              excited state, a large body of information is available as a test for models of
              the strong interaction.  Quantum chromodynamics is strongly felt to be the
              appropriate theory, but has not been adequately tested in hadron spectroscopy. 
              Experiments must be done at large accelerators; we have been active at
              Jefferson Lab where a large number of experiments have produced results in the
              last few years.  We were prominent workers in the details of tracking particles
              in CLAS and had primary responsibility for one of the key results, eta
              electroproduction.  We have also been very active in constructing a theoretical
              framework and doing complex fits to the data in order to determine the
              parameters discussed above.  Our results are expected to cause major
              modifications to the Particle Data Group compendium of baryon properties.  A
              new program to study mesons in a particularly clean experimental environment at
              Cornell Electron Storage Ring has been started.


