Title       : Dynamics of the Formation of Composite Bosons from Fermions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0140131

Award Number: 0140131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $415839             (Estimated)
Investigator: Galina Khitrova galina@optics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hyatt M. Gibbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1290      QUANTUM OPTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1767,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The exciton resonance in semiconductors is often used to demonstrate resonant
              phenomena first observed with atoms, such as photon echoes, quantum beats,
              vacuum Rabi splitting, and coherent-field Rabi flopping. Nonresonant optical
              excitation into the free-carrier continuum produces an entirely different
              initial condition, much closer to that of a gas plasma whose electrons and ions
              eventually recombine into atoms that emit photons to return to their ground
              state. In a semiconductor, the initial plasma consists of free carriers,
              electrons and holes, whose kinetic energies depend upon how much the excitation
              energy exceeds the band gap. Exciton formation from the free carriers has been
              studied for more than four decades, yet little is known. With few exceptions
              data have been analyzed assuming that each photon emitted with the energy of
              the 1s electron/heavy-hole transition must have come from an exciton
              recombining. A recent theoretical breakthrough showed that the plasma emission
              is also peaked at the 1s resonance. This important finding calls for the
              reevaluation of all previous conclusions. 
It is proposed to study the
              dynamics of exciton formation in a quantum well and to learn how to control the
              population of the 1s ground state. The goal of the project is to understand the
              fundamental transition from an initially purely fermionic system (free-carrier
              plasma generated by optical absorption) to a bosonic system (exciton
              population). If the bosonic nature of low-density excitons dominates over the
              fermionic nature of its components, as is the case for atoms, then
              Bose-Einstein condensation could be achieved in semiconductors at much higher
              temperatures than those of atomic systems.

