Title       : Black Hole Mergers: from simulation to detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0140326

Award Number: 0140326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren G. Anderson wganderson@utb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlos O. Lousto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Manuela Campanelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Brownsville
	      80 Fort Brown
	      Brownsville, TX  78520    /   -

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Gravitational waves are ripples of gravity thrown off by violent interactions of
              astrophysical bodies.  They were first predicted to exist by Einstein in 1916,
              but because they are weakened by traveling incredibly large distances before
              reaching Earth, they have not yet been detected.  Presently, a number of
              countries are completing the construction of detectors which might finally see
              gravitational waves, including the NSF-funded LIGO detectors.  The
              gravitational waves which should be most easily detected by such instruments
              will come from colliding black holes.  Unfortunately, even these events are
              likely to be undetectable without powerful techniques to extract the
              gravitational wave data from the instrumental noise. The research funded by
              this award will use cutting-edge computer simulations to provide partial, but
              vital, information about the gravitational waves from colliding black holes. 
              This information will then be used to develop powerful new techniques for
              detecting the gravitational wave signals.

The confirmation of Einstein's
              prediction of gravitational waves is a laudable scientific objective in itself.
              However, there is also a much greater promise.  Gravitational waves can be
              produced by objects, like black holes, that cannot be directly observed in any
              other way.  Because so little is known about such objects, it is almost certain
              that new insights into their origins and workings will result from observing
              them directly for the first time.  Furthermore, it is widely believed that
              gravitational waves will reveal aspects of the universe that have not yet even
              been conceived of, thus revolutionizing the current picture of the nature of
              the cosmos itself.  While this revolution will take years to realize, this
              award enables the important
first step of predicting what should be sought and
              how to seek it.

