Title       : Experimental Study of Adaptation to the Edge of Chaos and Critical Scaling in
               the Self-adjusting Peroxidase-Oxidase Reaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0140179

Award Number: 0140179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167908             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred W. Hubler a-hubler@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Scheeline  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1287,7205,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0140179
Hubler 

One aspect of biocomplexity is the ability of biota to
              self-adjust to their
environment.  Previous studies of adaptive behavior have
              shown that
adaptive systems will evolve over time to states that are weakly
              chaotic, a
condition known as the edge of chaos.  These studies typically use
              a
genetic algorithm (computer-based evolution) to implement adaptation. 
              It
is conjectured that most self-adjusting dynamical systems that
              initially
have chaotic behavior will also adapt toward the edge of chaos.  A
              model
for self-adjusting dynamical systems is introduced which treats the
              control
parameters as slowly varying, rather than constant.  The dynamics of
              these
parameters is assumed to be governed by some low-pass filtered
              feedback
from the dynamical variables of the system.  Under the influence of
              noise,
at least in numerical models, the probability of chaotic breakout shows
              a
universal scaling with the duration of the breakouts.

Applications of the
              model to biochemical oscillators as the simplest
possible adaptive system
              relevent to environmental dynamics will be
investigated.  A high degree of
              interdisciplinarity is required, as the
research involves expertise in
              dynamical systems, plant biology,
instrumental measurements, cybernetics,
              enzymology, chemistry, and physics.
 The system is chosen to be "biocomplex,"
              yet simple enough that meaningful
measurements can be made and quantitative
              models can be evaluated.

We intend to experimentally demonstrate adaptation
              using the
peroxidase-oxidase oscillator as an example.  This system is known
              to
exhibit non-linear, complex, and even chaotic behavior.  We will explore
              if
the in situ behavior of this enzyme provides the first
              experimental
evidence for adaptation to the edge of chaos in a naturally
              occurring
system.  Detailed chemical models are available to guide our
              experiments.
We will experimentally implement low-pass filtered feedback from
              the
dynamical variables to the control parameters through:
1. a computer
              based probe-actuator system, and 
2. the comparatively slow response of the
              metabolism of a thin section
   of horseradish root tissues suspended in a
              reactor, and check for
   adaptation to the edge of chaos, and critical
              scaling of chaotic
   outbreaks of chemical oscillations.

Outreach
              activities to local secondary schools will be incorporated into
our existing
              collaborations with high school science teachers.  If our
initial experiments
              on plant peroxidases show the anticipated complexity,
we will then explore the
              related complexity in the behavior of peroxidases
and oxidases in human
              neutrophils, cells associated with anti-bacterial
activity and response to
              systemic afronts.

