Title       : GOALI: Nanocomposite magnetic materials for multifunctional microwave devices
               with integrated EMI suppression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0140047

Award Number: 0140047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srikanth Hariharan sharihar@chuma1.cas.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              T. S. Sudarshan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              


0140047
Hariharan

Electromagnetic interference (EMI) and high
              frequency noise are major sources of signal loss and data corruption in
              electronics, communication and mass storage devices. In addition, there have
              been major advances in areas like high-speed, high-density memories and
              computer processor speeds. For example, nowadays, CPUs operate at frequencies
              over 1GHz. Rapid progress in microelectronics fabrication processes have led to
              miniaturization of electronic device modules. Space is at a premium and this
              causes power sources and IC components to be packed very close to each other.
              Moreover, there are major efforts to design and develop solid-state quantum
              computers that would be inherently highly susceptible to EMI. These advances
              place stringent requirements and underscore the critical need for improved
              materials that combine optimal device characteristics and excellent
              EMI--suppression properties particularly at RF and microwave frequencies. To
              obtain these new materials exhibiting desirable properties, a combinatorial
              approach involving materials synthesis and electromagnetic characterization is
              necessary.

Conducting materials, capacitors, ferrites have all been popular
              choices for near-field and far-field EMI suppression at frequencies in the low
              RF (few MHz) to the microwave (up to 100 GHz) range. While these materials
              individually are somewhat effective over different frequency bands, they are
              often tagged on to circuits as additional components.  The PIs propose a novel
              scheme using layered composite materials where wideband EMI--suppression
              functionality is integrated into the base materials that are used in devices
              for RF and microwave circuits. Their primary target will be to achieve
              integrated functionality and improved shielding effectiveness over the
              frequency range of 1 MHz to 10 GHz.

The PIs proposed research includes
              development of the following three strategies:

[1] Synthesize a series of
              nanocomposite materials comprised of magnetic nanoparticles    embedded in
              doped intrinsically conducting polymers. Study the fundamental magnetic
              properties, complex impedance and shielding effectiveness up to 10 6Hz.

[2]
              Investigate the RF response in variable thickness layered nanocomposite
              materials processed using thick film spin coating methods.

[3] Monitor the
              device performance and EMI-suppression of a PC mother board and a microwave
              circulator coated with the downselected nanocomposite materials.

The
              synthesis of nanoscale materials will be carried out in collaboration with
              Materials Modification Inc. (MMI) using a patented microwave plasma technique.
              Systematic magnetic and electromagnetic characterization will be done using
              resonant and non-resonant methods developed in their laboratory at University
              of South Florida. This GOALI project will contribute to extensive training and
              education of graduate students at USF in two major topical areas: Nanomaterials
              technology and Electromagnetic measurement methods. It also affords a direct
              opportunity for Applied Physics PhD students at USF to travel and work on-site
              at MMI and gain industry experience.

