Title       : Micro Grids with Distributed Generation in an Open Access Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0140629

Award Number: 0140629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chen-Ching Liu liu@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is submitted under the Small Grants for Exploratory Research
              (SGER) program.

Distributed generation is emerging as an important part of
              the power grid. The smaller generating units and renewable energy, e.g., micro
              turbines, wind and solar power, fuel cells and diesel generators, provide the
              resources that are critical at the peak load conditions. The availability of
              such generators also helps industrial, commercial or residential users avoid
              power outages caused by problems of the power grid. These distributed
              generators need to be connected to the grid in order to increase the
              flexibility of utilization. Small generators can also participate in the
              electricity market in an environment where the transmission access is open.
              After the recent energy crisis in California, distributed generation or
              distributed power has attracted even more attention. 

Many technical and
              economic issues are involved in distributed generation. The voltage and
              frequency of the generating units need to be regulated. Protective devices are
              needed to ensure that the faulted devices can be isolated and such protective
              functions must be coordinated with the grid. There are also economic issues
              from the suppliers' point of view such as market monitoring and decision
              support for buying and selling. These economics related tools allow the
              distributed generation to be able to respond to the market needs, leading to a
              larger pool of available resources for the grid.

This study will develop an
              intelligent multi-agent system that is able to handle the technical and
              economic functions of a control center for a micro grid. If each generating
              device and load has the ability and intelligence to communicate with the micro
              grid control agent and work together to solve technical and economic problems,
              then the grid can be managed by a multi-agent system. A Micro Grid Agent (MGA)
              works with generation, load and other control agents to manage the grid and
              maintain the grid security.

New micro grid phenomena related to distributed
              generation and their integration into the power grid will be explored. This
              study will also explore the new dynamic phenomena and the protection concepts
              associated with the micro grids. The other goal is to develop an intelligent
              system method that allows the micro grid to be operated by intelligent hardware
              and software tools without the sophistication and costs associated with a
              control center.

The results of this exploratory research grant to serve as a
              roadmap for researchers interested in the important and futuristic area of
              distributed generation. These researchers may come from the communities of
              power engineering, power electronics, and intelligent systems, optimization,
              control and economics.

