Title       : Wavelet Transform and Time Frequency Atoms Based Approach to Power Quality
               Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0140636

Award Number: 0140636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Domijan alexd@ece.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT (ECS-0140636)
An accurate and efficient approach to power quality
              monitoring will be developed. A power disturbance is typically a non-stationary
              signal with magnitude variance and frequency deviation. The proposed work deals
              with constructing the complex Time Frequency Atom (TFA) for power quality
              monitoring, in which there is no coupling between the central frequency and
              frequency radius. The TFA based Wavelet Transform (WT) approach has the
              following advantages over that based on a complex Wavelet function: (1) Since
              the central frequency and frequency radius of each filtering channel can be set
              or tuned separately and flexibly, the separation of different filtering
              channels, which are designated for a fundamental component and harmonics, in
              the frequency plane can be achieved, i.e. eliminating the interference between
              each other. The concept of "Wavelet Energy Distribution"(WED) is proposed,
              which is based on a complex Wavelet function and WT, to fulfill the "spectrum
              scanning" by a non-uniform frequency window. Further, novel power quality
              indices will be created that use the TFA and WED. The approach will be
              evaluated by using simulated power disturbance waveforms, followed by an
              on-line evaluation in the laboratory and in industrial sites, based on hardware
              implementation.
  The accurate estimation of magnitudes and frequencies of
              fundamental as well as harmonic components is also essential to power system
              control and protection. Therefore, the project will promote research and
              teaching in not only the power quality field but also power system control,
              protection, and the development of power instruments/apparatus. 

