Title       : Collaborative Research: Kaon Monitoring Equipment for MiniBooNE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0140372

Award Number: 0140372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marvin Goldberg                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric D. Zimmerman edz@pizero.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1221      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Observing neutrinos requires large detectors and great patience. Neutrinos are
              able to cross the entire universe, traversing space, planets, galaxies at
              almost the speed of light, without leaving a mark. Only the extremely rare
              collision with the core of an atom stops a neutrino and reveals its presence,
              transforming it into a charged particle. Depending on the type of neutrino
              hitting an atom, either an electron or a similar but heavier particle emerges
              from the collision. Physicists can detect light emitted by the charged
              particle, thereby learning more about the properties of the initial neutrino. 
              MiniBoone is an experiment at Fermilab designed to measure neutrino masses.
              
The specific goal of this proposal that forms part of a collaborative
              research project with a team from Princeton University is to fund detector
              equipment for a novel kaon secondary beam monitor which will constrain the
              background in the neutrino beam. 
While playing an important role in a large
              high energy physics experiment, this effort  is a rare opportunity for
              students, particularly undergraduates.  This is essentially a table top high
              energy experiment bringing all aspects, including physics and technical design,
              assembly and testing of detectors, layout and assembly of electronics, analysis
              of data  down to a manageable scale.  The remaining parts of the project,
              prototyping the detectors and data acquisition system, assembling and testing
              detectors, and analysis of data, would each make excellent senior theses or
              projects for graduate students.
