Title       : Studies in Astrophysics, Nuclear Physics, and Particle Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0140255

Award Number: 0140255
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evan R. Sugarbaker sugarbaker.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard N. Boyd  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 7201      NUCLEAR ASTROPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A very exciting development of the past decade in nuclear astrophysics has been
              that of beams of short-lived nuclides, often those along the pathways of
              processes of explosive nucleosynthesis, and sometimes critical to
their
              progression. Notably, the r-process is thought to occur near thecore of a
              supernova in a fraction of a second, and to synthesize half thenuclei heavier
              than iron. It occurs in a hot neutron-rich environment, passing through nuclei
              that are 20 neutrons beyond stability. One componentof the research will be to
              measure half-lives and structure of nuclei along the r-process path, thus
              greatly improving our understanding of ther-process.  Another process, the
              p-process, occurs in a high-temperature
hydrogen-rich environment in tens of
              seconds, as matter from one star is accreted onto either a white dwarf or
              neutron star companion. The result can be a nova or an x-ray burst. This
              process proceeds by successive proton-capturenreactions and beta-decays through
              nuclei a few protons to the proton-rich side of stability, but has critical
              points at which it may require a beta-decay in order to proceed unless the next
              reaction proceeds very rapidly.  Thus it is important to measure proton-capture
              reaction rates on the unstable nuclei along its pathway in order to understand
              how it synthesizes nuclei and generates energy. We plan to study several
              crucial p-process reactions.  The final component of the program involves the
              Observatory for  Multiflavor NeutrInos from Supernovae. OMNIS will detect
              several thousand events, mostly from "e-neutrinos", from the next galactic
              supernova. But, because of "neutrino oscillations" recently established by the
              Super-K and SNO neutrino observatories, these will actually reflect the energy
              distributions of the more-difficult-to-detect mu- and tau-neutrinos just as
              they emerge from the very core of the exploding supernova. OMNIS' data will
              enable a variety of results, ranging from (1) diagnosis of the stellar collapse
              process at a level that will test for several recently hypothesized effects,
              (2)direct measurement of neutrino masses several orders of magnitude more
              accurately than some present results, (3) determination of poorly determined
              neutrino oscillation modes, (4) observation of the signatures of someprocesses
              of 
nucleosynthesis, and (5) possible observation of the sharp neutrino
              luminosity termination that would signal the collapse to a blackhole.


