Title       : Applications of the Hardy-Littlewood Method in Number Theory and Beyond
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0140523

Award Number: 0140523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197313             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trevor D. Wooley wooley@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This proposal highlights the role of the Hardy-Littlewood 
(circle) method as
              a flexible tool that underpins progress 
in many areas of mathematics
              intersecting with number theory.
 The proposer intends to pursue a number of
              investigations 
that illustrate this intersubdisciplinary aspect of the
              method, 
concentrating on applications in arithmetic geometry and
              
combinatorics. First, the researcher constructs a large class
 of examples
              of algebraic varieties, of relatively small 
dimension in terms of their
              degree, that may be studied by 
means of the circle method. Questions
              concerning the density 
of rational points and weak approximation should be
              accessible,
the intention being to shed light on conjectures of Manin
              and
others. In a second direction, the proposer applies results 
from the
              modern theory of diophantine approximation in order 
to refine Gower's recent
              explicit version of Szemeredi's 
theorem. In a more traditional line of
              enquiry, the researcher
investigates the distribution of the number of
              
representations of integers as sums of powers. The latter work 
enables
              higher moments than the traditional mean square to be 
considered, leading to
              multidimensional applications of 
previously inaccessible type.

Number
              Theory studies the properties of integers (``whole 
numbers''). Since
              antiquity, the study of diophantine equations 
(equations to be solved in
              integers) has formed a core component 
of Number Theory, and has recently
              influenced the development of 
codes and cryptosystems (applied, for example,
              in data storage 
systems such as compact disks and DVDs, communications
              systems and 
banking security). The investigation of moment problems is a
              
fundamental topic for Fourier analysis, which in the larger setting 
plays a
              crucial role in electrical engineering and communications.  
The circle
              method, in its modern incarnations, provides a mechanism 
for transferring
              technology from one of these areas to another, 
and this proposal pursues
              basic research that facilitates such transfers.




