Title       : Fellowships for Seventh US National Congress on Computational Mechanics to be
               held August 4-6, 2002, in Albuquerque, New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0140035

Award Number: 0140035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob Fish fishj@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT
Seventh US National Congress on Computational
              Mechanics

Albuquerque Convention Center
Albuquerque, New Mexico, 
August
              4-6, 2003


The U.S. Association for Computational Mechanics, USACM, has
              asked a group of scientists from academia and government to organize the 7th
              National Congress on Computational Mechanics, to take place in the Albuquerque
              Convention Center, August 4-6, 2003. The Albuquerque meeting will occur at a
              time of increasing interest in computational mechanics, spurred by innovative
              approaches in materials engineering, nanotechnology, biology and medical
              science and by the availability of powerful new parallel and distributed
              computing systems. 

The biannual Congresses of the U.S. Association for
              Computational Mechanics are major scientific events that attract an
              international audience.  The seventh U.S. Congress, hosted by Sandia National
              Laboratories, will highlight the latest developments in all aspects of
              computational mechanics - from new applications in nanotechnology and
              bioengineering to recent advances in numerical methods and high-performance
              computing.  The technical program features invited plenary lectures by
              distinguished experts as well as minisymposia that focus on topics of current
              scientific interest. Participants will have a special opportunity to experience
              the unique scientific environment of Sandia National Laboratories through
              interactions with research staff and to envision its future in initiatives such
              as the Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies (CINT) and the Microsystems and
              Engineering Sciences Applications Complex (MESA).  

The 7th Congress will be
              the first where a National Laboratory is taking the lead organizational role.
              Dr. Bickel, director of the Engineering Sciences Center of Sandia National
              Laboratories, and Professor Fish, vice-president of USACM, will be the Congress
              general co-chairs. Dr. Bickel will exploit Sandia's many contacts in industry,
              academia, and government in planning and promoting the conference. Sandia will
              also provide administrative support, drawing on its extensive experience in
              planning scientific events.  Dr. Christon from Sandia and Professor Haber from
              the University of Illinois will co-chair the technical program. The Local
              Organizing Committee is comprised of Tom Bickel, Mark Christon,  Jacob Fish
              (RPI) and Robert Haber (University of Illinois). The Congress organizers are
              working closely with the Executive Committee of USACM, which is currently
              composed of twenty distinguished computational mechanicians, including the past
              presidents Ted Belytschko, Thomas Hughes, Tinsley Oden, Ahmed Noor, J.N. Reddy
              and Mark Shephard. 

Our main objective is to bring together the diverse
              communities that are active in computational mechanics and to promote
              interactions between government, academia and industry.  We will make a
              concentrated effort to attract new participants from consulting engineering
              firms and from key computer and software companies, while retaining the
              Congress's core constituency of scientists from academia and government
              laboratories. We also plan to support the participation of young researchers,
              especially graduate students, affording them a unique opportunity to
              disseminate their research results, to contact potential employers, and to
              learn about the latest advances in this rapidly developing field. Complete
              information about the meeting is available at the Congress web
              <http://www.esc.sandia.gov/usnccm.html>.

