Title       : Field Studies of Raindrop Axis Ratio and Orientation Distributions Using an
               Improved 2D-Video Disdrometer and Dual-Polarized Radar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0140350

Award Number: 0140350
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378450             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. N. Bringi bringi@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Hubbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Polarimetric radar measurements of precipitation contain information about the
              shape of the precipitation particles.  For raindrops, the shape may oscillate
              with time, but the average shape is approximately spheroidal, and the larger
              the drop the greater the deviation from spherical.  Hence polarimetric
              measurements of rain contain information about drop size - information in
              addition to what is provided by the radar reflectivity alone.  This is the
              basis for improved estimates of rainfall rate using polarimetry.  This project
              contributes to radar polarimetry by directly measuring the sizes, shapes, and
              canting angles of individual drops at the ground.  It employs an upgraded
              version of a video disdrometer manufactured by an Austrian firm, Joanneum
              Research.  This instrument records the front and side view of each individual
              drop as it falls through a square, horizontal sampling area about 10 cm on the
              side.  It measures the particle size, shape, canting angle, and fall speed. 
              The data enable the calculation of a parameter relevant to polarimetric
              measurements, called "effective beta," which depends on the relation between
              size, shape, and canting angle.  A recent theory shows that this parameter can
              also be inferred indirectly from radar observations of three polarimetric
              quantities, the reflectivity at horizontal polarization, the ratio of the
              reflectivities at horizontal and vertical polarization, and the differential
              propagation phase between the two polarization components.  Furthermore,
              knowing the effective beta enables more accurate estimation of the rainfall
              rate.  The purpose of the experiments is to test the theory by comparing radar
              estimates of beta with the values of this parameter determined directly from
              the disdrometer-measured properties of the drops.  Experiments will be
              conducted at two sites: in Colorado, using the CSU-CHILL radar, and in Darwin,
              Australia, in collaboration with the Bureau of Meteorology Research Center. 
              Using these sites will enable the evaluation of the theory in two climatic
              regimes with possibly different rainfall characteristics.  The work should
              improve the accuracy of rainfall estimation by radar.
