Title       : Theoretical High Energy Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2002   
File        : a0140151

Award Number: 0140151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederick Cooper                        
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric D'Hoker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1286      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research topic of this award is superstring theory, which is the most
              promising candidate for a complete unification of the four fundamental forces
              of Nature (electro-magnetic, weak, strong and gravitational) into a framework
              consistent with all known physical principles, including quantum mechanics and
              general
relativity. Strings are one-dimensional extended objects which, under
              time-evolution, sweep out fluctuating two-dimensional surfaces. The
              quantitative understanding of the dynamics of superstring theory, for weak
              coupling, requires precise mathematical methods for defining and calculating
              the quantum mechanics of these fluctuating surfaces. The research carried out
              under this award demonstrates how to overcome certain longstanding difficulties
              with both the definition and calculation of these effects and leads to concrete
              and beautiful quantitative formulas.

The above results have exciting
              applications, including the first reliable calculation, at two-loop order, of a
              number of physically important quantities.  The first is the scattering
              amplitude of massless superstrings, one of the key dynamical quantities of
              superstring theory.  The second is the so-called cosmological constant, which
              provides a possible modification of the equations of general relativity, and
              whose effects interfere
with the presence in the Universe of Dark Matter and
              Dark Energy.  String theory, being a theory of quantum gravity, is expected to
              make the calculation of the cosmological constant possible. D'Hoker's results
              show that the cosmological constant in flat space-time must vanish, and
              provides a general expression in
(more realistic) non-supersymmetric models. 
