Title       : Dynamics and Kinetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0140165

Award Number: 0140165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Bunimovich bunimovh@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Leonid Bunimovich
Proposal Number: 0140165

   ABSTRACT


The proposed
              research deals with the studies of finite- and
infinite-dimensional dynamical
              systems as well as of some
hybrid (intermediate between dynamical and
              stochastic) systems.
The class of hybrid systems which will be specifically
              addressed
is formed by deterministic walks in random environments. It has
              
been shownrecently that a large subclass of such systems (walks
in rigid
              environments) is completely solvable in 1D. The proposed
study deals with the
              case of environments with variable rigidity.
Another part of the proposal
              deals with the farther development of
recently constructed first natural
              examples of Hamiltonian systems
with divided phase space. The goal now is to
              show that a rather 
general class of such billiards has positive metric
              entropy in 
any (finite) dimension. The considered problems of statistical
              
mechanics deal with the rigorous derivation of formulas for 
kinetic
              coefficients and for escape rate in open systems. Among 
the problems which
              deal with infinite-dymensional systems are 
chaos-order transitions in Lattice
              Dynamical Systems and chaos 
in nonlinear wave equations. Other problems deal
              with various 
systems ranging from the Ergodic Theory (Benford's law)
to some
              simple models of brain dynamics and logistics.

  Traditionally the
              mathematical models of real systems are 
either purely deterministic or purely
              stochastic. These two 
classes of models enjoy having a rich theory, and
              researchers 
have quite good intuition on their behavior, i.e. they basically
              
know what to expect. This intuition is essentially based on a 
rich
              collection of completely solvable (i.e. completely 
understood) models.
              However, a majority of real systems are 
neither purely deterministic nor
              purely stochastic. Instead 
they have both (deterministic and stochastic)
              features. This 
project deals with a big class of such models which were
              
independently introduced in communication theory, statistical
              
physics,chemical kinetics, theory of artificiall intellect, etc. 

 

