Title       : Cavity QED with Localized Atoms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0140355

Award Number: 0140355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1776573            (Estimated)
Investigator: H. J. Kimble hjkimble@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1290      QUANTUM OPTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1768,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This research program explores quantum dynamical processes for individual atoms
              strongly coupled to the field of an optical cavity. The scientific objectives
              of the proposed research include investigations of atomic kinetics in a
              quantized light field and of the resulting entanglement between atomic motion
              and the optical field. The specific setting for the research is that of cavity
              quantum electrodynamics (cavity QED) in a domain of strong coupling whereby
              single atoms and photons can profoundly impact the evolution of the composite
              system.
The proposed research builds upon the previously realized "atom-cavity
              microscope" for tracking the motion of individual atoms bound in orbit by
              single photons inside a high-quality optical resonator. The strong interaction
              of atom and cavity field allows atomic motion to be sensed in real time at the
              quantum limits, thereby enabling the implementation of quantum feedback to
              control atomic motion within the resonator. The proposed program of research
              investigates the operating principles for such "quantum servos ", including
              probing the quantum limits for observation and control of the microscopic
              quantum world.  The goal is the coherent manipulation of quantum motion in ways
              that are not possible using ordinary feedback control.  Although the
              proposed
research is principally experimental, a supporting theoretical effort
              is also to be undertaken.
Within a more general context, the significance of
              the research program lies in its attempt to exploit the atom-cavity system as a
              paradigm for the investigation of quantum dynamical processes for open quantum
              systems in a regime of strong coupling. Cavity QED with strong coupling propels
              optical physics well beyond traditional nonlinear optics and laser physics into
              a new regime with dynamical processes now involving atoms and photons taken one
              by one.  By developing qualitatively new technical capabilities in optical
              physics, the research addresses fundamental issues related to the advancement
              of quantum information science and technology.

