Title       : Nonlinear Network Structures for Dynamic System Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0140490

Award Number: 0140490
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank L. Lewis flewis@controls.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The complexity of modem day aerospace, industrial, DoD, civil
              infrastructure, and vehicle systems is increasing, and performance requirements
              are becoming more stringent in terms of both accuracy and speed of response.
              Such systems are characterized by complex dynamics having nonlinearities,
              unmodeled dynamics, flexibility effects, varying parameters, unknown friction,
              high amplitude disturbances, and actuators with deadzones, backlash, and
              saturation. The control problems associated with such complex systems are not
              easy, as they do not satisfy most of the assumptions made in the controls
              literature. Therefore, most existing control algorithms do not work well.
              Optimal nonlinear control systems hold out the hope of successfully confronting
              these problems but are expressed in terms of solutions to the
              Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation. However, HJB is not analytically
              solvable for practical systems, and the dynamic programming solution for
              discrete-time systems suffers from NP-complexity problems ('the curse of
              dimensionality'). Approximate solution techniques for the HJB equation have
              been explored and show great promise in reducing NP-complexity issues. However,
              such HJB approximate techniques must be tied to real-time on-line feedback
              control techniques that simultaneously stabilize the system while adapting to
              approximate the HJB solution.

Recent developments show that nonlinear
              network structures, both neural network (NN) and fuzzy logic (FL) systems, hold
              out the hope of providing approximate solutions to the HJB equation and other
              nonlinear design equations. Structured nonlinear networks hold out the hope for
              confronting problems of NP-complexity in complex systems control. The structure
              inherent in FL systems holds out the hope of designing new NN architectures of
              increased structure.  Approximate HJB solution also holds out the hope of
              bridging the gap between high-level computer science architectures and
              servo-level feedback control. This research has three goals: (1) Nearly Optimal
              HJB Control Using Neural Networks; (2) 0N0ovel 00002High-Level Nonlinear
              Network Control Architectures; (3) and UTA/High School Teams and Courseware for
              Nonlinear Network Control. 	

