Title       : Theoretical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0140311

Award Number: 0140311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederick Cooper                        
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor R. Klebanov klebanov@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1286      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The scaling limit of open strings propagating in a neutral  electromagnetic
              background is known to
 give rise to non-commutative gauge theories
              (introduced by mathematicians  in the context of non-commutative geometry), but
              many interesting questions remain. This research programs investigates

              non-commutativity in  more general string backgrounds. In particular, 
              non-commutativity in  charged strings (as opposed to neutral strings) is
              studied, as well as  the related issues of generalization of the star product,
              and of the interpretation of the corresponding scaling limit in the D-brane
              language.  
Non-commutativity in solvable backgrounds of the plane wave type
              (the Nappi-Witten model is one example) will be also investigated.  The latter
              are time dependent backgrounds, and are very interesting in their own merits,
              and the center of much current research. 

The physics question one aims to
              answer is how intrinsic to string theory is non-commutativity of space-time
              variables. The possibility that space-time coordinates might not commute at the
              string  scale 
is a very radical departure from our current understanding of
              space-time, and points to a novel type of uncertainty principle.  It might
              induce deviation from smoothness of space-time at small distances,
 and
              possible modifications to the inflationary perturbation spectrum.   

