Title       : RUI: Design and Fabrication of Components with Optimized Intertwined Lattice
               Microstructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0140717

Award Number: 0140717
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281118             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas C. Stahl stahl@msoe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vito R. Gervasi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Milwaukee School of Eng
	      1025 N. Broadway
	      Milwaukee, WI  532023109    414/277-7300

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,9229,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to create a process for the design and
              fabrication of structural components with optimized composite microstructures. 
              Here the term "microstructure" refers to the component's inner structure, the
              scale of which is small compared to the scale of the component; the
              microstructure is not, for examples relevant to this project, microscopic.  The
              major phases of the research program include:  (1) creating a multi-scale
              design process to optimize a component and its microstructure, 
(the
              microstructure's geometry will be a lattice or, for composites with multiple
              constituent materials, a set of intertwined lattices and the iterative design
              process will address material density, anisotropy, and orientation in distinct
              steps, identifying optimal rotations and distortions for the lattice to create
              an optimized microstructure), (2) refining and extending hybrid fabrication
              techniques, based on Solid Freeform Fabrication, to construct the components
              with finely scaled microstructures, and (3) designing, fabrication and testing
              example components.  

If successful, this research will lead to practical
              procedures for the design and fabrication of lightweight, high performance
              structure and machine parts.  The ability to design the microstructure within a
              component will provide the opportunity to adjust material properties where
              appropriate, and to adjust the properties via gradients rather than
              discontinuities.  Applying this concept to composites made from multiple
              constituent materials, one could design a component that has two different
              material properties, for example, stiffness and thermal or electrical
              conductivity, optimized independently.
