Title       : An Innovative Process for Producing Complex Injection Molded Parts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2002     
File        : a0140396

Award Number: 0140396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lih-Sheng Turng turng@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Since 1976, plastics have been the most widely used materials in the U.S.,
              surpassing steel, copper and aluminum combined by volume. Among the various
              plastics processing methods, injection molding accounts for one-third of all
              polymers processed. This research is aimed at developing the scientific basis
              for a novel co-injection molding process that combines the aesthetic and
              processing advantages of injection molding with the property attributes and
              benefits of microcellular plastics (MCPs). By integrating solid plastics with
              MCPs via co-injection molding, synergistic benefits, such as increased
              productivity, reduced energy consumption, additional design freedom in part
              geometry, and a means to control the microstructure and properties of the
              molded products, can be realized. Furthermore, this environmentally benign
              process is a perfect candidate for recycling of post-consumer plastics.

This
              research involves systematic analytical, experimental, and computational
              efforts to demonstrate the feasibility and advantages of this novel process,
              advance the understanding of the process physics, develop computer modeling and
              simulation tools, and incorporate the research activities/results into the
              curricula to stimulates students' interest in advanced research and education.
              Collaboration with industrial partners in this research facilitates the sharing
              of expertise and resources, validation of research outcome, transfer of
              technology, education of the workforce, and assessment of the economic gain.
              Successful execution of this research will extend the applicability of MCPs and
              injection molding, ultimately helping the U.S. plastics industry gain
              competitive strength in the global marketplace.
