Title       : Microwave Photonic Modem Techniques for Millimeter Wave Transmitters and
               Receivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0140602

Award Number: 0140602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124254             (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Jemison w.d.jemison@ieee.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

0140602
Jemison

This proposal describes a systematic investigation into
              microwave-photonic techniques for the direct modulation, downconversion, and
              demodulation of millimeter wave signals for high-speed wireless applications
              such as telemedicine, multimedia distribution, and advanced satellite and
              military communications. Direct modulation eliminates the spurious emissions
              and filtering requirements associated with multiple frequency conversions,
              resulting in potentially increased modulation bandwidth and greater carrier
              tuneability. The use of photonics provides the wide bandwidth needed for direct
              conversion from baseband to millimeter wave frequencies and visa versa and
              offers the potential to significantly simplify millimeter wave transmitter and
              receiver architectures. Photonic transmitter and receiver approaches also are
              attractive since they are compatible with low-loss fiber optic distribution of
              millimeter wave signals prior to wireless transmission and subsequent to
              wireless reception.

Specifically, microwave-photonic modulation/demodulation
              (MP-Modem) techniques that work directly at millimeter wave frequencies and can
              support data rates approaching 1 Gbs will be developed. The techniques will be
              assessed via a combination of theoretical, simulation, and experimental work.
              Candidate techniques will be analyzed theoretically to develop models to
              quantify critical performance criteria such as link gain, linearity, and
              bit-error-rate (BER). These models will be implemented in commercially
              available microwave and system-level simulation packages using a recently
              developed modeling approach for microwave-photonic systems. Closed loop
              operation of promising MP-Modem techniques will be demonstrated experimentally.
              The experimental work will focus on proof-of-concept demonstrations using
              commercially available photonic components. System-level applications that
              exploit the inherent wideband nature of the MP-Modem approach also will be
              identified and studied. These applications may include, but are not limited to,
              support of ultra-wideband frequency hopping spread spectrum (FHSS); support of
              other wideband modulation techniques (e.g. quasi-orthogonal frequency division
              multiplexing (quasi-OFDM) by simultaneous operation in multiple wireless
              bands); support of multiple modulation formats (e.g. M-ary PSK and M-ary FSK);
              and support of multiple access. Approaches for implementing the techniques
              using advanced technologies such as integrated optics and/or MEMs also will be
              explored.

The knowledge gained from these investigations will be applied to
              develop a new class of transmitters and receivers that will meet the
              performance demands of emerging high-speed digital millimeter-wave wireless
              communications while providing implementation simplicity and advanced
              functionality that cannot be achieved via traditional electronic design
              techniques.

