Title       : Elastic Proton Form Factor Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0140108

Award Number: 0140108
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard  N. Boyd                        
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434177             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Perdrisat perdrisa@jlab.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The first experiment to measure the ratio of the elastic and magnetic
              form
factors of the proton at large four-momentum squared, Q^2 with
              good
accuracy produced unexpected results. This experiment realized in 1998
              at
Jefferson Lab used the recoil polarization technique, which takes
              advantage
of the fact that the transverse component of the recoil proton
              polarization
is proportional to the product of the 2 form factors, thus
              allowing accurate
determination of the small electric form factor. In a second
              experiment at
JLab in 2000, the measurement was extended to 5.6 GeV^2 , the
              results
confirmed the intrinsically different Q^2-dependence of the electric
              and
magnetic form factors of the proton beyond any doubt. The data from these
              2
JLab experiments have been a challenge for theoretical models which
              attempt
to describe the proton structure in the non-perturbative domain of
              Quantum
Chromo Dynamics (QCD). As the simplicity of perturbative QCD may not
              be
encountered at accessible laboratory energies, an understanding of
              the
structure of the proton (and likewise of the other nucleon, the
              neutron)
requires the use of phenomenological models which depend in parts on
              data.
Nucleons are the building blocks of the matter we are made of and in
              which
we live. A full understanding of the structure of the nucleon in terms
              of
its quark and gluon constituents will be achieved only when we accumulate
              a
complete data base of its response to the electromagnetic probe,
              electrons
and photons, over a large enough Q^2-range; such experiment
              represent
the main part of the research program at JLab. We now have a
              third
experiment, recently approved with highest priority; it will extend
              the
range of Q^2 probed to 9 GeV^2.This grant will make it possible for
me to
              continue leading this project to and through  the next phase, which
require
              new detectors (a new polarimeter to measure the recoil proton
polarization,
              and a new calorimeter to measure the associate scattered
electron) and will
              take  3 years to prepare.


