Title       : Collaborative Research: Innovations in Net-Shape Composite Fabrication through
               Microscale Modeling of Melt Infiltration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0140180

Award Number: 0140180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76948              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian S. Mitchell brian@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Many important composite materials are made by melt infiltration, in which
              polymers or metals are infiltrated into fibrous preforms. To minimize
              post-processing and machining, it is desirable to create parts directly from
              the impregnation step, a procedure called net-shape fabrication. While
              numerical simulation is a crucial part of process design, standard models
              operate at the continuum scale (i.e., the underlying fiber matrix is viewed as
              a continuum phase). This approach is necessary for practical reasons, but it
              requires significant empiricism to generate spatially averaged constitutive
              equations and parameters. Furthermore, current empirical techniques do not
              effectively account for important microcscale phenomena such as fiber
              anisotropy, wetting effects, and void formation during impregnation.

In this
              collaborative research project conducted by researchers at Louisiana State
              University and Tulane University, state-of-the-art microscale modeling
              techniques will be applied to the impregnation process, which will allow
              analyses to be performed using first principles. Experiments will be performed
              to aid in the model development and to validate its quantitative capabilities.
              In a second phase of the research, results from the microscale simulations will
              be scaled up and transferred to continuum-scale models for net-shape
              fabrication. The ultimate goal is for this multiple-scale approach to replace
              much of the empiricism associated with current methods, thereby improving
              fabrication techniques.  The collaborative nature of this project will provide
              unique learning opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, with
              graduate students from LSU participating in experimental aspects of the
              research at Tulane, and undergraduates from both institutions being included in
              research meetings at LSU. In addition, active participation in the Louisiana
              Alliance for Minority Participation is planed to provide summer research
              opportunities for students from under-represented groups.

