Title       : Nuclear Structure and Nuclear Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0140324

Award Number: 0140324
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4100000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ani Aprahamian aprahamian.l@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Umesh Garg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alejandro Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Wiescher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1233      HEAVY ION NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal will provide for continuing research at the Nuclear Structure
              
Laboratory (NSL) of the University of Notre Dame for a period of three
              
years. Research at the NSL is based on a broad program in low energy
              
nuclear physics and includes studies of nuclear reactions, structure,
              
dynamics, and fundamental symmetries spanning the subfields of Nuclear
              
Astrophysics, Weak Interactions and Fundamental Symmetries, Nuclear
              
Structure, and studies of Nuclear Reactions with Radioactive Ion Beams
              
(RIBs). This proposal represents a growing trend towards a more cohesive
              
and synergistic research program as our interests coalesce in the area of
              
Nuclear Astrophysics. We are enthusiastic about future developments in low
              
energy physics with the proposed construction of the rare isotope
              
accelerator RIA. Our funding request includes the support of three
              
accelerators (JN, KN, and FN) and various new developments in detectors,
              
ion sources, and new systems for fast transport of radioactive materials.
              
While the scientific output of the NSL and its impact to low-energy nuclear
              
physics has been tremendous, the most important part of our mission is
              
education. The obvious impact to Technology transfer via our education
              
mission has been substantial. Typically, 9 Ph.D. are awarded in a given
              
three year period. The Nuclear Structure Laboratory is a national and an
              
international resource with a lively user program from 14 US facilities
              
including universities and national laboratories, 11 foreign countries, and
              
I industrial laboratory. 
