Title       : Hydroforming of Aluminum Tubes for Automotive Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0140599

Award Number: 0140599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299791             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stelios Kyriakides skk@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Hydroforming is a relatively new process for shaping tubular components out of
              metals. A simple tube can be hydroformed into a fairly complex shape suitable
              for use as a frame for a structural component. A tube is placed between two
              half dies and then pressurized internally. It expands, comes into contact with
              the dies and is forced to conform to their shape. The simple radial expansion
              of the tube can lead to a number of defects, with a major concern being
              thinning of the expanded wall. This can lead to tube burst. In order to reduce
              thinning, the burst strain can be increased by axially feeding undeformed
              material into the dies from the two ends using actuators. However, the extent
              of the developed axial compression in limited by buckling and wrinkling and by
              friction.  Thus, for every part, a working envelope in the axial feed-pressure
              plane must be established which is free of these modes of failure. While
              aluminum in tube form is ideal for hydroforming, it is less ductile than steel
              and has more complex constitutive behavior, which make the hydroforming working
              envelope tighter. This need for a better understanding of processing control
              coupled with the empirical manner in which the dies and the process have been
              designed, have not allowed wide use of hydroforming for aluminum components.
              

The objective of this three-year project is to develop a scientific basis
              for establishing the working envelopes of the process parameters. The problem
              will be tackled in a three prong manner consisting of hydroforming experiments,
              development of constitutive models for appropriate aluminum alloy extruded
              tubes, and development of several levels of numerical models for analyzing
              hydroforming and establishing its limits. An important component of the project
              is a custom hydroforming facility, which will be fabricated and used to study
              the process parametrically. Alcoa and GM will be act as industrial partners to
              the project and will interact with graduate and undergraduate students on a
              regular basis.


