Title       : Research On Wave Equations and Scattering Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0140657

Award Number: 0140657
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio Sa Barreto sabarre@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
PI: Antonio Sa Barreto, Purdue University

DMS-0140657

Abstract of the
              project: Research on Wave Equations and Scattering Theory
on Manifolds

 In
              the first part of this project, the investigator will seek an improvement of
              the currently known lower bounds for the counting function of resonance for
              arbitrary second order self-adjoint perturbations of the Laplacian in Euclidean
              space.  The second part consists of studying
scattering theory in
              asymptotically hyperbolic manifolds.  Establishing upper, and possibly lower,
              bounds for the counting function of resonance in these spaces, and also giving
              a dynamical definition of the scattering matrix in terms of the radiation
              fields. The latter part is also expected
to be possible in the asymptotically
              Euclidean case. The third part consists of studying problems of recovering
              information about an asymptotically hyperbolic, or asymptotically Euclidean,
              manifold, and its Riemannian structure, from the scattering matrix. It is
              expected
that the dynamical definition of the scattering matrix will also play
              an important role in this part.


This project concerns the investigation of
              how waves propagate in a medium, and reciprocally,  what type of information
              about a medium can be extracted from a certain knowledge on the propagation of
              waves in it. For example, how a certain perturbation of a known medium, like
              an
obstacle in space, affects the propagation of waves, and, vice-versa,
              determine properties of the obstacle from information obtained from waves
              reflected by it. It also concerns the study of the wave equation on spaces that
              are geometrically different from the usual Euclidean
space, e.g., spaces that
              resemble the hyperbolic space at infinity.



