Title       : Qualitative Studies of Some Partial Differential Equations and Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0140604

Award Number: 0140604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Changfeng Gui gui@math.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Changfeng Gui, University of Connecticut
DMS-0140604

Abstract:

The PI
              will work on two projects on qualitative properties of partial differential
              equations.  In the first project, he will study phase transitions modeled by
              the Allen-Cahn
equation and its generalized vector equations, which are the
              gradient flows of the Allen-Cahn energy with either double-well potentials or
              multiple-well potentials of equal depths.  The objectives are to determine the
              existence, uniqueness and stability  of  some special configurations, and then
              to further study  the fine structure near the interfaces or near
the triple
              junction and  the dynamics of  these sharp interfaces and
triple junctions. 
              One of the immediate goals is to classify the optimal
configurations of
              anti-phases. This  is indeed to solve a conjecture of
De Giorgi  which
              concerns the one dimensional symmetry of
certain entire solutions  of  the
              Euler-Lagrange equations of the
Allen-Cahn energy.  The De Giorgi conjecture
              is also related to the study
of  minimal surfaces, and is still open in
              dimensions bigger than three.
In the second project the PI will study the
              Gierier-Meinhardt
systems of equations arising in biological pattern
              formations and chemical
reactions. In particular,  the proposor will try to
              show mathematically
the existence of  some special concentration patterns and
              to understand
their stabilities.


Diffusion is a very common phenomenon,
              and it generates very
complex structures when several different substances are
              involved.
Phase transitions, pattern formations  are well observed in 
              material
sciences, in  biological and chemical reactions, and they are
              closely
related to diffusions.  Special nonlinear partial differential
              equations
and systems are used to model these phenomena mathematically. 
              The
proposor hope  to develop analytic techniques  to obtain 
              good
qualitative properties for solutions of these equations, which will
              lead
to better numerical methods for simulations.  The study will help
              to
understand the finer structures and long time behaviors of
              phase
transitions, pattern formations, and other similar phenomena.




