Title       : Structure and Dynamics in Highly Excited Molecular States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0140296

Award Number: 0140296
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261077             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth F. McCormack emccorma@brynmawr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bryn Mawr College
	      
	      Bryn Mawr, PA  19010    215/645-5000

NSF Program : 1292      ATOMIC & MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The structure and decay dynamics of highly excited states in molecules is a
              research area that has provided a rich and diverse sampling of interesting and
              important physics. Investigations of processes such as photoionization,
              photodissociation, and photo-association have required more detailed and
              accurate knowledge of the unique way molecular systems behave. In particular,
              understanding the role of electronic and nuclear spin in molecular systems has
              emerged as important in several areas, for example, high resolution
              photoionization studies, chemical reaction dynamics and loss mechanisms in cold
              molecule production in atomic traps. This has led to new theoretical efforts to
              incorporate electronic and nuclear spin dynamics into the highly successful
              theoretical approach of multichannel defect theory (MQDT). Fundamental
              questions are being raised, including: 1) How does spin angular momentum
              coupling vary with energy in molecular Rydberg states? 2) At what values of
              principal quantum number and electronic angular momentum do different behaviors
              emerge for different species? 3) Does nuclear spin affect either electronic or
              rotational autoionization of Rydberg states into different ionic states? 4) Do
              spin interactions play a role in the relative branching ratio between
              ionization and dissociation in the decay of highly excited states? 5) What role
              does internuclear separation play in these spin dynamics? 
This project
              proposes to begin addressing these questions by investigating the structure and
              dynamics of highly excited molecular states, including the effects of orbital
              and rotational angular momentum and vibration on molecular spin interactions,
              by using the novel approach of time-resolved, resonant four-wave mixing
              spectroscopy. The goal is to perform high energy resolution measurements within
              a given Rydberg series or a given vibrational progression in order to follow
              the evolution of angular momentum coupling as a function of energy and
              internuclear separation. By examining three fundamental systems with distinct
              molecular structures; H2, N2 and the OH radical, prototypical interactions and
              dynamics can be systematically investigated. This kind of data, taken together
              with MQDT analyses, promises to provide new insights into the unique nuclear
              and electronic angular momentum interactions that molecules exhibit.


