Title       : Linear and Permutation Representations of Groups and Coverings of Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0140578

Award Number: 0140578
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284660             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Guralnick guralnic@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and his colleagues study permutation and
              linear
representations of finite and algebraic groups. The focus is
on
              primitive permutation representations and irreducible
linear representations. 
              These results will be applied to
monodromy groups of coverings of curves and
              higher dimensional
varieties over finite fields and to various questions
              in
probabilistic group theory.  The investigator expects to make
significant
              progress on outstanding conjectures about automorphism
groups of curves in
              positive characteristic, the size of images
of rational points for maps
              between varieties over finite fields
and monodromy groups of coverings of
              curves of small genus.
In characteristic zero, the investigator and
              collaborators plan
to obtain a complete classification of the possible
              monodromy
groups of indecomposable rational functions.  This is a much
more
              ambitious project than the solution of the Guralnick-Thompson
conjecture that
              was recently solved.  The techniques involve
detailed analysis of properties
              of simple groups and translating
problems in arithmetic algebraic geometry to
              group theory.
Many of these results will give detailed information
              about
questions in probabilistic group theory as well.

Since the
              classification of finite simple groups was announced
in the late 1970's, there
              have been some remarkable applications
of this theorem in many areas of
              mathematics.  This proposal
continues in this tradition.  There is also a long
              history of
translating problems in number theory and geometry
              (particularly
over finite fields) to group theory.  The investigator
              intends
to obtain quite detailed results about finite simple groups
and their
              subgroups.  Some of the investigation into finite simple
groups is quite
              natural but other aspects are motivated by applications
to curves and
              varieties over finite fields. This will give insight into
various problems
              about maps over finite fields -- in particular, about
polynomials and rational
              functions.  This has applications to
coding theory and cryptography as well as
              answering basic
questions in the field.  A special case of this is the
              study
of "exceptional" polynomials.  These were first studied by
Dickson in
              his thesis in the 1890's.  The major result in
the area, using the
              classification of simple groups, was only
obtained in 1993 by Fried, Saxl and
              the proposer. The investigator
intends to classify all such polynomials. 
              These results about
simple groups will also give detailed information about
              probabilistic
generation of finite groups.  These kinds of questions have
              become
increasingly important in the design of algorithms in
              computational
algebra.  These results show that by following certain recipes,
              one
can be reasonably sure of picking a generating set for your
favorite
              finite group.

