Title       : Collaborative Research: Procedures for Efficient Cycle Time-Throughput Curve
               Generation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0140385

Award Number: 0140385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce E. Ankenman ankenman@iems.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry L. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of efficient and effective tools
              for the estimation of cycle time-throughput (CT-TH) curves via computer
              simulation. Unlike analytical queueing models, computer simulation can be used
              to represent almost any manufacturing system regardless of how complex.
              Unfortunately, simulation allows for the evaluation of only one point at a time
              on the CT-TH curve, so tools are needed to guide the simulation for development
              of the full curve. Since the CT-TH curve for real manufacturing systems is
              subject to variability, this research will identify and derive appropriate
              models and tools to represent not only the mean of the curve, but also its
              variance and selected percentiles, especially in the region of maximum system
              capacity. The tools for constructing the CT-TH curves will be adaptive and
              selective both in terms of the models used and the precision required by the
              user.  Accurate model determination will be directed under both fixed-budget
              and fixed-precision settings. Experiments to evaluate the methods developed
              will be conducted on a test bed of tractable queueing models and a large-scale
              simulation of a semiconductor manufacturing facility.

If successful, the
              results of this research will provide methods for efficiently generating the
              CT-TH curves associated with simulation models of semiconductor manufacturing
              facilities. Since CT-TH curves can be used to quantitatively evaluate different
              scenarios of product mix, production targets and capital expansion, the primary
              goal of this work will be to develop simulation methods for generating accurate
              CT-TH curves given finite resources. Compared to existing methods, this work
              will increase the number and complexity of manufacturing system evaluations
              that can be conducted leading to improvements in production facilities.
              Production improvements will lead to subsequent reductions in production cost
              and/or increases in throughput. The proposed work will also contribute to the
              tools available for model fitting, variance reduction and fixed sample
              allocation in large-scale simulation models.
