Title       : Passivation of Silicon Dangling Bonds by Deuterium Implantation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a0140584

Award Number: 0140584
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Durgamadhab Misra dmisra@njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will obviate the diffusion annealing by introducing deuterium
              through ion implantation. In MOS transistors, for example, deuterium will be
              implanted on silicon substrate before the thin gate oxide was grown. To achieve
              the objective, we will investigate (1) effect of deuterium implantation energy
              and dose on oxide growth and its interface. An appropriate dose can reduce
              substrate damage or eliminate creation of dislocation loops while satisfy the
              dangling bonds even after the subsequent thermal cycles of oxide growth.
              Thermal budgets will be optimized to control the physical incorporation and
              subsequent electrical characteristics by studying the distribution of deuterium
              after ion implantation. (2) Secondly, thermal kinetics of deuterium desorption
              from the interface will be studied and its effect on electrical characteristics
              of finished device will be evaluated. (3) Thirdly, the mechanisms of deuterium
              diffusion in Si/Si02 system due to oxide growth will be investigated. The focus
              of the proposal is to conduct an experimental investigation of incorporating
              deuterium effectively through ion implantation. Tasks will be undertaken for a
              comparative study of this process to other means of interface passivation such
              as various annealing treatments, deuterium implantation at a partially
              completed device (TI approach) and hydrogen implantation. In addition, we will
              incorporate deuterium using ion implantation in silicon nanocrystals used for
              optoelectronics applications. Even though the main focus of this research will
              be towards Si/Si02 interface, an additional task will study GaAs devices to
              investigate behavior of deuterium implantation in optoelectronic devices.
              Extensive physical and electrical characterization will be employed. Sub-micron
              MOSFETs will be used to achieve a fundamental understanding of the behavior of
              implanted deuterium at the ultra-thin silicon-dioxide/silicon interface, which
              is, at present, poorly understood.

Test devices will be processed at the
              Microfabrication Center at NJIT with the help of graduate and undergraduate
              students. Since NJIT has a significant presence of minority and women students
              (~40% and ~18% respectively) it is expected that some of these students will
              have the opportunity to contribute to this project. A recently acquired
              state-of-the-art device characterization system (NSF supported) will be used
              for electrical characterization at NJIT whereas some of the physical
              characterization will be carried out at Agere Labs formerly Lucent
              Technologies. GaAs samples will be prepared by Anadigics. Deuterium
              implantation will be carried out at NJIT and at Ion Implantation Company
              (IICO). The high national importance of this cutting edge technology and close
              involvement of qualified staff and students at NJIT and researchers at Agere
              Labs and Anadigics will significantly impact on advancing knowledge base in
              this area.

