Title       : Relativistic Heavy Ion Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0140389

Award Number: 0140389
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448817             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Cebra cebra@physics.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Draper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              F. Paul Brady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1233      HEAVY ION NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is the study of collisions between relativistic nuclei
              and ultimately the determination of the properties of nuclear matter over a
              wide range of temperatures and densities. Extremely hot or dense objects which
              are made of nuclear matter exist in the cosmos, however, without the
              possibility direct study of neutron stars, supernovae, or the Big Bang, one
              resorts to the challenging studies of finite and transient systems as provided
              by nucleus-nucleus collisions. It has become clear that in order to understand
              the nuclear equation of state or to identify a transistion to a new state of
              matter, the quark-gluon plasma, it will require a comprehensive and correlated
              set of measurements as well as extensive calculations which relate the
              observables to the nuclear matter variables. This project focuses on the
              acquisition and analysis of such a set of data using the Solenoidal Tracker at
              RHIC (STAR) experiment at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) located at
              Brookhaven National Laboratory. The collection of detector systems which make
              up the STAR experiment provide detailed information about individual collision
              events. The UCD group will use data from these detectors to reconstruct the
              events and infer, from the recorded debris, both the dynamics and the
              thermodynamics of the collision.
