Title       : Phenomenology of Hadrons and Fundamental Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0140362

Award Number: 0140362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sidney A. Coon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Lebed richard.lebed@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0140362
Lebed

Three topics will be investigated under this grant, spanning
              both nuclear and particle theory.

1)      Flavor Symmetries.  The PI and his
              graduate dissertation student (partially funded by this grant) will investigate
              possible "flavor" symmetries among the three fermion generations, especially
              the constraints imposed upon them by recent and forthcoming experimental
              results on neutrino masses and mixing.  Additional constraints to be taken into
              account arise from limits on flavor-changing neutral current processes and
              proton decay.  These studies are designed to work toward answering the question
              of why there are three replicated generations of fermions with nonetheless
              widely differing masses and mixings.

2)      Baryons in the Large N Limit. 
              The PI will build upon the numerous successes of QCD with a large number N of
              color charges (large N) to study the dynamics of baryon resonances.  These
              particles are now being produced in huge numbers at Jefferson Lab, but the
              theoretical tools currently used to study them are limited.  In particular, the
              PI will seek model-independent results that respect not only the large N
              expansion, but also the chiral symmetry implied by coupling among pions and
              nucleons (to which the resonances decay).

3)      Rigorous QCD Constraints
              on Hadronic Quantities.  The imposition of constraints from dispersion
              relations allows one to make precise statements about QCD amplitudes even in
              the nonperturbative regime.  One obtains relations between fundamental
              quantities such as quark and gluon parameters on one hand, and measured
              quantities such as form factors on the other.  These relations can provide
              subtle and highly nontrivial information on the way that the strong interaction
              works, and form the motivation for this work.  The PI will continue this
              successful program to consider such cases as expanding the range of
              applicability and including additional information from the region of
              asymptotic freedom.

