Title       : U.S.-Japan Planning Visit: Scaling Bubble Behavior Between the Deep-Sea and
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0140027

Award Number: 0140027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6722               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ira S. Leifer ira.leifer@bubbleology.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0140027
Leifer

This award supports a one year planning visit between
              Professor Ira Leifer at the University of California at Santa Barbara and
              Professor Tomoaki Kunugi of Kyoto University in Japan and Professor Katsumi
              Tsuchiya of the University of Tokushima in Japan.  The researchers will devise
              a plan to improve understanding of the behavior of deep-sea bubbles by
              intercomparing field observations with laboratory studies.  Currently, few
              studies exist in the literature on these bubbles, and thus incorporation of
              appropriate parameterizations of deep-sea bubble behavior
              (chemico-hydrodynamic) into numerical simulations requires potentially
              unjustified assumptions.  Research to generate more realistic parameterizations
              will improve the accuracy of numerical models of processes such as hydrocarbon
              seepage bubble-mediated gas transfer into the ocean and atmosphere.  

This
              research will facilitate collaboration between three groups with complementary
              expertise and capabilities, allowing an important technical problem to be
              addressed with a broad array of modern methods.  Professor Leifer has expertise
              both in laboratory research of bubble hydrodynamics (at atmospheric pressure)
              and field bubble observations at depths from 20 to 540 m.  Professor Tsuchiya
              has experience in laboratory research both at atmospheric and high pressure,
              and is a well-recognized theoretical expert on bubbles and bubble wake
              hydrodynamics.  Professor Kunugi is a well-recognized expert on direct
              numerical simulation of two-phase flows.  The project will offer a good
              opportunity to join efforts between the two countries.  This research impacts
              important areas such as oceanic carbon dioxide injection to counter human
              emissions, studying the fate of seep oil and hydrocarbons in the environment,
              and the use of rising seep bubbles for location of marine petroleum resources. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  


