Title       : Nonlinear Optics in Waveguides Coupled With Photonic Band Gap Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0140109

Award Number: 0140109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Haus jwhaus@udayton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Dayton
	      300 College Park
	      Dayton, OH  454690104    937/229-2919

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0140109
Haus

The PI proposes to design, fabricate, characterize, and test
              waveguide-geometry, periodically textured nonlinear optical devices. Proton
              exchange and reverse proton exchange processes will be used to fabricate
              waveguides in lithium niobate. The superstrate is patterned over a wide area
              using UV laser lithography. The PI has developed the capability to fabricate
              one- (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) photonic band gap (PBG) structures with the
              UV laser facility with lattice constants varied from 150 nm to about 2 microns.
              Patterning will be done using plasma etching techniques, especially inductively
              coupled plasma etching to control reactivity and retain anisotropy of the etch
              process. The optical properties of the waveguides, such as mode index and loss,
              will be characterized in our laboratories. The laser diode pumps will be used
              to make compact, short wavelength, emission sources. Other spin-off
              applications will be examined, such as, terahertz wave generation, PBG-based
              electro-optic modulators, and parametric generation or oscillation at infrared
              wavelengths.

Planned simulations of our complex three-dimensional
              propagation geometry will help optimize the design parameters and minimize the
              losses. For lithium niobate PBG waveguides his vector coupled-mode theory
              calculations predict that the second-harmonic and parametric generation output
              efficiency will be enhanced by two orders of magnitude over quasi-phase matched
              devices of the same length. His experiments are designed to test these results.
              Furthermore, he will explore the properties of 2D photonic crystals to further
              improve frequency generation based on the large dispersion, resonant field
              enhancement, and low group velocity, which is an ubiquitous feature of higher
              dimensional PBGs not related to a band edge. He will conduct a theoretical
              study of the resonant mode characteristics of 1D and 2D PBGs to determine the
              grating and waveguide fabrication issues and test the designs in the sample
              fabrication process.

Photonic band gap structures have received wide
              attention because of their unique properties and potential for diverse
              applications. The coherent, PBG sources could impact future developments in
              storage technology, imaging, space communications, xerography, medical
              photo-therapy, bio-assays, and UV lithography. Students will be trained with
              the skills and knowledge to develop future PBG-based optoelectronic devices.
              They will fabricate and characterize the devices and test the accuracy of the
              designs by comparing with modeling and simulation results. Hence they will have
              developed a broad range of laboratory and modeling experien

