Title       : Cohomology Theories for Algebraic Varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0140445

Award Number: 0140445
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc N. Levine marc@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator studies the theory of algebraic cobordism, 
recently
              constructed by the investigor and F. Morel, as well 
as generalized cohomology
              theories for algebraic varieties 
and schemes, the relation of rational
              equivalence in the 
Morel-Voevodsky  algebraic-homotopy category, and a
              refinement 
of Asakura's arithmetic Hodge cohomology. The investigator
              
attempts to construct a theory of higher algebraic cobordism, 
along the
              lines of Bloch's higher Chow groups, examines the 
category of cobordism
              motives, and tries to give a theory of 
algebraic higher elliptic genera. In
              addition, the investigator 
examines the generalization of the motivic
              cohomology to K-theory
spectral sequence to other cohomology theories on
              algebraic 
varieties, and considers the relationship of this spectral
              
sequence to the slice spectral sequence of Voevodsky, using the 
notion of
              rational equivalence in the algebraic homotopy category. 
Finally the
              investigator defines a variation of Asakura's 
arithmetic Hodge cohomology and
              uses this to construct an infinite
sequence of cohomology theories which
              conjecturely give a better 
and better approximation to motivic
              cohomology.

The investigator's research involves a mixture of algebraic
              
geometry and algebraic topology. Algebraic geometry is the study 
of
              solutions of equations using both algebra and geometry. For 
example, one can
              study a circle by examining its equation, or by 
looking at its geometric
              properties. Algebraic topology studies 
spaces by attaching algebraic
              invariants to them, invariants which 
can often be computed explicitly.   The
              investigator takes methods 
and constructions in algebraic topology, and then
              modifies and 
refines them so that they can be used to define algebraic
              versions 
of the topological invariants. These new algebraic invariants are
              
then applicable for studying subtle properties of solutions of 
equations.

