Title       : Nonlinear Dispersive Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0140023

Award Number: 0140023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67556              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustavo Ponce ponce@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              March 6, 2002

PI: Gustavo Ponce. DMS-0140023

Proposal title : Nonlinear
              Dispersive Equations. 

 
In recent years there has been a significant
              progress on
the study of qualitative behavior of solution to
              nonlinear
dispersive systems. The relation between dispersive and nonlinear
              effects
has motivated several remarkable works. Among them one finds
sharp
              local and global wellposedness theories under minimal regularity 
assumptions
              on the data, precise blow up results as well as ill-posedness 
ones. As a
              consequence our understanding of several phenomena in nature is 
now more
              complete. The principal investigator will focus on several
representative
              problems connected with partial differential
equations arising in wave
              propagation and fluid mechanics.

 The wave propagation in diverse mediums
              and the interaction of
different kind of waves can be modeled by complicated
              systems of
partial differential equations. These systems involve many
              variables
which depends of the particular physical setting of the problem. In
              many 
cases, these systems are too complicated to be treated with reasonable
              
accuracy, thus one has to consider approximated models. The validity of these
              
approximations is essential to further study of the physical phenomenon. One
              
has to give precise conditions under which the qualitative behavior of the
              
solution of these approximated models captures the features of the physical
              
setting. It is here where the theoretical study of these solutions become
              
essential. Thus, one starts with special solutions and its properties,
              
stability, long time behavior, ill-posedness, etc. In situations where these
              
theoretical results are unavailable one needs to start the study with
              
appropriate numerical simulations.


