Title       : Three-Body Coulomb Effects and Asymptotic Normalization Coefficients in Nuclear
               Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0140343

Award Number: 0140343
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Akram Zhanov   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PHY-0140343
Zhanov

The purpose of the research is to further extend and
              apply the asymptotic three-particle Coulomb scattering wave function to
              problems in nuclear astrophysics.  Knowledge of the three-body Coulomb
              scattering wave function is important both from fundamental and practical
              points of view.  On the fundamental side, it will pave the way to a solution,
              both in nuclear and atomic physics, of the long-standing three-body
              quantum-mechanical problem with three charged particles.  As a practical
              application, we will use the three-body Coulomb scattering wave function to
              estimate both the effect of the post-decay Coulomb acceleration in Coulomb
              breakup reactions and the effect of the a third spectator proton (medium) on
              the hydrogen burning p-p reaction that involves two protons inside the sun.
              Nuclear capture reactions between charged particles in stellar interiors occur
              at such small energies (< hundred keV) that their cross sections are very
              small. Hence, direct measurements in the lab are extremely difficult or
              impossible.  Thus indirect techniques have been developed to determine stellar
              cross sections. One such indirect technique uses breakup reactions of a
              projectile in the Coulomb field of a heavy target.  However, the Coulomb field
              of the target being a source of the reaction, plays not only a positive but
              also a negative role: the positively charged fragments formed from the
              projectile breakup are moving in the repulsive Coulomb field of the target. 
              This acceleration effect due to the Coulomb field, called post-decay Coulomb
              acceleration (PCA), distorts the experimental results that are used to extract
              the radiative capture reaction rates. Unfortunately, a real quantum-mechanical
              estimate of PCA has not been done because the three-particle Coulomb scattering
              wave function describing the motion of two fragments in the Coulomb field of
              the target is unknown.  Recently we have found the leading asymptotic terms of
              this wave function in the asymptotic region where two fragments are close to
              each other and far away from the third particle.  This is just configuration
              region that contributes to Coulomb breakup reactions. Hence, the asymptotic
              Coulomb wave function found in our earlier work and its extension can be used
              to estimate, for the first time, the effect of the PCA on the nuclear
              astrophysical radiative capture processes determined from the Coulomb breakup
              reactions in a full quantum-mechanical approach.  The same wave function also
              will be used to estimate the impact of the proton-spectator on the fusion cross
              section of two protons inside the sun. This is the first of the hydrogen
              burning reactions in the sun and hence it defines the sun's luminosity. 
              Further we will apply the asymptotic normalization coefficient (ANC) concept to
              calculate the external region contribution to radiative capture widths for
              resonances decaying to bound states that are important in nuclear astrophysics.
               In some cases it is difficult to measure the radiative widths and the
              calculated ANC's allow us to put the limits on the possible radiative width
              values.



