Title       : Collaborative Research: A Focused Research Group on Multiscale Geometric
               Analysis--Theory, Tools, Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0140698

Award Number: 0140698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $543002             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Donoho donoho@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal IDs: DMS-0140698, DMS-0140540, DMS-0140587, DMS-0140623
PIs: Donoho,
              Candes, Huo and Jones
TITLE: A Focused Research Group on Multiscale Geometric
              Analysis--Theory,
Tools, Applications

Abstract

An interdisciplinary
              team, bridging Harmonic Analysis, Statistics, Image Analysis and Astronomy,
              proposes a united effort to exploit and extend recent breakthroughs in
              computational harmonic analysis. The team will consolidate several scattered
              advances into a unified body of theory and methods to be called Multiscale
              Geometric Analysis, which can probe the fine structure of 2-, 3- and higher-
              dimensional functions and point clouds, able to isolate and manipulate
              intermediate-dimensional phenomena. Simple examples include edges in 2-d
              images, filaments and sheets in 3-d point catalogs. Characterizing such
              intermediate-dimensional phenomena is essential for fundamental progress in a
              wide range of problem areas (including 2-d and 3-d imaging) where traditional
              multiscale methods have now run their course. Our united effort has three main
              outcomes. 1. Theory. Coherent, comprehensive knowledge, showing what can and
              cannot be accomplished with computational harmonic analysis. 2. Tools. A wide
              range of practical MGA algorithms and a unified, publicly available software
              environment - BeamLab - deploying them. 3. Applications. Our main initial focus
              will be on the analysis of 3-d point catalogs in astronomy, such as those
              coming on-line soon from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. We know a priori that
              the data contain filaments and sheets, embedded in a scattered background, and
              MGA provides a decisive set of tools to resolve the structural properties of
              such catalogs, far more sensitive and more comprehensible than any tools
              currently available for such analysis.

Many new kinds of massive databases
              are being created in our era's revolutionary transition to a data-rich society.
               Many of these databases contain geometric structures such as surfaces, and
              filaments, albeit in a sometimes hidden manner. Databases of this sort can
              include galaxy catalogs in astronomy -- in which the filaments and sheets are
              predicted by various theories of universe formation -- 3-D scanning of faces
              and other objects -- in which filaments and surfaces are caused by structures
              such as skin and hair -- and statistical databases in which curves and surfaces
              arise from existence of predictable patterns. This Focused Research Group on
              Multiscale Geometric Analysis is a research effort bringing together
              mathematicians, statisticians, image analysts and astronomers to create new
              tools and theories to help extract geometric structure and meaning from such
              databases.  The participants are skilled at multiscale analysis, which will be
              a central organizational principle. We expect multiscale methods to have an
              impact here comparable to what wavelets have had over the last twenty years in
              many other problems in science and technology.

