Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Mechanics of Rock Glacier Creep: A New GIS
               Method and A Possible Response to Climate Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2002  
File        : a0140132

Award Number: 0140132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11700              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Nelson Caine cainen@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9198,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Rock glaciers are considered a glacial or periglacial feature that slowly creep
              downslope as a result of deformation of ice that has been consolidated with
              angular, coarse rock.  Although rock glaciers have been studied using a variety
              of field techniques and, more recently, with remote aerial photography
              analysis, much still is unknown regarding the dynamics of flow.  The mechanism
              by which factors like micro-topography, ice content, or rock glacier form
              influence rock glacier behavior is unknown.  Similarly, little is known of the
              possible existence of regional flow patterns as a result of climate change. 
              Previous analyses have been primarily limited to the Alps in Europe.  This
              doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the mechanics of rock
              glacier creep in the U.S. and Canadian Rocky Mountains, using an approach that
              combines analyses using high-precision temporal aerial photography and a
              geographic information system (GIS).  The doctoral student will design a
              digital methodology for detecting motion of the rock glaciers to maximize the
              advantages of data analysis within a GIS.  Rock glacier sections within a
              variety of different rock glacier forms will be analyzed to gain a greater
              comprehension of rock glacier motion.  Because active rock glaciers are
              considered an indicator of discontinuous permafrost, a regionalized approach to
              rock glacier motion will be undertaken to detect climatically induced changes
              in permafrost distribution.  The methods employed in this study will resemble
              those presented in earlier studies, but they will incorporate GIS-based
              analytic procedures.  A sequence of temporal air photos for rock glaciers will
              be selected and scanned at a high resolution.  The photos will then be
              enhanced, orthorectified, and co-registered to a common scale.  Point-to-point
              methods will be conducted in a GIS to temporally track large boulders and
              rocks.  Attribute data about the points as well as ancillary data will be
              included to determine the factors affecting flow.  Detailed digital elevational
              models (DEM) will also be constructed to monitor surface slumping.  Vertical
              and horizontal velocities will be calculated for approximately five to ten rock
              glaciers extending across a latitudinal transect of the Rocky Mountains for
              dates ranging from 1940 to the present.

As development and recreation
              continue to increase in mountainous regions, the nature and stability of these
              areas is threatened.  Global warming will further alter stability.  An
              important component to the alpine geomorphic system, rock glaciers, are
              expected to experience substantial change.  Rock glaciers may become unstable
              or may cause catastrophic releases of water that could damage nearby
              residential areas, communication towers, ski lifts, hiking paths, campgrounds,
              or other recreational areas.  The results of this study should help monitor the
              form rock glaciers.  They also will provide a better understanding of the
              dynamics of rock glacier flow, which will enhance our understanding of other
              rock glaciers and permafrost distribution on other terrestrial planets such as
              Mars.  The study will develop methods using a GIS that will allow the input of
              ancillary data and incorporate IKONOS data for future analysis.  This GIS-based
              format will be easily updateable and transferable to other parts of the world. 
              As a result, this research will help advance the monitoring of global changes
              in permafrost.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
              award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
              strong independent research career.


