Title       : Microscopic Theory of Quantum Fluids and Nuclear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0140316

Award Number: 0140316
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Clark jwc@wuphys.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Willem H. Dickhoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PHY-0140316
Clark


This award supports research on a broad spectrum of
              quantum many-body problems. The primary objective is prediction, from first
              principles,of the properties of strongly correlated systems of fundamental and
              technological importance, assuming realistic interactions and dealingwith
              realistic conditions of density and temperature.  The main focus is on
              outstanding questions in the theory of nuclei and nuclear matter.  However, the
              research also crosses disciplinary boundaries into many-body problems in
              neutron-star matter, helium and other quantum liquids, strongly correlated
              electron systems, spin-lattice models, and lattice-gauge systems.  Much of the
              work involves application of two highly developed semi-analytic methods, namely
              the self-consistent Green's function approach and correlated-basis theory.  In
              addition to their quantitative accuracy and ab initio character, these methods
              are capable of providing information on important system properties associated
              with quantum coherence that are not yet accessible to brute-force computer
              simulation.  Two themes of current and enduring interest will be emphasized
              during the period of the grant, namely the contrasting roles of short- and
              long-range correlations in nuclear systems and the occurrence of quantum phase
              transitions in a rich variety of physical settings.  Within the latter theme,
              pairing phenomena are being studied with new techniques that promise unique
              insights into superfluidity in neutron stars, exotic nuclei, and liquid
              Helium-3 as well as high-temperature superconductivity.  The selection of
              problems and goals is motivated by the potential for impact facilities and
              observations of compact astrophysical objects from orbiting observatories. 
              Specific highlights of the project include (i) a comparison of pionic
              long-range excitations in nuclear matter and in finite nuclei to determine
              whether such correlations should be excluded in the calculation of nuclear
              saturation properties, (ii) an improved description of collective features of
              Oxygen-16 that will permit quantitative evaluation of spectroscopic factors for
              single-nucleon knockout and cross sections for two-nucleon removal, (iii)
              analysis ofexperimental data to deduce the properties of the highest-momentum
              protons in the nucleus (the "last missing protons"), (iv) application of
              incisive new methods of analysis and computation in pairing theoryto elucidate
              the superfluid phase diagrams of neutron matter, symmetrical nuclear matter,
              liquid Helium-3, and quantum chromodynamics, (v)exploration of the breakdown of
              Fermi-liquid theory, as manifested in fermion condensation and other
              rearrangements of single-particle degrees of freedom in strongly correlated
              systems, and (vi) investigation of mathematical and many-body aspects of
              quantum control relevant to laser control of chemical reactions and to quantum
              computation.  Continuing a long tradition, the preparation of graduate students
              for productive careers in teaching and research plays a central role in the
              program, essential to its success.


