Title       : Novel Wavelength Tailorable Heterojunctions For Infrared (IR)Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a0140434

Award Number: 0140434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Unil A. Perera   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project involves research on Heterojunctions concepts, for
              developing infrared detectors having potential applications in important areas
              such as spectroscopy in chemistry and biology, optical communication, plasma
              diagnostics, medical and biological imaging systems, and astrophysics. In the
              previous NSF program, emphasis was on QWIP detector formats for IR detection
              and the improvement of the performance by understanding transient effects. Here
              the development of tailorable solid state IR detectors for 3-30 um (100-10 THz)
              range (a technologically important region for a wide range of applications) is
              proposed. These detectors show better performance (responsivity, efficiency,
              operating temperature and D*) than the available detectors. Recent
              breakthroughs in THz generation have started bridging the gap between terahertz
              frequencies and the frequencies above and below. However, in THz detector
              development, extreme cooling capabilities are still a requirement as in
              superconducting hot electron bolometers. In order for the field to develop
              substantially, both source and detectors should develop at the same pace. The
              primary goal of this proposal will he to design and characterize detectors
              based on a novel concept [heterojunction interfacial workfunction internal
              photoemission (HEIWIP)] and optimize the devices for various frequency
              (wavelength) ranges. The work will include both experimental and theoretical
              effort studying the role of device parameters on the performance including
              doping, barrier parameters, layer thickness, resonance cavity effects and dark
              current issues. In collaboration with scientists at other universities
              (Cornell), national laboratories (NRC - Canada and U.S. Army Research Lab) and
              other institutes (Institute for Physics of Microstructures, Nizhny Novgorod)
              these problems will be addressed by exploring structures grown by different
              groups and different methods. Optimized designed features, well-doping
              profiles, energy-selective barriers, emitter/collector barriers, etc. will be
              modeled and incorporated.

The high national importance of this cutting-edge
              technology, and the close involvement of highly qualified staff and students at
              Georgia State with our collaborators will continue to impact significantly on
              advancing knowledge, and physics and engineering education, making a
              significant contribution to the nation's science and technology base by
              supplying the scientific community with leading young scientists. The
              collaborations will also ensure effective transfer to emerging high-tech
              applications both in commercial and government laboratories. The results of the
              proposed research will vastly improve the understanding of detectors and form
              the basis for the next generation of THz detectors.

