Title       : Recent Progress in Langlands Functoriality Conference, June 17-28, 2002, Luminy,
               France
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0140045

Award Number: 0140045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Goldberg goldberg@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Freydoon Shahidi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              To recognize and build upon recent advances within the Langlands program, a
              conference with the above title has been approved by CIRM for June 17-28, 2002.
               The investigators, who are among the organizers, feel that such a conference
              will serve to advance the careers of any young researchers who are in
              attendance.  We are proposing that ten junior people receive funds to support
              their participation in these proceedings.  The amount requested will be
              sufficient for travel as well as local expenses. In administering these funds
              we shall make every effort to support those who have no other means of
              funding.

The focus of this conference is to survey recent results within a
              branch of mathematics referred to as the Langlands program.  The underlying
              philosophy of this program is that there should be deep, and in some sense,
              fundamental connections between three seemingly disparate mathematical fields:
              Algebraic Geometry, Number Theory, and Harmonic Analysis.  The Shimura-Taniyama
              conjecture, which posited the equivalence of the theory of elliptic curves
              (geometric objects) and a certain classes of automorphic forms (analytic 
              objects with number theoretic applications) 
is just a ``simple'' (that is
              simple within the context of the program) example of what the Langlands program
              is expected to produce.  By proving this conjecture, Andrew Wiles delivered a
              long sought proof of Fermat's Last theorem, that for integers larger than 2,
              there is never a choice of two non-zero integers whose n-th powers sum to the
              n-th power of another non-zero integer. More general conjectures within the
              Langlands program can be stated with some more technical language, but have a
              similarity to the Fermat problem in that the proofs are much harder than the
              statements.  
The last several years have witnessed a series of remarkable
              breakthroughs in the Langlands program.  Wiles's work is one of many examples
              of these exciting results.  As outlined in the proposal, this is critical point
              in the history of the program, in that new  ideas must be found to build upon
              this recent momentum.  Thus, providing funding for relatively new researchers
              to attend a high level conference, such as the one being sponsored by CIRM,
              will serve the field, and the greater mathematical community greatly.  It is
              through such development that mathematics  continues to play a critical role in
              our society, both culturally and  technologically.

 

