Title       : Characterizing Keyhole Plasma Intensity and Absorption Mechanisms for Improving
               High Speed, Very Deep Penetration Laser Beam Welding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0140437

Award Number: 0140437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay F. Tu tujf@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to advance the fundamental understanding of
              high speed, very deep laser welding processes by estabishing a quantitative
              descriptions of the welding plasma. Laser material processing has rapidly
              replaced or complemented many conventional manufacturing techniques in
              production lines.  As industrial lasers become capable of delivering very high
              power, 10KW to 20KW, economically, they open up applications to weld sheet
              metals over 10 mm thick at speeds over 2 m/min.  One of the most critical
              issues in very high power laser welding is to control and overcome violent
              plasma generated during welding. Excess plasma can absorb, reflect, or refocus
              the laser beam resulting in insufficient penetration, burn-through, irregular
              weld shape, or contamination of the beam delivery optics. 

The PI has formed
              a close research collaboration involving Purdue University, Osaka University,
              Japan and Caterpillar, Inc. in an attempt to provide a more complete picture of
              plasma and its effect on laser absorption mechanism. The theoretical modeling
              will focus on characterizing plasma electron temperature and density inside the
              keyhole which is a capillary into the workpiece created by the laser beam. 
              Experiments will be  conducted mainly at Osaka University and affiliated
              industrial laboratories using state-of-the-art 2KW CO2 and 8KW diode-pumped
              Nd:YAG lasers. In addition to advancing the fundamental understanding of high
              energy laser interactions with materials, this collaboration will provide an
              effective opportunity to bring the experience and expertise in laser welding of
              the Osaka University group together with the academic research group at Purdue
              and the industry partner, Caterpillar. This will promote technology transfer to
              the industry as well as training for industry practioners.

