Title       : Vibrational Normal Modes of F-Actin: A Study on Inherent Filament Flexibility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1994   
File        : a9316109

Award Number: 9316109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Monique M. Tirion   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Ben-Avraham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9316109  Tirion  F-actin is composed of multiple copies of a globular protein 
              subunit, g-actin, assembled in a helical fashion.  We have examined  the
              low-amplitude oscillations, or normal modes, of this monomer  complexed with a
              nucleotide (ADP) and a cation (Ca+ +).  A video  animation of the computed
              oscillations of the monomer shows the  slowest modes to correspond to
              collective motions of domains; a  propeller-type twisting and a scissor-style
              opening-and-closing of  the large and small domains, as well as a rolling
              motion about a  stationary helix and a puckering movement in the large domain. 
               With a quantitative description of the inherent flexibility of the  monomer,
              and an atomic model of the structure of f-actin, we  propose to compute the
              natural, low-amplitude, oscillations of the  f-actin filament.  To this end,
              the normal modes of the monomer  will serve as generalized coordinates of
              motion, similar to the  dihedral coordinates of motion in the description of
              the modes of  the monomer.  The computation will allow us to study the nature
              of  coherent motions along the filament; to estimate the apparent  angular
              disorder, the amount of lateral slipping, and the  importance of internal
              hinges (the modes of the monomer) in  transmitting structural information along
              the f-actin helix.  By  refining the parameterization for the intermonomer
              (non-covalent)  bonds, we will study the contribution of the DNase I loop, and 
              subdomain 2 generally, to the stability and rigidity of the  filament.  The
              developed computational techniques will be useful  for studying the flexibility
              of other polymers, such as E. Coli  RecA, tubulin and DNA.   %%%  Biological
              macromolecules, such as proteins, exhibit a rich  repertoire of inherent
              flexibility; motions necessary for these  systems to perform their catalytic
              and enzymatic activities.  Due  to the small sizes of these systems (on the
              order nanometers), and  the very fast time-scale of the motions (ranging from
              nanoseconds  to picoseconds), structura l fluctuations are difficult to monitor
               experimentally.  We therefore rely on computer simulations and  visualizations
              to describe and understand the motions inherent to  macromolecules and
              macromolecular assemblies.  In particular, we  will study the natural,
              low-amplitude oscillations of a large  filamentous protein assembly, f-actin. 
              F-actin is an important  component of all eukaryotic cells, where it is
              involved in  structural support, cell transport and motility. Atomic, three- 
              dimensional models of f-actin have recently been proposed, which  permit a
              detailed, mechanistic examination of its structural and  dynamical
              characteristics.   ***
