Title       : GRGC: High Resolution (Century to Dacadal) Isotopic (18O and 13C) Record
               Preserved in Speleothem Calcite: Holocene Vegetation and Climate Change in the
               Midwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1995       
File        : a9316875

Award Number: 9316875
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luis A. Gonzalez luis-gonzalez@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark K. Reagan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,1571,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9316875  Gonzalez    The eastern portion of Iowa and surrounding states,
              Minnesota,  Wisconsin, Illinois, and Missouri are characterized by the presence
               of a well developed karst in which cave development is extensive.   We propose
              to study the stalagmite age and isotopic record in three  to four different
              "basins" in a region encompassing the karsted  southern edge of the Prairie
              Peninsula where the Holocene history  of the peninsula is virtually unknown. 
              This research compliments  current and proposed research by R. G. Baker and
              others that study  the palynological, plant macrofossil and soil record and
              attempts  to fill information gaps in the Holocene vegetation and climatic 
              history.  We propose to use the picomole to subpicomole resolution  of combined
              isotope dilution and mass spectrometry U-Th methods to  accurately date
              speleothems (stalagmites) and the carbon and oxygen  isotopic composition of
              calcite to extract a record reflecting  climatic change.  The goals of these
              research are; 1) Better define  the extent of the climate-induced vegetation
              change in the upper  Midwest utilizing delta 13C shifts and U-series dates; 2)
              Provide a  more precise and accurate timing of climate-induced vegetation 
              change in the region; 3) Attempt to generate a quantitative record  of
              temperature change at the decadal scale for the Midwest; 4)  Attempt to define
              rates of vegetation change and biomass turnover  over the cave areas using
              changes in the delta 13C; 5) Attempt to  resolve annual and possibly
              semi-annual changes in speleothem  calcite; 6) Provide a well dated history of
              changes in the southern  edge of the Prairie Peninsula; 7) Attempt to estimate
              precipitation  from growth rate changes.  Multiple speleothems will be analyzed
               within individual basins and caves to replicate and validate timing  and
              magnitude of isotopic shifts, growth rate changes, or the  presence of basin
              wide desiccation events.  Careful attention will  be given to cave selection
              with special emphasis in the  identificati on of evidence of desiccation and
              flooding events which  will diminish and validity and utility of isotopic
              analysis for  climatic inferences.  Attempt will be made to find study sites in
               close proximity to those being studies  by Baker and others so that  precise
              timing for vegetation changes can be provided.
