Title       : Mitochondrial Factors Associated with Pollen Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1994       
File        : a9316342

Award Number: 9316342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally A. Mackenzie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Mackenzie  Abstract  MCB-9316342  Recent research into the genetic interactions
              that occur between  the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes suggests that a
              number of  regulatory functions supplied by the nucleus are unique to higher 
              plants.  A useful class of mitochondrial mutants, giving rise to  the
              cytoplasmic male sterility phenotype, is available for the  study of these
              unusual nuclear-mitochondrial exchanges.  We plan to  take advantage of the
              useful features of the cytoplasmic male  sterility system in common bean to
              investigate the role of nuclear  genotype in the regulation of mitochondrial
              genome structure and  expression, with particular emphasis on the importance of
              these  intracellular events on the pattern of pollen development.  During  the
              course of our study, we plan to pursue two primary objectives.   We intend to
              further characterize the expression of a mitochondrial  sequence, pvs, that is
              associated with pollen sterility.  We have  developed a mitochondrial cDNA
              library that will allow us to  determine whether the expression of pvs involves
              transcript  splicing and to identify all encoded open reading frames 
              transcribed from this region.  We have available polyclonal  antibodies against
              the product of a co-transcribed second open  reading frame, pvs-orf98.  With
              the transcription information and  these antibodies, we will evaluate the
              temporal and spatial  expression of the sterility-associated mitochondrial
              segment.  This  will include transcription assays as well as
              immunocytochemistry.   Our second objective will be to evaluate the effects of
              two  different nuclear fertility restorer genes on expression of the pvs 
              sequence.  With information gained regarding transcription of pvs,  and with
              the use of anti-PVS antibodies, we will determine the  developmental and
              expressional consequences of introducing the two  different nuclear restorer
              genes.  Preliminary evidence suggests  that expression of pvs and its
              regulation are restricted to plant  reproductive tissues.  ***  Ou r final
              objective will be to use the information derived from  this study to identify
              additional nuclear genes that regulate  expression of the pvs sequence.  We
              have identified five plant  lines not previously studied by our lab, each
              containing nuclear  fertility restorer alleles.  Genetic and molecular analysis
              using  the information from this study will allow us to determine whether 
              these nuclear genes act by mechanisms distinct from Fr and Fr2, two  restorer
              genes already identified for CMS common bean.  %%%
