Title       : T Lymphocytes in Sharks: Adaptive and Non-adaptive Recognition Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1996       
File        : a9316468

Award Number: 9316468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Churchill McKinney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch of Med
	      Research Administration, RMSB
	      Miami, FL  33136    305/243-6232

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9316468  McKinney    Sharks evolved more than 300 million years ago, and have
              remained  a relatively successful species.  Animals live for more than 75 
              years in the wild and are not subject to overwhelming infectious  disease in
              captivity.  Yet, their immune system, by mammalian  standards, appears to be
              very limited.  Although antibody responses  occur and non-specific cytotoxic
              cells are present, there has been  no direct demonstration of T lymphocytes,
              which initiate and effect  cellular immunity in more evolved vertebrates.  The
              goal of this  project is to characterize T lymphocytes in sharks, if they
              exist.   Both cellular and molecular approaches will be taken.  Using  cognate
              antigens, antigen-reactive lymphocyte populations will be  identified in
              sharks.  In addition, the role of class II MHC  molecules in their reactivity
              will be investigated using class II-  specific cDNA and a monoclonal antibody. 
              Three molecules  characteristic of T lymphocytes will be used as tools to
              identify  and isolate T cells:  interleukin 2, perforin, and the T cell 
              receptor.  The major approach will use PCR amplification of  phylogenetically
              conserved gene sequences coupled with cell  fractionation.  Lastly, the
              cytotoxic lymphocyte-like cell will be  identified using electron microscopy. 
              This study will determine  whether T cells had evolved by the time of emergence
              of sharks, and  may begin to clarify the origins of the adaptive immune system.
                 %%%  Sharks evolved more than 300 million years ago, and have remained  a
              relatively successful species.  Animals live for more than 75  years in the
              wild and are not subject to overwhelming infectious  disease in captivity. 
              Yet, their immune system, by mammalian  standards, appears to be very limited. 
              Although antibody responses  occur and non-specific cytotoxic cells are
              present, there has been  no direct demonstration of T lymphocytes, which
              initiate and effect  cellular immunity in more evolved vertebrates.  The long
              term goals  of this laboratory are to  define and understand normal immune 
              function in the shark, to explore the natural history of the  vertebrate immune
              system, and to determine the immune functions  which permit this primitive
              vertebrate a relatively disease-free  existence even though it apparently lacks
              the complexity of the  mammalian host defense system.  The goal of this project
              is to  determine whether sharks have T lymphocytes and if so to identify  and
              characterize them.  The results of this research will  contribute to our
              fundamental knowledge of the natural defense  mechanisms of an organism that
              occupies an important place in the  evolution of immune function in vertebrate
              species.  Knowledge such  as this should contribute in the long term to our
              ability to  maintain biodiversity.  ***
