Title       : U.S.-Thailand Cooperative Research: Field Search in NE Thailand for Craters
               Associated with the Formation of the Australasian Tektites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  1995   
File        : a9316561

Award Number: 9316561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14940              (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Wasson jtwasson@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,5927,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9316561  Wasson    This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. John T. Wasson, 
              Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, University of  California, Los
              Angeles, to pursue with Professor Kaset  Pitakpaivan, Retired Director,
              Geological Survey Division,  Department of Mineral Resources, Thailand, for a
              period of 18  months, a program of research to locate and identify craters in 
              northeast Thailand associated with the formation of the  Australasian tektites.
               Field work will be conducted by  collaborating U.S. and Thai teams of about
              five members each.   Theory holds that tektites, glasses with high silicon
              dioxide  (60-80%) and high aluminum oxide (10-15-%) contents, are produced  by
              the melting of a well-mixed continental sediment such as shale  or soil during
              the impact of an asteroid or comet with the Earth.   Small tektites, usually
              weighing less than 300 g and in the shape  of disks, dumbbells, and teardrops,
              are believed to have been  formed by the solidification of a liquid while
              spinning in the  atmosphere.  Larger layered tektites are believed to have been
               formed on the ground from puddles of silicate melt.  Promising  research sites
              will be identified from remote sensing data  provided by the Thai
              collaborators.  Rock samples returned from  the field will be examined for
              shocked quartz by optical  microscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance, and by other
              techniques  to search for evidence of shock effects.    Confirmation of the
              impact origin of tektites requires the  identification of the crater or
              craters, but none has been found.   While most researchers are of the opinion
              that the tektites were  produced in a single crater with a diameter of about 10
              km or  more, the PI has proposed that additional smaller craters are  required
              to account for the layered tektites which are found  across a 1,200 km distance
              from Hainan Island through Cambodia to  Thailand.  The highest density of
              Australasian tektites is found  in the southeast corner of northeast Thailand. 
              The research  problem is  of great interest to geologists, and the present 
              project may do much to resolve the uncertainty in this field  regarding the
              formation of these tektites.  The PI and his  collaborators are highly
              respected researchers in the field of  this proposal.  This project is relevant
              to the objectives of the  East Asia and Pacific Program which seeks to increase
              the level  of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and their 
              counterparts in the Asia-Pacific region through the exchange of  scientific
              information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through  collaboration on
              problems of mutual benefit.  ***
