Title       : Cellular Mechanism of Auxin-Induced Proton Excretion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1996  
File        : a9316947

Award Number: 9316947
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Van Volkenburgh lizvan@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316947  VanVolkenburgh       The PI, Dr. Elizabeth Van Volkenburgh proposes to 
              investigate the cellular mechanism of auxin-induced proton  excretion in
              protoplasts from Avena coleoptiles and tobacco  plants.  The goal of this
              research is to determine how the  hormone, auxin, activates the ATP-dependent
              proton-pump in  plasma membranes of growing cells.  This hormone stimulates 
              cell enlargement in plants, and plays a fundamental role in  regulating
              development during the plants life cycle.  It is  hypothesized that this ligand
              initiates cascades of cellular  events that lead to pump activation, proton
              excretion,  membrane hyperpolarization, solute accumulation and cell  growth. 
              Electrophysiological techniques, primarily whole  cell patch clamp methods will
              be used to determine the  possible roles of suspected components of signal 
              transduction cascades leading to changes in ion flux across  the plasma
              membrane.  Cytoplasmic contents will be  equilibrated with the solution in the
              patch pipette  containing either substances that might initiate ion flux in 
              the absence of auxin, or substances that might block the  response to auxin. 
              The pH and pCa of the cytoplasm will be  manipulated to determine the effect of
              these ions of the  auxin response.  These experiments will provide direct 
              evidence concerning the role of cytoplasmic components in  auxin induced proton
              excretion.  %%%  Protoplasts will be isolated from the known auxin-sensitive 
              tissue, the Avena coleoptile, and from tobacco mesophyll  which reportedly
              shows an unusually rapid response to auxin.  Protoplasts will be characterized
              for responsiveness to  auxin by measurement of auxin-induced protoplasts
              swelling.  The relationship between swelling and proton excretion will  be
              determined.  The effect of auxin on the membrane  potential of tobacco leaf
              cells will be compared to that of  coleoptiles using microelectrode techniques.
               Both cell  types will be investigated further with patch clamp  experiments,
              and the results will confirm  or reject the  reports of auxin effects on
              tobacco protoplasts.  The  results of these experiments will serve as
              foundation for  further biotechnological manipulation of vascular plants.  ***
