Title       : Crystallographic Studies of Phosphoryl Group Transfer Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9316934

Award Number: 9316934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400110             (Estimated)
Investigator: Osnat Herzberg osnat@carb.nist.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316934  Herzberg  The three dimensional structures of proteins involved in
              phosphoryl  group transfer reactions will be determined by X-ray 
              crystallography and the reaction mechanism will be investigated  using a
              combination of crystallographic and site-directed  mutagenesis approaches.  The
              phosphoenolpyruvate:sugar  phosphotransferase system (PTS) studied during the
              previous funding  period will be investigated further.  The project will also
              include  another enzyme, pyruvate phosphate dikinase (PPDK), which shows 
              sequence homology  to Enzyme I of the PTS.  The PTS is a multi-  enzyme system
              that regulates sugar transport across the membrane by  a phosphoryl group
              transfer chain.  The crystal structures of two  of the PTS components, HPr and
              the IIA domain of the glucose  permease, have been determined by us during the
              last two years, and  much learned about the nature of the phosphoryl transfer
              reaction  between them at the atomic level.  The proposed work will draw on 
              these findings and test our understanding by engineering altered 
              phosphorylation specificity of the glucose IIA domain.  The  designed mutants
              will be analyzed biochemically, as well as by X-  ray crystallography, to
              understand the reasons for success or  failure.  The second part of the studies
              of the PTS is the  structure determination by MIR methods of the first protein
              in the  phosphotransfer chain, Enzyme I, which has been recently  crystallized.
               This will provide a complete structural basis for  future investigations of
              the soluble proteins of the system.  The  structure determination will be
              followed by inhibitor binding  studies to elucidate the mechanism of
              phosphorylation by  phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) and of phosphoryl transfer to
              HPr.  The  third part is the completion of the structural comparison between 
              the high and low salt forms of HPr, and the structure refinement of  the HPr
              mutant H15A.  This work is important for resolving a  current controversy
              related to the question whether phosphorylation  of HPr i s associated with a
              conformational transition of the  backbone.  Our data shows that this is not
              the case.  In addition  to work on the PTS, the scope of the project has been
              expanded to  include PPDK, a multi-domain enzyme that catalyses the inter- 
              conversion of PEP and ATP.  Its sequence homology to Enzyme I stems  from the
              common substrate, PEP.  PPDK catalyses a total of three  phosphoryl group
              transfers, one of which involves a pyrophosphate  intermediate, an
              unprecedented intermediate in enzymatic phosphoryl  transfer reactions.  The
              structure determination of the Clostridium  symbiosum enzyme will facilitate
              inhibitor binding studies and  mutagenesis work that probe the various
              mechanistic aspects of this  complex enzyme.  The nature of the conformational
              transition  associated with the phosphoryl group transfers, which is proposed 
              to be substantial, will be revealed by these structural studies.  %%%  The goal
              of the proposed studies is to gain better understanding of  the nature of
              regulation by protein phosphorylations, reactions  which are central to a wide
              range of biological processes.  A  combination of X-ray crystallography and
              protein engineering  techniques will be used to elucidate the three dimensional
               structure of the proteins, and to probe their function by binding  studies in
              the crystals, and by site-directed mutagenesis  approaches.  Two systems that
              utilize multi-phosphotransfer  reactions have been selected:  (a) A phosphoryl
              transfer chain that  mediates sugar uptake across the membrane in bacteria. 
              The three  soluble proteins involved, Enzyme I, HPr and Enzyme IIA will be 
              investigated. (b) The enzyme pyruvate phosphate dikinase that  catalyses the
              inter-conversion of two high energy compounds, ATP  and PEP, in some bacteria
              and plants.  ***
