Title       : Thioredoxin-Linked Changes in Enzymes and Storage Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1994   
File        : a9316496

Award Number: 9316496
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bob B. Buchanan view@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Buchanan  9316496  This proposal is based on recent evidence that the
              NADP/thioredoxin  system (consisting of thioredoxin h, NADP-thioredoxin
              reductase and  NADPH) functions in seed germination.  Thioredoxin specifically 
              reduces major storage proteins of cereals (gliadins and glutenins  in wheat),
              thereby enhancing their solubility and susceptibility to  proteinases, and
              reductively inactivates a disulfide protein that  inhibits alpha-amylase, an
              enzyme of starch degradation (barley  alpha-amylase/subtilisin inhibitor).  An
              extension of this research  has shown that the thioredoxin system strengthens
              the gluten  protein network, thereby enhancing bread quality, and inactivates 
              trypsin inhibitor proteins, thereby potentially improving the  nutritional
              quality of soybean.  A patent application covering  these findings has been
              filed, and precommercial development of  thioredoxin technology has commenced. 
              The proposed research  addresses fundamental new questions: (1) Does
              thioredoxin have  additional regulatory functions in the germination of cereals
              such  as wheat? (2) What changes in redox state and abundance does  thioredoxin
              undergo during germination? (3) Does the activity of  enzymes necessary for the
              reduction of thioredoxin change during  germination? (4) Does thioredoxin
              function in the germination of  other types of seeds such as soybean?.  The
              research will add to  our understanding of thioredoxin function, enzyme
              regulation and  seed germination.  %%%  This proposal stems from research in
              which we have presented  evidence for an enzyme system (the "thioredoxin
              system") that  functions as the earliest known signal triggering the
              germination  of cereals such as wheat.  The thioredoxin system functions by (1)
               activating storage proteins of the grain, thereby enabling their  use as a
              source of nitrogen and energy by the seedling, and (2)  activating enzymes
              required for the degradation of starch, thereby  enhancing energy production in
              the early phase of germination.  An  extension of  this research indicates that
              the thioredoxin system is  of technological value.  Application of the system
              to flour  strengthens gluten and enhances bread quality.  The thioredoxin 
              system also neutralizes plant protein inhibitors of animal  digestive enzymes. 
              Application of the thioredoxin system to foods  like soybean may enhance their
              nutritional quality.  A patent  application covering these uses has been filed,
              and precommercial  development of thioredoxin technology has commenced.  The
              current  project represents an extension of the fundamental aspects of this 
              research.  The experiments planned will show whether the  thioredoxin system
              has additional functions in wheat and whether  the system is important in the
              germination of other seed types.  ***
