Title       : Intracellular Signalling in Drosophila Embryonic Patterning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9316986

Award Number: 9316986
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Wasserman stevenw@pooh.swmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316986  Wasserman    Dr. Wasserman is studying a conserved signal transduction 
              pathway that regulates gene expression by controlling the  subcellular
              localization of a transcription factor.  Intracellular transduction of a signal
              received at the  surface of the Drosophila embryo promotes nuclear import of 
              the dorsal protein and thereby establishes the dorsoventral  body axis. In
              mammalian T cells, the homologous pathway  regulates transport of the
              transcription factor NF-kappaB  into nuclei in response to the cytokine
              interleukin-1. Dr.  Wasserman would like to understand where each of the known 
              proteins in the pathway resides and how these proteins  interact with one
              another to effect signal transduction. In  addition, he would like to isolate
              the genes for any  components in the pathway that have not been identified 
              previously. He will use antisera directed against pathway  proteins to
              determine their distribution in whole mount  embryo preparations and then
              examine whether that  distribution is affected by signal transduction or is 
              dependent on the presence of other proteins in the pathway.  He will also map
              the sequences responsible for localizing  each protein, so that he may assay
              the role of protein  localization in signaling. To investigate interactions
              among  components of the dorsoventral pathway, he will us the two-  hybrid
              screening system in S. cerevisiae. Pairs of  Drosophila proteins will be
              separately fused to either LexA  DNA binding domain or an acidic
              transcriptional activating  domain and assayed for their ability to promote 
              transcription downstream of LexA operator sites through  protein-protein
              interaction. He will also use the yeast  system to isolate mutations that
              prevent interaction between  the Drosophila proteins. Such mutations will then
              be  expressed in the context of the Drosophila embryo to assay  their effect on
              signal transduction. To identify additional  genes that might function in the
              dorsoventral signaling  pathway, he will screen for Drosophila prote ins that
              bind to  known pathway components. Using the yeast two-hybrid system,  he will
              investigate whether any of the five previously  identified proteins can
              interact specifically with other  proteins encoded by an embryonic cDNA
              library. Once he has  identified candidate clones in this screen, he will
              derive  data on sequence, map position, and, where possible, mutant  phenotype,
              to determine the likelihood that the encoded  proteins play a role in
              transducing the dorsoventral signal.  ***
