Title       : Regulation of Sister-Chromatid Segregation by the mei-S332, Grauzone, and Cortex
               Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1996     
File        : a9316168

Award Number: 9316168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Orr-Weaver weaver@wi.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Whitehead Inst Biomed Res
	      Nine Cambridge Center
	      Cambridge, MA  021421479    617/258-5215

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9316168  Orr-Weaver  The Drosophila gene mei-S332 has been shown to be
              critical for  maintaining sister-chromatid cohesion in meiosis because
              mutations  in the gene cause the sister chromatids to prematurely disjoin late 
              in the first meiotic division.  The defect in mei-S332 mutants is  manifest at
              a time when the sister chromatids are held together  only at their centromere
              regions, suggesting that the product of  this gene acts at the centromere or
              kinetochore to promote cohesion  in mitosis.  The molecular mechanisms by which
              mei-S332 controls  sister-chromatid cohesion will be elucidated by isolating
              the gene,  identifying the protein it encodes, and analyzing where that 
              protein is localized on the chromosomes.  The nature of unusual  sex-specific
              mutations will be determined.  Experiments will  investigate whether the
              mei-S332 protein is modified at the  metaphase-anaphase transition, the time at
              which sister-chromatid  segregation will be identified by their interaction
              with the mei-  S332 protein, using biochemical and genetic approaches.  Two 
              maternal effect mutants have been identified in Drosophila,  grauzone and
              cortex, that have the opposite phenotype as mei-S332  mutants.  In these
              mutants meiosis is arrested at metaphase II,  prior to the separation of sister
              chromatids.  These genes may act  in a regulatory manner to signal the
              metaphase-anaphase transition,  or they may promote the separation of
              sister-chromatids, possibly  by causing the loss of cohesion.  Genetic and cell
              biology  experiments will define the role of these genes in meiosis and 
              mitosis and their relationship to mei-S332.  The grauzone gene will  be
              isolated in order to understand the molecular basis of its  action in
              sister-chromatid segregation.  ***  The proper segregation of chromosomes is
              essential to ensure that  a complete complement of genetic information is
              transmitted to  progeny or daughter cells.  Prior to chromosome segregation a
              copy  of each chromosome is replicated.  During mitosis th ese sister 
              chromatids segregate to daughter cells.  In the first meiotic  division the
              sister chromatids migrate as a unit to the same pole  as the homologous copies
              of each chromosome segregate; the sister  chromatids do not segregate until the
              second meiotic division.  One  aspect of chromosome segregation that is poorly
              understood is how  the sister chromatids remain attached until their separation
              in  mitosis or meiosis.  Sister-chromatid cohesion is likely to be  mediated
              through structural functions that hold the sister  chromatids together and
              regulatory functions that time their  dissociation.  The control of
              sister-chromatid segregation will be  investigated using Drosophila as a model
              system because it affords  the combined approaches of genetics, cell biology,
              and molecular  biology.  %%%
