Title       : Structural Requirements for Protein Membrane Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1996  
File        : a9316891

Award Number: 9316891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross E. Dalbey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316891  Dalbey    The proposed research is focused on how N-terminal tails  of
              bacterial membrane proteins are transferred across the  membrane bilayer.  It
              is not known whether membrane  insertion of these tails will require SecA or
              SecY, central  components of the sec- machinery, or whether insertion can 
              occur spontaneously into the lipid bilayer.  Most proteins  with N-terminal
              periplasmic tails conform to the "positive  inside" rule with mroe positively
              charged residues on  cytosolic loops compared to periplasmic loops.  However, 
              subunit H of the photosynthetic reaction center of  Rhodobacter sphaeroides,
              which contains an N-terminal  periplasmic tail, violates this rule and has a
              highly  negatively charged region at the membrane/cytoplasm border.  The aims
              of this proposal are: 1), to determine whether  short N-terminal tails are
              inserted through the lipid or  through a proteinaceous complex within the
              membrane; 2), to  define the features (length, charge, or an amphiphilic 
              helix) within N-terminal tails that are needed to  translocate the tails across
              the membrane; 3), to examine  whether there is a certain length of the
              N-terminal tails  where the membrane proteins utilize the sec- machinery; and 
              4), to identify the determinants of the protein topology of  subunit H, a
              protein that has an orientation that disobeys  the "positive inside" rule.  A
              variety of approaches will be  used, including site-directed mutagenesis, gene
              fusions,  topological mapping, and biochemical studies with protein-  free
              liposomes.  %%%  This project focuses on the question of how bacterial 
              membrane proteins are inserted into membranes.  The delicate  architecture of
              biological membranes, and the fine-  resolution accuracy of placement of
              membrane proteins in  biological membranes, are absolutely critical to the
              proper  functioning of biological systems.   An understanding of the  "rules"
              that Nature uses to achieve this defined  architecture is in turn critical to
              the successful  exploitation of modern gen etic engineering and bioprocessing 
              technologies.   This research projects will result in better  understanding
              those rules of Nature concerning  how membrane  proteins achieve their final
              topology and location.  ***
