Title       : The Macroscopic Theory of Process Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9316572

Award Number: 9316572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231486             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Erik Ydstie ydstie@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Ydstie - 9316572    In systems engineering, computer science and
              mathematical physics, there is interest in the study of complexity, global
              system structures and macroscopic analysis.  This is a consequence of advances
              made in the stury of nonlinear dynamic systems.  The interest can also be
              motivated by industrial and societal needs - large systems must be modelled and
              controlled in the face of a changing environment and significant uncertainty. 
              Interconnections between systems become increasingly complicated and the
              decision making processes are integrated.    The aim of this research is to
              develop a macroscopic theory for process control.  The first law of
              thermodynamics will be used to develop a reduced complexity description of the
              process.  The second law will provide a mechanism for dissipation, and Lyapunov
              analysis will be applied to establish sufficient conditions for the existence
              of stabilizing controls.   This theory is valid far from equilibrium and it can
              be applied to a wide range of unsteady state control problems.  A constructive
              method for control system design will be derived.   The method can be used to
              decide which variables should be measured and manipulated, how nonlinear
              combinations of measurements can be used and how equipment and equilibrium
              constraints limit the control system performance.    The theory will be applied
              to two systems.  First, the idea of microscopic reversiblity will be used to
              develop a complete theory for the control of single stage, well mixed
              processes.   Second, this will be generalized to processes with several well
              mixed stages.    u    } cs, there is int erest in the study                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      !         !         !         !               F                        
                             V             V                                 R    Times   
              Symbol  " Helvetica    Chicago    Tms Rmn  " Helv  1 Courier  B Script  P
              London  P Athens  P San Francisco    Cairo  @ LosAngeles    Palatino    Mobile 
              & Arial Narrow    Book Antiqua    Bookman Old Style  & Century Gothic  5
              Courier New  F Monotype Corsiva    Monotype Sorts    Century Schoolbook   
              Wingdings    MT Extra   Apple LaserWriter II NT LPT3: pscript Apple LaserWriter
              II NT           U D             o d                 ,                          
                                                                        X   Z                
                                e   *                           @   @         @           "  
                        h      <   \ E \ E          O         A    ydstiabs93    Nichelle T.
              Coward Nichelle T. Coward                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
