Title       : Early Ordovician Greenhouse to Late Ordovician Glacial Transition: Effect on the
               Cyclic Sedimentary Record, Kentucky-Virginia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1996     
File        : a9316057

Award Number: 9316057
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181208             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Read jread@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9316057  Read  This proposal request funds to study superb outcrops and the 
              extensive core collections of Middle and Late Ordovician rocks in  Kentucky so
              that we can compare them with the Early Ordovician  strata, to search for the
              stratigraphic evidence of possible change  from low amplitude eustasy of Early
              Ordovician greenhouse times to  possible higher amplitude eustasy developed
              during Late Ordovician  Gondwana glaciation.  We presently have a very large
              data base on  Early Ordovician and Middle Ordovician rocks characteristic of 
              greenhouse conditions, that will serve as a basis for comparison  with the
              younger units.  We propose to log bed-by-bed the later  Middle and Late
              Ordovician carbonates and shales which appear to  have developed on
              storm-dominated ramps, documenting any peritidal  and shallow to deeper water
              subtidal cycles, their degree of  lateral continuity, their stacking patterns
              and relation to  depositional sequences, and bounding surfaces.  We will also 
              examine the cycles for evidence of:  1. long term climate change  and 2.
              evidence of short term emergence (including paleosols,  erosion surfaces,
              negative departures of stable isotope profiles,  and meteoric cementation); all
              these might become more pronounced  if glacially driven sea level amplitudes
              increased into the Late  Ordovician.  Using detailed regional cross sections of
              cyclic  lithofacies, we will define depositional sequences, and document  the
              relationships and timing of bounding surfaces to the tectonic  history of the
              foreland basin, including peripheral bulge  development and prograding clastic
              rocks along the tectonically  active proximal margin.  Finally, we will
              computer model the cycles  and the depositional sequences to better constrain
              the roles of  tectonism, low- and high- frequency eustasy, and sediment supply.
                Defining the stratigraphic signature of greenhouse to global  glacial
              conditions appears to hold the key for a future more  detailed global climate
              subdivision of the Phanerozoic than h as  been attempted.
