Title       : Physically-Based Simulation of the Evolution and Flow Characteristics of Natural
               Fracture Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9316099

Award Number: 9316099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63987              (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Pollard dpollard@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9189,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9316099  Pollard       An understanding of the geometry of natural fracture
              networks  is essential for accurate interpretations of the geologic past and 
              for meaningful models of seismic wave propagation and fluid flow  and transport
              through fractured formations.  Further, the degree to  which the geometry of
              natural fracture systems can be accurately  simulated directly affects our
              ability to deal with such important  problems as waste isolation, ore deposit
              genesis, natural resource  recovery and aquifer remediation.       This
              proposal seeks to increase our understanding of the  parameters which control
              the geometric characteristics of natural  fracture networks by incorporating
              well established physical  principles into models for the generation of natural
              fracture  networks.  Previous investigations have demonstrated that 
              physically-based fracture network simulators (PBNSs) can accurately  predict
              the evolution of experimentally generated fracture sets.   This proposal seeks
              to identify appropriate values for the  parameters which control the growth of
              natural fracture networks by  comparing simulated networks to those observed on
              outcrops.   Knowledge of the appropriate values for these growth parameters is 
              essential for accurate simulation of natural fracture network  geometries.     
               This proposal also seeks to apply the PBNS in an analyses of  the conductivity
              of simulated networks in order to discern the  critical geometric parameters
              controlling fluid flow within  fractured formations.  The identification of
              these geometric  parameters, when combined with the appropriate growth
              parameter  values, will result in more accurate interpretation of, and for, 
              fluid migration through fractured formations.        Models for natural
              fracture networks which result from this  work will improve our understanding
              of how fracture systems are  created by, and influence other, geologic features
              and processes.   This understanding will enhance our ability to accurately
              model  many important sub-sur face processes and, as such, has application  to
              many problems in earth science.  Such problems include, but are  not limited
              to, seismic inversion, natural resource recovery and  structural mechanics of
              the earth's crust.
