Title       : Role of Cellulose and Protein in the Dictyostelium Spore Coat
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1994   
File        : a9316897

Award Number: 9316897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geza Hrazdina                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134928             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher M. West westcm@anatomy.med.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316897  West      Dictyostelium spore coats contain about one -half 
              polysaccharide, including cellulose and galuronan, and about  one half protein,
              including at least 7 different protein  species.  The coat is assembled in two
              phases.  First,  preformed coat proteins and the galuran are secreted,  forming
              a layer at the cell surface.  Most of the proteins  exchange between
              neighboring spores, indicating that  assembly occurs extracellularly after
              secretion.  One  protein. is unique in that it is not exchanged, as if it 
              anchors or initiates coat assembly.  During the second phase  cellulose
              accumulates, and the proteins organize further.  Cellulose has traditionally
              been considered to be the  primary determinant of structure and function.  The
              PI  proposes two hypotheses to investigate the relative  contribution of
              proteins and polysaccharides.  Hypothesis I  suggests that proteins play a
              critical role in initiating  assembly of the coat so that the absence of
              essential groups  of proteins  such as SP86, the protein part of the coat will 
              not assemble or will not be attached to the plasma membrane,  and what
              accumulates will not be positioned correctly.  Hypothesis II suggests that in
              the absence of cellulose, a  microscopically detectable and sedimentable
              protein  pseudocoat will still form..  The proposal has three aims:  1) To
              disrupt the gene for the spore coat protein SP87; 2)  To isolate the gene for
              the spore coat protein SP86 and  disrupt it; and 3) To disrupt the gene for
              UDPGPP2, and to  investigate the effect of this gene on coat structure.  %%% 
              Spore coats and other extracellular matrices protect  enclosed cells from
              unfavorable environments.  Although the  constituents of a number of these
              matrices is partially  known,  knowledge of how this parts fit together, how
              their  proportions are regulated, and how protection occurs is  largely derived
              by speculation.  The spore coat of the  cellular slime mold Dictyostelium is a
              good system to study  matrices at a molecular level, becaus e it is simple it
              can  be isolated in bulk and in high purity, the genes for a  number of its
              proteins and enzymes for polysaccharide  synthesis have been cloned and can be
              disrupted, and good  assays exist for the composition. structure and function
              of  the coat.  The results of this investigation will enhance  our knowledge
              about the assembly of walls in plant and  fungal cells.  ***
