Title       : Phosphatase Regulation of Plant K+ Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1998     
File        : a9316319

Award Number: 9316319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292620             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah M. Assmann sma3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316319  Assmann       Application of Ca++ to plants prevents stomatal  opening.
               One effect of Ca++ is to inactivate the inward K+  channels that mediate K+
              uptake.  Evidence has recently been  obtained that this activation results from
              Ca++ activation  of a phosphatase analogous to animal protein phosphatase 2B. 
              The proposed whole-cell patch clamp experiments will test  whether the protein
              phosphatase 2B acts " downstream" of  abscisic acid and/or activated G-protein
              and/or  inositoltriphosphate in a signal transduction pathway.  Parallel
              biochemical studies utilizing guard cell  protoplasts and guard cell protein
              extracts will determine  whether abscisic acid, Ca++ and protein phosphatase 2B
              cause  dephosphorylation of the same protein, as would be predicted  if protein
              phosphatase 2B is a second mesenger for the  abscisic acid response. 
              Microinjection experiments on  intact guard cells will address the possibility
              that protein  phosphatase 2B is, alternatively or in addition, a second 
              messenger for other environmental signals that prevent  stomatal opening.  %%% 
              Stomatal guard cells are vital control points in the  regulation of
              photosynthetic CO2 uptake and transpirational  water loss.  Stomatal appertures
              are regulated by osmotic  swelling and shrinking of guard cells, driven by ion
              fluxes  across the guard-cell plasma membrane.  Several reports  implicate Ca++
              as one of the second messengers for abscisic  acid, a plant hormone that
              prevents stomatal opening and  also reduces inward K+ current.  In this
              proposal  complementary electrophysiological, cell biological and  biochemical
              experiments are outlined to test the hypothesis  that environmental signals
              which regulate stomatal opening  act on inward K+ channels via a phosphatase 2B
              homologue.  Results from these studies will provide insight into the  second
              messenger systems utilized by plants to translate  environmental signals into
              alterations of ion channel  activity.  Results will also be of interest to
              environmental  physiologis ts who would like to understand how the external 
              and internal environments affects stomatal apertures and  thereby impacts plant
              productivity.  ***
