Title       : Glucose-regulated mRNA turnover in Saccharomyces Cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1996     
File        : a9316011

Award Number: 9316011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Immo E. Scheffler ischeffler@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316011  Scheffler  When yeast cells (S. cerevisiae) are switched  from a
              nonfermentable carbon source (e.g. glycerol, YPG medium) to a fermentable
              carbon source (glucose, YPD medium), the expression of a substantial number of
              genes is repressed.  This phenomenon, "glucose repression", has become a model
              system for studying the adaptation of cellular metabolism to a changing
              environment.  Past studies have focused wither on the promoter elements of
              relevant genes and on the transcriptional activators/factors, or on the
              elements in the signaling pathway connecting the sensing of extracellular
              glucose levels to nuclear events.  A foremost phenomenon is the repression of
              mitochondrial biogenesis, and in our studies the expression of the genes for
              succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) has been emphasized.  SDH is part of complex II
              on the inner mitochondrial membrane and links the Krebs cycle to the electron
              transport chain.  They have revealed that while the expression of the iron
              protein (p) and flavoprotein (Fp) genes is regulated at the transcriptional
              level, by far the most significant mechanism appears to be the regulation of
              the stability of the Ip and Fp mRNAs: in glycerol their half-life is < 60 min,
              while in glucose it is less than 5 min.  The analysis of a variety of chimeric
              transcripts has shown quite conclusively that the 5' untranslated region
              (5'UTR) of Ip mRNA is the dominant cis-acting element in establishing the
              differential stability of the transcript in YPG and YPD.  Furthermore, the 5'3'
              exonuclease encoded by the XRN1 gene appears to play a prominent role in the
              degradation of Ip and Fp mRNA's induced by glucose.  The emphasis on the
              importance of the 5'UTR in mRNA turnover is unusual, but it may provide
              significant clues to the coupling of translation and turnover.  This system
              represents a unique model system for studying mRNA turnover in yeast; under
              some conditions the transcripts are extremely short-lived, and we can
              manipulate the conditions to control the turnover rate over a b road range.  
              It is likely that many mRNAs encoding mitochondrial proteins are subject to the
              same control mechanism.  Advantage is to be taken of the powerful methods of
              yeast genetics to isolate mutations in which this control mechanisms is
              perturbed.  The Ip 5'UTR will be combined with heterologous coding sequences to
              create chimeric reporter genes, and these will be used to devise selections or
              screens based on the differential expression of the reporter gene product in
              YPD or YPG.  Such mutations will identify genes and their gene products which
              may play role in mRNA turnover in general, and specifically in the control of
              the stability of a subset of mRNAs by the carbon source.  It remains to be
              established whether a short-lived mRNA is stabilized i glycerol, or whether the
              addition of glucose induces a factor which promotes access to the 5'
              exonuclease.  What is the signaling mechanism?  The phenotype of the expected
              mutants will distinguish between the two possibilities.  The mutations will
              also identify genes which can be cloned, and the encoded proteins can be
              characterized.  The relatively short 5'UTR (44-59 nucleotides) of Ip mRNA will
              also be modified by in vitro mutagenesis to learn about its unique features
              which may single out transcripts encoding mitochondrial proteins for this
              regulatory mechanism.  It is important to emphasize that mitochondrial
              biogenesis involves the coordinate expression of hundreds of nuclear genes ( as
              well as genes encoded by the mitochondria genome), and the regulatory mechanism
              being explored here must have a broad applicability.  Thus, the almost
              identical behavior of the Fp and CYC1 mRNAs must also be related to sequences
              within these transcripts.  %%%  The control of mRNA stability is being
              recognized as a prominent post-transcriptional mechanism for controlling gene
              expression during the cell cycle, during development, and in response to
              external signals.  However, knowledge of the sequence elements in the mRNAs,
              and the trans-acting factors involve d in the degradation its control, is still
              sketchy.  It is hoped that genetic approaches in yeast will contribute
              information which will also aid in our understanding of this phenomenon in
              other organisms.  ***
