Title       : Shapes of Protein-Macromolecule Complexes by Solid-State Nuclear Magnetic
               Resonance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1996  
File        : a9316161

Award Number: 9316161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob Schaefer schaefer@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316161  Schaefer  Dr. Schaefer proposes new solid-state NMR experiments to
              determine  the structures of big, non-crystallizeable complexes of proteins 
              with macromolecules, including protein-protein cross-links in  insect and plant
              cell walls, protein-oligosaccahride complexes, and  protein-DNA complexes.  The
              versatile rotational-echo double-  resonance (REDOR) and transferred-echo
              double-resonance (TEDOR)  analytical methods that he has developed in the last
              five years for  the accurate determination of internuclear distances (and hence
               geometry and structure), and the new combined TEDOR-REDOR and  TEDOR-TEDOR
              methods which he proposes to develop, are techniques  that are directly
              applicable to the analysis of big complexes.  The  sensitivity of solid-state
              NMR for this kind of work already has  been established in practical
              applications on big proteins.  Dr.  Schaefer now routinely performs long-range
              distance measurements on  one umole of a 50-kD labeled protein complex embedded
              in an ionic  glass, an amount of protein commonly used for conventional 
              solution-state 1H multi-dimensional NMR.  %%%  The practical applications of
              REDOR solid-state NMR could lead both  to new science and new biotechnology,
              the latter including the  biorational design of pesticides, herbicides, and
              drugs.  Dr.  Schaefer plans to examine by NMR protein-protein cross-links in 
              insect and plant cell walls, protein-oligosacahride complexes, and  protein-DNA
              complexes.  These complexes cannot be analyzed by other  techniques because
              they are too big or are part of too  heterogeneous a matrix.  He also proposes
              to use atomic force  microscopy (AFM) to characterize the global structure of
              some of  the same protein complexes that we examine by NMR.  Protein  complexes
              anchored on the undulations of glassy polymer surfaces  will be examined by
              non-perturbative "tapping-mode" AFM.  The  combination of NMR and AFM
              experiments on the same protein systems  will provide an internal calibration
              (a self consistency check) and   should lead to new structural insights.  ***
