Title       : Folding Mechanism of a Conus Toxin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9316065

Award Number: 9316065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Goldenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Goldenberg  9316065  The goal of this project is to determine what factors
              influence  the folding and disulfide-bond formation of a small peptide toxin 
              found in the venom of a marine snail, Conus magus.  The venoms  are composed of
              small peptides, typically 12 to 30 residues long,  most of which contain two or
              three disulfide bonds. Although  these molecules are much smaller than typical
              globular proteins,  they fold into well-defined three-dimensional structures.
              The  small size of the peptides and the high degree of sequence  variability
              suggests that information in addition to that found  in the mature toxin may be
              necessary to direct correct folding.  This information may be provided by
              recently identified  pro-peptide sequences. Folding may also be influenced by
              the  enzyme protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) or other cellular  components. 
              In order to determine the role of the pro-peptide  sequence, the in vitro
              folding and disulfide formation of the  mature toxin will be compared with that
              of the pro-toxin form  produced in E. coli. Comparing the rates of folding and
              the  distribution of intermediates with and without the pro-peptide  will
              indicate whether the pro-peptide can increase the rates of  productive folding.
              The folding kinetics of the mature and  pro-toxin forms will be examined in the
              presence of PDI. An in  vitro translation-translocation system will also be
              used to study  the folding of the toxin precursor. Comparison with results 
              obtained in vivo will indicate how well the in vitro reactions  mimic folding
              in vivo and may reveal the presence of other  components of the endoplasmic
              reticulum that are important for  folding.  %%%  Proteins are long linear
              molecules made up of amino acids linked  together by chemical bonds. In this
              regard, proteins resemble  synthetic polymers such as nylon.  Proteins differ
              from most  other polymers, however, because the chains are able to fold into 
              unique three-dimensional structures. The shape of the folded  protein and the
              distribution of  chemical groups allow  proteins  to interact with other
              molecules with high specificity.  Most  proteins known to fold into a unique
              structure contain a minimum  of about 50 amino acids. A very interesting
              exception to this  generalization has been discovered in peptides found in the 
              venoms of snails in the genus Conus. This genus is made up of  about 500
              species of cone-shaped marine snails. These snails are  predators and are able
              to paralyze their prey by injecting highly  potent venoms containing mixtures
              of small peptides. These  peptides are typically only 12 to 30 amino acids
              long, but have  been shown to be folded into well-defined three-dimensional 
              structures. The different peptides interact strongly and  specifically with
              components of the nervous system. The high  specificities of these interactions
              have made the Conus toxins  powerful tools for studying the molecular
              components of the  nervous system. The goal of this project is to determine
              what  molecular and cellular factors enable the Conus peptides to fold  into
              their specific conformations, in spite of their small size.   In addition to
              helping to elucidate the details of this unusual  biological system, the
              results of these studies may be useful in  the design and production of
              artificial peptides  with novel biological activities.  ***
