Title       : Microanalytical Studies of Extraterrestrial and Terrestrial Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9316328

Award Number: 9316328
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ghislaine Crozaz gcw@howdy.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernst Zinner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Bernatowicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9316328  Crozaz  Several projects mostly based on the results obtained with 
              prior NSF support are planned:   a) comprehensive  microanalytical studies of
              interstellar SiC and graphite in  order to elucidate their formation in stars,
              b) trace  element and isotopic studies of eucrites and ureilites to  clarify
              the origin of these meteorite classes, and c) trace  element measurements of
              Siberian eclogites to understand  their formation and relationship to similar
              samples from  their kimberlites.  Extreme differences in isotopic  composition
              compared to solar system material identify SiC  and graphite grains from
              primitive meteorites as  circumstellar dust.  Isotopic measurements of these
              grains  combined with astrophysical theory are contributing new  insights into
              nucleosynthesis and stellar evolution.  Future  work on interstellar  grains
              from separates prepared at the  University of Chicago will emphasize the
              complete  understanding of the dust, and to this end will combine ion 
              microprobe isotopic measurements with determinations of  trace  element
              abundances as well as detailed physical  studies in the TEM.  To better
              understand the petrogenesis  of eucrite and ureilite meteorites, minor and
              trace element  abundances (particularly rare earth elements) will be 
              determined by in situ ion microprobe measurements.  A study  of Siberian
              eclogites will be extended to additional  xenoliths assumed to have sampled a
              wide range of depths  within the mantle.  Eclogite inclusions present in some
              of  the Siberian diamonds will also be analyzed to determine  whether the
              diamonds are cogenetic with the eclogite hosts.
