Title       : Molecular Genetics of Root Hair Development in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1997   
File        : a9316409

Award Number: 9316409
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Schiefelbein schiefel@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316152  McClure    In solanaceous plants with gametophytic self-incompatibility
              (GSI), S-allele pollen recognition and rejection are controlled by a single
              genetic locus, the S-locus.  Pollen is rejected if its single S-allele matches
              either S-allele in the pistil.  Information is communicated about the allelic
              constitution of the S-locus in the sporophyte and in the gametophyte.  The
              products of the S-locus are the carriers of this information.  The S-locus
              products expressed in the pistil comprise a series of allelic ribonucleases,
              the S-RNases.  It has been shown that each S-allele encodes a different
              S-RNase.  However, it is not known how these differences lead to S-allele
              specific recognition.  No S-allele specific product has yet been identified in
              the male gametophyte (i.e., pollen-S).  This proposal seeks to develop an
              understanding of the molecular basis for S-allele specific recognition and
              rejection.  The first step will be to develop a system in which S-allele
              specific recognition and rejection can be manipulated.  Cloned S-RNases from
              Nicotiana alata will be used to introduce new allelic specificity into
              transgenic plants.  Using the expression system, it will be possible to
              manipulate cloned S-RNase sequences in vitro and assess the effects on
              pollination behavior in vivo.  The choice of plant materials for use as
              transgene recipient is very important.  The transformation efficiency of N.
              alata is too low to generate the necessary number of transformants.  Therefore,
              transgenes will be introduced into a plant such as Nicotiana plumbaginifolia
              and crossed into N. alata or into a transformable F1 hybrid ca pable of
              S-allele specific pollen rejection.  In either case, the inherent specificity
              of the SI reaction provides excellent controls.  Dr. McClure will look for the
              introduction of, or modification of, a new specificity in the transgenic
              plants.  Identification of the pollen-S product is a major goal of this
              proposal.  A combined genetic and molecular biological approach is proposed.  A
              large F2 population segregating for two S-alleles has been generated.  Plants
              homozygous for a given S-allele will be pooled.  Using these pooled materials,
              subtractive hybridization and differential mRNA display will be used to
              identify a putative pollen-S cDNA.  GSI has the potential to help understand
              plant cell-cell communication.  To realize its potential, GSI research must
              move into an analytical phase.  This proposal aims to accomplish this by
              developing a system for direct analysis of the allelic specificity function of
              S-RNases, and identifying the product responsible for allele specific
              recognition in pollen.  ***  409Schiefelbeintio                $       W   `  
              e   g                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      g                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                !                        F                         The
              morphogenesis of plant cells is primarily achieved by the precise control of
              cell division and cell enlargement.  The long-term objective of the proposed
              work is to analyze the contribution of single genetic loci to the complex
              process of plant cell development.  The model system being studies is the
              formation of root hairs in Arabidopsis thaliana.  The complete process of
              Arabidopsis root hair development can be subdivided into several phases: (1)
              root epidermal cell fate specification, (2) the initial formation of a bulge at
              the base of the epidermal cell, (3) the expansion of the hair by tip growth,
              and (4) the maturation of the hair and cessation of tip growth.  In this
              proposal, genes will be studied that appear to influence two of these stages of
              root hair cell development (cell expansion and cell fate specification).  In
              one part of the proposed research, genes affecting root hair cell expansion
              will be cloned and characterized by virtue of their association with the T-DNA
              of Agrobacterium.  Several root hair mutants have already been identified from
              T-DNA populations of Arabidopsis.  One of these possesses a mutation in a
              previously-characterized locus, RHD3, and it has been used to isolate putative
              genomic and cDNA clones of the RHD3 gene.  In the other major part of the
              proposed research, genes that affect cell fate specification in the root
              epidermis will be characterized and identified.  The Arabidopsis TTG gene,
              which affects trichome formation and anthocyanin production, has been shown to
              influence the fate of root epidermal cells.  Normally, only epidermal cells in
              particular positions will form hairs.  However, it ttg mutant plants, all root
              epidermal cells appear to form hairs, and in Arabidopsis plants that
              ectopically express a putative TTG homolog (the maize R gene), no hairs form on
              the root epidermal cells.  These studies will servt to define genes that affect
              two of the basic processes that occur d uring the formation of root hair cells,
              and they will provide insights into the molecular mechanisms that control cell
              development in plants.homologueserve      W             W                      
                        R   W      !     !     !     !     !     !      g         g     (   
              Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                                             
                                                  &   z       P   R   U   W     e            
                                                $               W       -       `            
                                      "             h      c   d   d        k             +  
                   Dana Brigham Dana Brigham                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
