Title       : Low Noise Coupling and Signal Detection for EPR Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1997      
File        : a9316827

Award Number: 9316827
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $692225             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gareth R. Eaton geaton@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                       Recent developments in the methodology and  instrumentation of electron
              paramagnetic  resonance (EPR) hold promise of revolutionary enhancement of 
              applications of EPR to  problems in materials science, chemistry, physics,
              biology,  and medicine. One key missing  development is an improvement in the
              coupling of the sample-  containing EPR resonator to  the microwave source and
              detector systems.        In preliminary work basic engineering design equations
               were developed for three types  of coupling of an EPR resonator to a
              transmission line:  mutual inductive coupling, series  capacitive coupling, and
              parallel capacitive coupling. These  equations form an accurate  basis for
              developing new, more optimum resonator coupling  techniques. Focusing on the 
              versatile loop-gap type~of EPR resonator (LGR), a test  fixture was built in
              which were  tested prototype LGR coupling networks. The tests verified 
              predictions of the equations  and demonstrated that a varactor (a
              voltage-variable  capacitor) diode is a useful tuning  element in LGR coupling
              networks. A prototype, novel,  general-purpose resonator has  been constructed.
              It yields useful low-temperature spectra  of metalloenzymes.        The design
              equations and the results of tests conducted  on prototype resonators and 
              coupling devices point directly to the specific aims of the  proposed grant
              period. It is now  proposed to build a resonator at S-band (2-4 GHz) 
              implementing the predicted best  low-noise coupling scheme, and incorporating
              design features  that facilitate ease of sample  change and flexibility for
              both continuous wave and pulsed  EPR. The design will be  consistent with
              convenient variable temperature (including  cryogenic) operation. GaAs 
              varactor diodes and field-effect transistor amplifiers will  be used, since
              they have good  performance at cryogenic temperatures. Several of the  critical
              microwave components can  be located in close proximity to the sample on a
              small  circuit board, which itself can be  cooled alo ng with the sample and
              resonator, with the goal of  the lowest thermal noise in  the electronic
              components. Careful attention to materials  properties will result in a robust 
              and usable assembly.        The second phase of the work will be the
              development of  a totally new approach to  integrating the resonator, coupling
              assembly, means for  tuning, and the microwave bridge  element all on or close
              to a small hybrid microwave subs~te.  Such a hybrid microwave  bridge circuit
              will have lower losses resulting in improved  EPR signal-to-noise ratio at 
              room temperature. By cooling the circuitry to cryogenic  temperatures there is
              potential for  a large increase in signal-to-noise.        Extension to the
              X-band (9 GHz) region, which requires  making everything smaller  and building
              it more precisely, will begin during the  proposed grant period. The use of 
              varactor tuning will be demonstrated at X-band, and a test  fixture will be
              built to obtain  practical operating experience with the sensitivity of the 
              resonator and coupling system  performance to various construction features.
