Title       : Problems in Membrane Biophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1995   
File        : a9316256

Award Number: 9316256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harden M. McConnell harden@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316256  McConnell  This research explores the use of lipid/protein monolayers
              at the  air-water interface to study specific cell membrane-monolayer  membrane
              interactions.  Fluorescence microscopy is the principle  technique used to
              carry out these studies.  Membrane proteins of  special interest are the class
              II molecules of the major  histocompatibility complex (MHC).  These proteins
              are  incorporated in lipid monolayers.  The interaction between MHC-  peptide
              complexes and peptide specific, MHC restricted T-cell  hybridomas is studied by
              fluorescence microscopic observations of  suitably labeled
              protein/peptide/lipid, taking advantage of  recently developed knowledge
              concerning physical properties of  lipid monolayers.  Apposition of T-cells to
              the monolayers is  carefully controlled using cell suspension methods. 
              Detection of  the binding of specific MHC-peptide complexes in monolayers to a 
              population of T-cells is a potential novel technique leading to  the
              identification of reactive T-cells clones, and to the  eventual sequencing of
              T-cell receptor genes.  %%%  The surface of the earth is approximately 75%
              air-water  interface.  In spite of the potential ecological and  environmental
              significance of this interface, remarkably little  is known about physical and
              chemical events that are interfacial.   This is simply because so few molecules
              are present at this  interface at any one time.  Research in the laboratory of
              Harden  McConnell at Stanford has brought about a breakthrough in  technique
              for observing chemical, physical and biological events  at this interface. 
              This technique has involved the application  of fluorescent molecular probes
              that bind only to the  interface--they are not soluble in water, nor do they
              vaporize  into the air.  These probes permit the observation of events at  the
              interface using a simple fluorescence optical microscope.   Many phenomena
              (phase transitions, chemical reactions, and  bacterial motion) can be observed
              at the air-water interface by  their eff ects on the spatial distribution of
              these fluorescent  molecules.  Literally dozens of new observations have been 
              reported in the scientific  literature using these techniques.  A  study
              currently being initiated in this laboratory concerns the  effects of
              electrical fields on biological cells.  ***
