Title       : Function of Conserved Structures in Related Coliphage RNA's
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1996     
File        : a9316501

Award Number: 9316501
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann B. Jacobson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Jacobson  9316501  Dr. Jacobson and coworkers study the shape of large genomic
              RNAs  in the RNA coliphage system. These molecules have a dual  function: they
              carry the genetic information coding for viral  genes; and in addition,
              hydrogen bonding between distant regions  of the molecules regulate viral
              growth, controlling both the  expression of viral proteins and viral RNA
              replication. The  detailed conformation of the molecules will be studied in
              order  to understand the structural mechanisms used in regulation.  Electron
              microscopy is used as a primary tool. This method allows  one to see large
              structural features in the RNA and to measure  changes in the shape and
              relative stability of these structures  in mutant RNAs that have been created
              by genetic engineering. The  structural changes that are observed can be
              correlated with  changes in the growth patterns of mutant viruses.  The current
              work focuses on the conformation of genomic RNA from  coliphage QB. Dr.
              Jacobson's studies demonstrated for the first  time that the molecules contain
              two types of structural domains.  One type is unusually stable; the other is
              highly variable and  can switch between alternative conformations.  Both types
              of  structures appear to be utilized in the regulation of viral  protein
              synthesis. Two of the stable domains appear to suppress  translational
              initiation of viral proteins. In addition, stable  domains may serve as
              structural anchors (much like door hinges)  that limit the formation of
              alternative structures in the  variable regions of the molecule. In addition,
              computer modeling  will be used to understand RNA conformation. A new method
              was  developed to detect likely stable structures as well as likely  variable
              regions of an RNA molecule. The results obtained by  modeling are consistent
              with electron microscopic studies with  both native and mutant RNAs. The new
              approach is of general  interest and will be used by investigators in many
              disciplines.  %%%  Many unanswered questions remain about the rol e of RNA
              structure in  gene regulation in RNA coliphages.  These can now be addressed
              with  modern methods of analysis.  Answers to these questions will  provide
              fundamental insights into the properties of all large mRNA  molecules, and are
              therefore relevant in understanding mechanisms  governing growth, evolution,
              and the regulation of gene expression  in disease causing plant and animal
              viruses.  ***
