Title       : Theoretical Methods for Dissecting Electron Tunneling Interactions in Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1998     
File        : a9316186

Award Number: 9316186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose N. Onuchic jonuchic@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Onuchic  9316186  The focus of this research program is to understand under 
              precisely what conditions electron tunneling in proteins can be  explained by
              our Pathways approach, and when explicit multiple  pathways become important. 
              To address these questions we will  implement our new suite software package,
              Greenpath, which is  based on our SGF method.  Using the new software, we will
              be able  to develop the concept of pathway families.  In the limit that  the
              protein can be represented by a few independent pathway  families, a reduced or
              simplified representation of the protein  (renormalized protein) will become
              possible for ET.  This  renormalized protein will include all the relevant
              details of the  protein environment that will influence the value of TDA.  In
              the  opposite limit, when large interferences between families of  pathways
              become important, the description of the  protein  environment as a homogeneous
              medium will become valid (details of  the structure will not be important). 
              The simple model of TDA  decaying exponentially with the direct distance
              separation  between redox sites will become valid.  (However this decay  factor
              may vary for different proteins.)  This strategy will be  tested on
              ruthenium-modified cytochrome c and myoglobin.  A  larger number of proteins is
              necessary to understand why some  structures may be understood with a few
              pathway families while  other ones may not.  Therefore, myoglobin and
              cytochrome c are  just the first two proteins to be analyzed using the proposed
               procedure.  Several other proteins will also be analyzed:   cytochrome b5 and
              cytochrome C551 (alpha-helical), plastocyanin  and azurin (beta-barrel), and
              HiPIP, for example.  If successful,  this strategy will become a very powerful
              tool for the study and  design of new electron transfer proteins.  The method
              will be  expanded to investigate electron transfer in protein complexes.  
              Studies will focus on the following complexes:  cytochrome c-  cytochrome c
              peroxidase and photosynthetic  reaction center-  cytochrome c.  Also, since the
              tunneling matrix element is  affected by protein internal water molecules and
              protein motions,  improvements to the method will be included to account for
              these  effects.  %%%  Electron transfer processes are ubiquitous in chemistry,
              biology  and physics.  In biology, these reactions occur in the key 
              bioenergetics processes of photosynthesis and oxidative  phosphorylation.  The
              rates of these reactions are  extraordinarily sensitive to the chemistry of the
              bridge coupling  the sites for the electron.  Our main goal is to create a 
              theoretical framework for understanding these electron transfer  reactions and
              for designing new molecules with performance  analogous to the biological ones.
               The success of our model and  software Pathways opens up new methods for
              designing electron  transfer proteins.  The power of predicting experimental
              data  speaks for itself.  To the best of my knowledge, Pathways is the  only
              theoretical approach for biological reaction rate design,  other than
              qualitative structural (steric effects)  or  electrostatic calculations.  Yet,
              this is just the starting  point.  We are very optimistic about the growth of
              new  increasingly sophisticated methods following on the developments  of
              Pathways.  These new techniques will give rise to a new  software package
              Greenpath  that is the main goal of the proposed  work.  Using these new
              techniques, we will be able to answer  several existing questions not addressed
              by Pathways (or other  methods).  We will also create a powerful set of tools
              to  interpret native biological electron transfer systems and to aid  in the
              design of new electron transfer proteins.  ***
