Title       : Tree-Ring Dating of Alpine Fault Earthquakes, New Zealand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1994      
File        : a9316428

Award Number: 9316428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112355             (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Bull   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9316428  Bull       Tree-ring dating of recent New Zealand earthquakes is an 
              important and robust test of lichenometric dating of regional  rockfall events
              caused by earthquakes.  Lichen studies indicate  that about 240 years have
              elapsed since the most recent Alpine  fault earthquake, and a magnitude 8.1
              +0.2 earthquake may soon  rupture about 400 km of the Alpine fault. 
              Verification of  lichenometry earthquake dates would substantiate needs for 
              establishing seismic monitoring and earthquake hazard reduction  programs.     
               Small patches of trees of the same age are typical of the rain  forest between
              the Alpine fault and the seacoast in the South  Westland district of New
              Zealand.  Partial destruction of the  forest canopy by disturbance events, such
              as windstorms or  earthquakes, allows a new generation of rimu (Dacrydium 
              cupressinum) to germinate and fill the gaps.  Regeneration patches  appear to
              be larger on poorly drained (seismically sensitive) soils  of the Okarito
              Forest near the coast where we will make our study.   Increment-core estimates
              of germination times for even-age patches  of rimu in two plots at a more
              inland site were made by Boyd  Cornere.  His M.Sc. thesis suggests that both
              plots had a canopy-  opening disturbance approximately 250 years ago.  These
              preliminary  results encourage us to accurately date forest-disturbance events 
              through study of times of abrupt increase or decrease of tree-ring  widths.    
                The proposed dendrochronology data set is a by-product of  selective logging
              in the Okarito sustained-yield forest.  An  initial phase of our work will be
              to develop a model for spatial  patterns of tree populations ages.  This
              important task will allow  us to make predictions about the way seismic shaking
              will affect  tree-ring width.  About 1000 mature rimu trees will be harvested
              in  1993 and 1994.  Departures from a standard chronology for rimu will  be
              identified by anomalous patterns of tree-ring widths and  densities.  We will
              select, prepare, and analyz e 200-300 sections  from basal rimu trunks for
              dates of canopy-opening events, tree-  damage events, and germination dates. 
              Year 1--Stand dynamics study  of the Okarito Forest; sample collection,
              shipping, and  preparation; measuring and cross-dating of tree rings.  Year 2--
               studies and dating of tree-ring anomalies, analysis of data, and  report
              preparation.       Our project has multidisciplinary significance.  Comparison
              of  tree-ring and lichenometric dates should validate a new surface-  exposure
              dating method that is more accurate than radiocarbon  dating.  We expect to
              determine the earthquake recurrence intervals  for the adjacent Cook and
              Brunner segments of the Alpine fault, and  the times since the most recent
              earthquakes.  This will test the  hypothesis that a major earthquake is
              imminent.  An ecological end  product will be improved understanding of forest
              dynamics and  microenvironments, and forest-landforms relations.
