Title       : Analysis of Phosphorylation of Elongation Factor 1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1995  
File        : a9316900

Award Number: 9316900
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jolinda A. Traugh jolinda.traugh@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9316900  Traugh  A.  Specific Objectives of the Proposed Work  Elongation factor
              1 (EF-1) is found in multiple forms in the  cytosol as EF-1, EF-1.valyl-tRNA
              synthetase, and EF-1a.  In rabbit  reticulocytes, all of the valyl-tRNA
              synthetase is associated with  about 15%  of the EF-1.  Recently, all four
              subunits of EF-1 have  been shown to the phosphorylated.  The   and   subunits
              are  phosphorylated b y casein kinase II  in vitro and in reticulocytes  and
              Artemia salina (1-4).  EF-1  ,  ,  , and are phosphorylated by  protein kinase
              C in reticulocytes treated with phorbol ester and in  vitro (1-5).  The  
              subunit is phosphorylated in Xenopus oocytes  and in vitro by the cell division
              control  kinases p34cdc2 (4,6).   The   subunit has also been shown to be
              modified by methylation and  addition of glycerolphosphorylethanolamine (7). 
              Phosphorylation of  EF-1 by protein kinase C, both in vivo and in vitro,
              stimulates the  rate of elongation by 2-3 fold (1,5).  In these studies, we
              propose to analyze, at the molecular level,  the two complexes of EF-1 with
              regard to structure, function, and  regulation.  The role of phosphorylation by
              protein kinase C and  casein kinase II on complex formation and individual
              subunits of  EF-1 expressed in E. coli.  The latter will enable us to determine
               the effects of site-specific mutations of the individual  phosphorylation
              sites on GDP/GTP exchange activity and on the rate  of elongation.    The
              following specific aims will be carried out.  1.  Analyze the effects of
              phosphorylation of EF-1 valyl-tRNA  synthetase an EF-1 by protein kinase C and
              casein kinase II on  elongation activity and on GDP/GTP exchange activity.   
              2.  The  ,  , and   subunits  of EF-1 from rabbit have been cloned  and
              expressed in E. coli.  Site specific mutations of the  individual
              phosphorylation sites for protein kinase C and casein  kinase II sites will be
              prepared.  3.  EF-1 will be reconstituted from the subunits expressed in E. 
              coli and the effects of the site-specific mutations  on activity  will be
              analyzed.  %%%  Elongation factor 1 (EF-1) is one of two proteins factors
              involved  in the elongation phase of protein synthesis. EF-1 consists of four 
              subunits.  EF-1  forms a ternary complex with GTP and aminoacyl-  tRNA and
              correctly positions the tRNA on the ribosome.  GTP is the  energy source for
              this step and is cleaved to GDP and phosphate;  the GDP remains bound to EF-1
              and must be exchanged for GTP by EF-  1    for EF-1  to function again.  All
              four   subunits of EF-1 have been shown to be phosphorylated.   Three different
              protein kinases have been shown to phosphorylate  EF-1; casein kinase II,
              protein kinase C, and the cell division  control kinase p34cdc2.  The   and  
              subunits by protein kinase C  and the   subunit by the cell division control
              kinase.  In these studies, we propose to examine phosphorylation of EF-1 by 
              casein kinase II and protein kinase C.  The effects of  phosphorylation on
              elongation activity and on GDP/GTP exchange  activity will be examined.  The
              subunits of EF-1 from rabbit have  been cloned and expressed in E. coli.  These
              subunits will be  reconstituted and the effects of phosphorylation on
              individual  subunits will be determined.  Site specific mutations of the 
              individual phosphorylation sites will be prepared.  Subunits  containing these
              mutations will be reconstituted and analyzed and  the effects of the
              site-specific mutations on activity will be  determined.  ***       .
