Title       : Initiation of Sex Determination in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9316826

Award Number: 9316826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claire R. Cronmiller crc2s@VIRGINIA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Cronmiller  93-16826  The broad goal of the proposed work is to understand the
              molecular  basis of the initiation phase of the sexual pathway choice in 
              Drosophila. Toward this goal, the following questions will be  asked: 1) Where
              and how do mutational changes in the da gene  disrupt wild-type function?  Six
              new ethyl-methane-sulfonate  induced alleles which have been characterized
              genetically will be  sequenced to find functional domains within the da gene
              product.  2) What regions of Da are required to activate sex-specific Sxl 
              expression in vivo? This approach will use in vitro mutagenesis,  combined with
              a transient in vivo functional assay, to complement  the domain mapping by
              mutational analysis. 3) Two newly identified  putative regulators of sex
              determination, E(2)AX and E(2)P239 will  be genetically characterized in regard
              to the null phenotypes,   temporal and spacial expression, function, genetic
              roles during sex  determination and the molecular mechanisms of function.  %%% 
              A central problem in the study of eukaryotic development is how the  growth and
              differentiation of an organism is genetically  programmed.  Sex determination
              in Drosophila has proven to be a  successful model system for elucidating basic
              biochemical  mechanisms that mediate the initiation and subsequent maintenance 
              of commitments to a variety of cellular differentiation pathways.   For
              example, the genetic and molecular analysis of the Initiation  of the sex
              determination pathway has uncovered connections between  this system and such
              diverse processes as dosage compensation,  neurogenesis, oogenesis, mammalian
              immunoglobulin gene expression  and oncogenic transformation.  These
              connections have emerged, in  part, as a result of the characterization of the
              daughterless gene.   The daughterless (da) gene has multiple roles in
              development, one  being the control of the cellular choice between male and
              female  developmental pathways.  In this capacity, the gene functions  together
              with the molecular constituents o f the pathway  initiating  signal, the X/A
              ratio.  Maternally supplied daughterless product is  required as a positive
              activator of the gene, Sex-lethal (Sxl),  which acts as a binary switch gene
              for the sex determination  pathway.  The product of the daughterless gene is a
              DNA-binding  protein, a member of the basic-helix-loop-helix family:  The da 
              protein (Da) appears to be a transcription factor.  The ultimate  goal of the
              work outlined in this proposal is to understand the  molecular basis of the
              Initiation stage of sexual pathway choice in  Drosophila.  One approach toward
              this goal will include a  functional "dissection" of the daughterless protein,
              one of the key  molecules in this genetic regulation.  An in vivo bioassay will
              be  developed to identify functional domains within the structure of  Da, and
              the molecular lesions responsible for a collection of  genetically defined
              hypomorphic and null alleles of the gene will  be identified.  A second
              approach will consist of the  characterization of other loci that may function
              in the early  regulation of sex determination. Two recently identified genes
              will  be analyzed to determine their genetic and molecular contributions  to
              sex determination.  ***
