Title       : Vertebrate Breathing: Control by pH and Gas Oscillations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9316434

Award Number: 9316434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stacia A. Sower                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168734             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Furilla   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Med Sci
	      G P O Box 5067
	      San Juan, PR  00901    809/753-5353

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9316434  Furilla      Blood passing through the lungs of air-breathing animals
              picks up  oxygen and eliminates carbon dioxide on inspiration when fresh  air
              enters the lung, but not on expiration.  This process leads  to rhythmic
              oscillations in the level of oxygen and carbon  dioxide in the blood leaving
              the lungs.  Recently, a relationship  was shown between these oscillations and
              respiration in mammals.  Moreover, the rate at which carbon dioxide rises may
              be an  adequate stimulus in controlling breathing frequency.  These 
              oscillations are not only influenced by breathing, but are also  altered by the
              state of activity (e.g. exercise).  Therefore, it  is the purpose of this study
              to examine the role of lung and  blood gas oscillations on the control of
              breathing in birds and  reptiles.  These studies are possible because birds and
              snakes  (unlike mammals) have lungs that are open at both ends, making it 
              possible to pass air through the lung in one direction only.  Oxygen and carbon
              dioxide  will then be made to oscillate in the  airstream.  The effect of these
              oscillations on nerves that  respond to these gases will be recorded.  In
              another series of  experiments, the effect of the oscillations on breathing
              will be  examined.  A computer will monitor breathing and control gas  mixing;
              therefore, the animal can control the gas mixer with its  breathing movements,
              thereby controlling its blood gases.  The  contribution of nerves monitoring
              lung and blood gases as well as  interactions between these nerves and the
              central nervous system  will be examined.  This information will provide
              insight into the  influence of these dynamic processes in air-breathing
              animals,  including mammals.  ***
