Title       : Regulation of Coronatine Biosynthesis in Pseudomonas Syringae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1996   
File        : a9316488

Award Number: 9316488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol L. Bender cbender@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316488  Bender  The phytotoxin coronatine is an important virulence factor in 
              several plant disease caused by  the phytopathogenic bacterium,  Pseudomonas
              syringae.  Fundamental to understanding the molecular  basis of pathogenicity
              is to determine how virulence factors are  modulated.  Furthermore, the
              organization and function of genes  required for biosynthesis of bacterial
              phytotoxins has not been  intensively studied.  A long-term goal of this
              research is to  elucidate mechanisms that regulate coronatine production in P. 
              syringae.  Coronatine has a unique structure derived from two  unrelated
              biosynthetic pathways:  coronafacic acid (CFA) is of  polyketide origin,
              whereas coronamic acid (CMA), is an  ethylcyclopropyl amino acid derived from
              isoleucine.  These two  components are substrate feeding studies and
              complementation  analyses have been used to identify regions of the coronatine 
              biosynthetic cluster required for CFA and CMA production and the  coupling
              (cpl) gene which catalyze amide bond formation.  In this  work, Northern blot
              analyses and transcriptional fusions will be  utilized to elucidate the
              transcriptional organization and  regulation of the coronatine biosynthetic
              cluster.  The nature of  the cpl promoter and factors which regulated the cpl
              transcript  will be identified using primer extension, deletion analysis and 
              gene fusions.  The protein product of cpl will be overproduced and  used to
              study its enzymatic activity in vitro.  The results will  significantly enhance
              our understanding of the regulatory controls  and biosynthetic mechanisms
              employed in phytotoxin production.   This work is part of an international
              collaborative effort to  understand the mode of action, biosynthesis, and
              regulation or  coronatine production in P. syringae.    %%%  This research will
              aid in our understanding of how some bacteria  are able to infect plants while
              others cannot.  ***
