Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Development and Application of Advanced Numerical Methods
               to Outstanding Problems in Experimental Shock Waves Geophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1994      
File        : a9316529

Award Number: 9316529
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elbridge G. Puckett egpuckett@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1317,9139,9263,GLCH,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9316529    Puckett       The central focus of this research is the design and 
              development of a numerical method for modeling complex nonlinear  wave
              interactions in condensed matter at high pressures and  temperatures.  This
              numerical method is based on a collection of  numerical algorithms that have
              been used with great success to  model shock wave refraction in gases.  The
              extension of these  algorithms to problems involving condensed matter involves 
              modifications to accommodate a realistic condensed phase equation  of state,
              the inclusion of realistic constitutive relations for  modeling the strength
              effects in solids, and the development of  robust algorithms for describing
              vacuum states.  It is also  expected that a better understanding of wave
              phenomena in  condensed matter gained from the numerical computations will 
              contribute to the understanding of the wave structure that  characterize
              solutions of more general systems of hyperbolic  conservation laws than those
              that govern the flow of gases, and  thus aid in the mathematical analysis of
              these equations.  This  work includes extensive experimental validation of
              numerical  results.       This project is concerned with developing advanced 
              computational methods, based on methods originally developed to  address
              aerospace and defense problems, and applying the new  methods to important
              problems in the geosciences.  These new  computational methods are used to
              design an improved experimental  technique for determining sound speeds in
              geophysical materials.  Accurate knowledge of sound speeds is important for the
              correct  interpretation of seismic data.  The new computational methods are 
              also used to model the effect the impact of a large comet or  asteroid would
              have on the Earth.  Such impacts have been proposed  to explain the mass
              extinction of species (e.g., dinosaurs) and  may have been responsible for the
              periodic loss of the Earth's  early atmosphere.  The specific nature of such
              large shocks, and  the consequences they might hav e for the atmosphere and the
               Earth's magnetic field, are addressed.  The use of the  computational methods
              to model explosive volcanic eruptions is  also investigated.  The computational
              methods developed in this  research will have a wide range of applications in
              other areas of  science and technology.
