Title       : Genetic Dissection of Insulin Receptor Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1995     
File        : a9316997

Award Number: 9316997
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Todd M. Martensen                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heimo Riedel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Joslin Diabetes Center
	      One Joslin Place
	      Boston, MA  022155397    617/732-2429

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  MCB-9316997  Riedel  We will use the insulin receptor as a bait to
              identify the unknown  proteins with which it interacts and to define the roles
              of these  interactions in insulin signaling.  We will employ the two-hybrid 
              system as a sensitive and systematic molecular genetic screening  strategy in
              yeast which exploits selection for amino acid  prototrophy as a result of
              bait-library interaction and permits the  screening of the full complexity of
              large mammalian expression  libraries.  In Preliminary studies we have
              demonstrated that the  two-hybrid system can detect the interaction between the
              insulin  receptor and its known substrate IRS-1 as well as two novel IRS-1- 
              interaction proteins in vivo which also associate with IRS-1 in  vitro.  Based
              on these results we will systematically identify and  isolate the coding
              sequences of all proteins that directly interact  with the insulin receptor and
              that are detectable with this  sensitive strategy.  In particular, we will
              prepare various fusion  plasmids with catalytic insulin receptor domains as
              baits and  screen two mammalian cDNA expression libraries for interacting 
              expression products.  Positive clones will be isolated, purified  and confirmed
              by genetic tests, and cDNA inserts encoding  interacting proteins will be
              sequenced and compared with protein  sequence databases for motifs which may
              suggest potential  functions.  cDNAs lacking sequence homology to known
              proteins will  be used as probes to identify and isolate complete protein
              coding  sequences.  Novel interacting proteins and known proteins  identified
              with this strategy will be tested for their role in  insulin signaling by
              biochemical analysis including cDNA  expression, co-purification, in vitro
              binding, co-  immunoprecipitation, cross-phosphorylation assays, and by other 
              approaches, which will be specifically designed for the candidate  proteins
              once they have been identified.  The knowledge gained is  expected to further
              elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved  in  insulin signaling and peptide
              hormone action in general.  ***  One of the most thoroughly studied models of
              peptide hormone action  is insulin with its receptor, both of which are key
              elements in  signaling pathways in virtually any mammalian cell.  Despite great
               progress in the elucidation of the structure and function of the  insulin
              receptor, many of the detailed mechanisms, the sequence of  events and the
              components involved in the transmission of the  insulin signal from the cell
              surface to the nucleus remain unclear.   While a number of direct insulin
              receptor substrates are suggested  by the complex cellular responses to insulin
              only one, IRS-1 has  been characterized in detail at the molecular level.  Part
              of the  reason has been the lack of systematic and efficient strategies to 
              identify other unknown direct insulin receptor targets by molecular  cloning
              techniques.  Using a new, simple and systematic molecular  genetic strategy,
              the two-hybrid system, we have demonstrated that  protein interactions
              involving the insulin receptor and its  substrate IRS-1 can be detected and
              that IRS-1 interacting target  protein sequences can be identified and
              isolated.  With this  approach we will screen mammalian cDNA libraries for all
              cellular  targets of the insulin receptor that are detectable.  The screen is 
              expected to identify and isolate sequences of known proteins with  a previously
              unknown role in insulin action as well as novel  cellular targets of the
              insulin receptor.  Once they are identified  these components will be
              characterized by biochemical analysis for  their role in the insulin signaling
              pathway.  This strategy is  expected to identify the elements in the insulin
              signaling pathway  stepwise to the final destination in the cell nucleus.  The 
              elucidation of these steps should critically contribute to our  understanding
              of the molecular mechanisms involved in peptide  hormone action.  %%%
