Title       : Self-Incompatibility in Nicotiana Alata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9316152

Award Number: 9316152
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. McClure mcclureb@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316152  McClure    In solanaceous plants with gametophytic self-incompatibility
               (GSI), S-allele pollen recognition and rejection are  controlled by a single
              genetic locus, the S-locus.  Pollen  is rejected if its single S-allele matches
              either S-allele  in the pistil.  Information is communicated about the  allelic
              constitution of the S-locus in the sporophyte and in  the gametophyte.  The
              products of the S-locus are the  carriers of this information.  The S-locus
              products  expressed in the pistil comprise a series of allelic  ribonucleases,
              the S-RNases.  It has been shown that each S-  allele encodes a different
              S-RNase.  However, it is not  known how these differences lead to S-allele
              specific  recognition.  No S-allele specific product has yet been  identified
              in the male gametophyte (i.e., pollen-S).  This  proposal seeks to develop an
              understanding of the molecular  basis for S-allele specific recognition and
              rejection.  The  first step will be to develop a system in which S-allele 
              specific recognition and rejection can be manipulated.  Cloned S-RNases from
              Nicotiana alata will be used to  introduce new allelic specificity into
              transgenic plants.  Using the expression system, it will be possible to 
              manipulate cloned S-RNase sequences in vitro and assess the  effects on
              pollination behavior in vivo.  The choice of  plant materials for use as
              transgene recipient is very  important.  The transformation efficiency of N.
              alata is too  low to generate the necessary number of transformants. 
              Therefore, transgenes will be introduced into a plant such  as Nicotiana
              plumbaginifolia and crossed into N. alata or  into a transformable F1 hybrid
              capable of S-allele specific  pollen rejection.  In either case, the inherent
              specificity  of the SI reaction provides excellent controls.  Dr. McClure  will
              look for the introduction of, or modification of, a new  specificity in the
              transgenic plants.  Identification of the  pollen-S product is a major goal of
              this proposal.  A  combined genetic and molecul ar biological approach is 
              proposed.  A large F2 population segregating for two S-  alleles has been
              generated.  Plants homozygous for a given S-  allele will be pooled.  Using
              these pooled materials,  subtractive hybridization and differential mRNA
              display will  be used to identify a putative pollen-S cDNA.  GSI has the 
              potential to help understand plant cell-cell communication.  To realize its
              potential, GSI research must move into an  analytical phase.  This proposal
              aims to accomplish this by  developing a system for direct analysis of the
              allelic  specificity function of S-RNases, and identifying the  product
              responsible for allele specific recognition in  pollen.  ***
