Title       : Chemoreception of aromatic acids by Pseudomonas putida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1996  
File        : a9316257

Award Number: 9316257
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline S. Harwood   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1305,9104,9183,9197,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Harwood  9316257  Aromatic compounds are abundant in the environment as major 
              components of plant material (lignin) and as toxic by-products of  industrial
              activities.  Although we know something about how these  compounds are
              degraded, not much is understood about how bacteria  detect them in the
              environment.  Several genera of motile bacteria,  including Pseudomonas, have a
              strong attraction to aromatic acids.   We will study the molecular basis for
              chemotaxis to 4-  hydroxybenzoate and related aromatic acids in P. putida. 
              Recently,  a gene encoding an apparent chemoreceptor for these compounds was 
              cloned and sequenced.  The aromatic acid receptor is a membrane  protein with a
              structure different from other bacterial  chemoreceptors that have been
              described.  We will attempt to define  the chemosensory signaling domain of the
              aromatic acid  chemoreceptor by metagenesis, and then asses a possible role for
               methylation and/or phosphorylation of the protein in chemosensory  signal
              transduction/adaptation. The genetic organization of the  region contiguous to
              the chemoreceptor gene will be determined, and  the regulatory requirements for
              chemoreceptor gene expression will  be defined.  Finally, genes that are
              required for P. putida  chemotaxis will be cloned and sequenced as a means of
              putting the  aromatic acid chemoreceptor "in context" with the central 
              chemotaxis machinery of this bacterium.  Since the chemoreceptor  protein for
              aromatic acids appears to have distinctive structural  characteristics, our
              studies will broaden current concepts about  mechanisms of bacterial
              chemoreception and sensory transduction.   %%%  Many environmental pollutants
              have a benzene ring as the main  structural constituent and are classified as
              aromatic compounds.   Bacteria have the ability to remove aromatic compounds
              from nature,  and there is great interest in harnessing this ability to develop
               new methods for bioremediation to use in toxic waste management.   To
              effectively use bioremediation, we need to  understand how  bacteria degrade
              aromatic compounds, and we also need to know how  bacteria sense the compounds
              in nature in the first place.  This  project will examine the behavioral
              responses (chemotaxis) of  bacteria to aromatic compounds.  The bacteria we
              study are motile  and can detect these compounds as food in their surroundings.
               Our  main experimental plan will be to develop mutants that don't sense  the
              compounds and then determine what is missing in the cell that  is responsible. 
              Once identified, we will clone and analyze the  gene(s).  If we can understand
              the mechanism(s) responsible for  attraction to aromatic compounds (which
              involves one or more  receptors), then it may be possible to devise strategies
              to recruit  bacteria to bioremediation sites.  ***
