Title       : A Novel Building Material for Panelized Construction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0229631

Award Number: 0229631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nasim Uddin nuddin@eng.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fouad H. Fouad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Uday K. Vaidya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,1624,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              FRP/AC sandwich panel with a core of lightweight high performance Aerated
              Concrete (AC) (e.g., Autoclave Aerated Concrete, Cellular Concrete etc.) and
              face sheets of Fiber Reinforced Plastics (FRP) composites has the potential to
              be an excellent energy absorbing construction material plus it is relatively
              inexpensive and available over much of the globe. Consistent with the recent
              interests in high performance, zero maintenance civil infrastructures, the
              proposed project will investigate the potential of FRP/AC sandwich panels (that
              are cost effective, long lived, and lightweight), and concepts will be
              developed and feasibility demonstrated for construction of low cost building
              structures using the panel. FRP/AAC sandwich components will also be durable in
              severe environments including corrosion and against ballistic impact. The
              results of the program has the potential to provide commercial and residential
              building that is more energy efficient and cheaper than traditional
              construction. It also has some properties, in addition to those mentioned
              above, that may be of interest to the military and others responsible for
              protecting lives. The unique contribution of the effort will be the application
              of cost-effective VARTM (Vacuum Assisted Resin Infusion Molding process)
              processing using innovative FRP hardening schemes with recently developed
              glass-and carbon fiber architectures and vinyl ester as well as epoxy resin
              types. The proposed effort will also eliminate traditional hand lay-up
              processing techniques which prove to be expensive and time-wise inefficient,
              and simultaneously advanced the state of the art of usage of advanced
              composites in civil infrastructure.

This project, a first step towards the
              long-term goal, will address five fundamental queries: 1) Investigate
              cost-effective manufacturing of FRP/AC sandwich panels with damage tolerant
              architectures and new resin systems. 2) Perform material characterization and
              structural testing of FRP/AC sandwich panels through a comprehensive
              experimental program. The experimental studies are expected to provide an
              understanding of the (a) failure mechanisms of the proposed sandwich panels,
              (b) the strength, energy absorption, strain and modulus characteristics, (c)
              the role of the fiber-to-AC concrete interface, and (d) failure of the
              composite layers in the sandwich structure. 3) Develop concept and demonstrate
              the ballistic response of affordably produced sandwich panels that have promise
              to harden/strengthen without adding weigh penalty, and are cost-effective. 4)
              Understand the structural response of such structures through analytical
              simulations. 5) Develop modular systems to show how the FRP/AC panels can be
              used for a variety of types of building construction. Erection, assembly, and
              connections will be provided to clearly show how the construction can handle
              the material in the field. The proposed effort will explore the tangible
              benefits for wider application in structural engineering application areas.
              Finally, it was demonstrated in our previous study that the impact response of
              two proven materials- i.e., carbon fiber reinforced composite (CFRC) and glass
              fiber reinforced composite (GFRC), in conjunction with engineered Polycarbonate
              (PC) thermoplastic exhibits desirable failure mechanisms through indention of
              the Polycarbonate accompanied by delaminating at Polycarbonate-laminate
              interface rendering minimal damage to the laminate. The dynamic tests included
              ballistic impact loading conditions using a 30-cal sabot assisted projectile
              and high strain rate loading using compression Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar
              (SHPB). The rationale was that by providing a PC facing, the damage resistance
              of the composite structure could be enhanced, as the PC can absorb energy, with
              minimal weight penalty, and can serve the purpose of a sacrificial layer, that
              is easily repairable or replaceable. 

Two graduate students and three
              undergraduate students will be involved in the project. They will be exposed to
              a wide range of technological issues crossing the boundaries of different
              engineering disciplines such as materials science, structural design, computer
              simulations, infrastructure analysis, hazard mitigation, and a variety of
              fabrication techniques at the University of Alabama (Birmingham) campus. The
              REUs will also organize demonstration for the high school students at the
              university high school on the UAB campus. The PI has had prior rewarding
              experiences working with REUs from diverse groups. 

