Title       : Upper Triassic Terrane Faunas and Their Use in Paleogeographic Comparisons
               within the Cordilleran Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0229795

Award Number: 0229795
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275207             (Estimated)
Investigator: George D. Stanley fossil@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Blodgett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Upper Triassic Terrane Faunas and Their Use in Paleogeographic Comparisons
              within the Cordilleran Region
George Stanley, Robert Blodgett
              EAR0229795
University of Montana

ABSTRACT

This project will employ a
              combination of field work, laboratory, and  museum collections research to
              assess invertebrate faunas during a critical time in the Late Triassic. It
              seeks to document the taxonomic composition, paleoecology and paleogeographic
              significance of various tropical to subtropical, shelly fossils from Alaska,
              western Canada, Nevada, and Mexico and to make comparisons with coeval fossils
              from other regions of the world, such as western Europe and parts of the former
              Tethys. 
	Fossils to be studied are corals, sponges, hydrozoans, articulate
              brachiopods, bivalves and gasropods. These are abundant and widespread but
              little is known about the species taxonomy. The study will assess both taxonomy
              and paleoecological associations. During the Triassic time, some of these
              invertebrate faunas inhabited the western shores of North America but many
              others inhabited volcanic islands, now regarded as displaced terranes. The
              terranes from which faunas will be extracted, include the Alaskan portion of 
              Wrangellia and the Farewell terrane, as well as Chulitna, Wallowa, Alexander
              and Junco terranes. 
	In Triassic time, these terranes were located at
              unspecified distances off the western coast of the craton and their faunas
              provide unparalleled opportunities to test and better resolve the
              paleogeography, specifically to work out the paleobiogeographic affinities and
              relationships between some key terranes such as Wrangellia and the Alexander
              terrane. Many terranes represent active island arcs which, during and following
              cessation of volcanism, subsided and were replaced by sedimentary deposition,
              thus fostering rich invertebrate marine associations. Some of the fossils to be
              studied occur in thick carbonate deposits and even reefal associations. These
              organisms once developed at tropical to subtropical latitudes somewhere in the
              ancient Pacific ocean. Because many biotic assemblages proposed for study are
              silicified, fossils will be etched in dilute acids which are expected to free
              large numbers of fossils for study. Taxonomic study these silicified faunas
              will provide a wealth of new and important data. The project also is expected
              to benefit by collaboration with a number of outside specialists.
              
	Statistical paleobiogeographic methods will be employed and the project also
              will benefit from the development of an electronic paleontological database for
              many of the Triassic taxa. This paleontological project is expected to provide
              the necessary data for a general paleobiogeographic synthesis and to lay the
              foundation for testing some tectonic postulates for terrane relationships.

