Title       : Quantitative Methods for Public Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0229967

Award Number: 0229967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29992              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Bressoud bressoud@macalester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              What is Quantitative Literacy? How do you teach it? How do you measure it? How
              can you develop a program that will ensure that all undergraduates have it by
              the time they graduate? Faculty from Macalester College, joined by colleagues
              from Carleton, Grinnell, Lawrence, and St. Olaf, are thinking deeply about
              these questions and are testing a concept. A pilot program is running at
              Macalester and the Fund for the Improvement of Post-Secondary Education (FIPSE)
              has funded a four-year project to develop, implement, and assess an extension
              of this model and to begin to disseminate it to other institutions. The NSF
              project is complementing the FIPSE project by providing support for additional
              workshop activities, preparation of student projects and assignments, and
              development of a web site and a professional brochure. Some partial funding is
              being provided to institutions who will test the Macalester model.

The
              program is interdisciplinary. The pilot year involve courses in Mathematics,
              Statistics, Economics, Political Science, Geography, and English. It is also
              cohesive. The focus is on public policy, and all courses use the same policy
              issue to illustrate applications. All students come together one evening per
              week to hear experts debate the policy issue and talk about their own use of
              quantitative methods in analyzing options. The policy topic however changes
              from year to year. While certain core courses participate every year, other
              departments participate only when the topic is particularly relevant. This is a
              mechanism for drawing in less quantitative departments. Viewing quantitative
              methods through the lens of policy analysis has the potential to be a strong
              motivator for students, demonstrating the power of quantitative methods in a
              context students recognize as important.  

