Title       : Development of Novel Combined Treatment Technologies for Decontaminating
               Polluted Air
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0229135

Award Number: 0229135
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Sorial george.sorial@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0229135   Sorial   The passage of the 1990 Amendments to the Clean Air Act
              significantly heightened the interest in the development of innovative
              technologies for solving current pollution problems and preventing new ones.
              This study will focus on development of a combined treatment scheme (PSA/TBAB)
              that is adaptable to any particular contaminant or mixture of contaminants. A
              pressure swing adsorption (PSA) unit followed by a trickle bed air biofilter
              (TBAB) unit is proposed for yielding an effluent stream complying with emission
              regulations during adverse conditions of industrial operations.  The objectives
              of this research study are: 1) to study the influence of fluctuating
              contaminant concentration, periods of non-use, and change of contaminant on the
              performance of the TBAB; 2) to investigate the mechanism of single solute and
              competitive equilibrium adsorption on different types of adsorbents for the
              contaminants of concern; and 3) to investigate the operating pressurization,
              and de-pressurization cycles for the PSA unit that will yield constant loading
              conditions on the biofilter and will provide contaminant removal above 99%. The
              PSA unit can serve a number of purposes, such as periodic cycles of adsorption
              and desorption, to dampen the impact of fluctuating contaminant concentration
              to the biofilter; or as an adsorption cycle only for a contaminant removal
              during off-times of the biofilter; or a desorption cycle only to act as a
              contaminant feed to the biofilter during shut down periods such as weekends or
              holidays.
The development of a combined PSA/TBAB technology will be of
              significant benefit to the chemical industry where off-gas treatment is
              necessary for complying with the Clean Air Act. It is anticipated that effluent
              treatment cost will be significantly reduced by enhancing the performance of
              the biofiltration process. Furthermore, the results obtained in this study will
              be disseminated by presentations at national and international conferences and
              by publication in peer refereed journals for enhancing scientific and
              technological understanding of the combined
scheme.
The combined treatment
              technology of this research provides excellent case studies for both the
              undergraduate and graduate classes. Research experience gained in the
              laboratory will be replicated in the classroom by developing discovery-based
              teaching modules, so the experience can be shared by all of the students.
              Problem-based learning, undergraduate research and research-based education
              will help students develop critical thinking, problem-solving, teamwork and
              communication skills.

