Title       : Collaborative Research: Late Quaternary History of Reedy Glacier
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0229314

Award Number: 0229314
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370051             (Estimated)
Investigator: John O. Stone stone@geology.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard B. Conway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The stability of the marine West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) remains an
              important, unresolved problem for predicting future sea level change. Recent
              studies indicate that the mass balance of the ice sheet today may be negative
              or positive. The apparent differences may stem in part from short-term
              fluctuations in flow. By comparison, geologic observations provide evidence of
              behavior over much longer time scales. Recent work involving glacial-geologic
              mapping, dating and ice-penetrating radar surveys suggests that deglaciation of
              both the Ross Sea Embayment and coastal Marie Byrd Land continued into the late
              Holocene, and leaves open the possibility of ongoing deglaciation and
              grounding-line retreat. However,  previous work in the Ross Sea Embayment was
              based on data from just three locations that are all far to the north of the
              present grounding line. Additional data from farther south in the Ross Sea
              Embayment are needed to investigate whether recession has ended, or if the rate
              and pattern of deglaciation inferred from our previous study still apply to the
              present grounding line. This award provides support to reconstruct the
              evolution of Reedy Glacier, in the southern Transantarctic Mountains, since the
              Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). Because Reedy Glacier emerges from the mountains
              above the grounding line, its surface slope and elevation should record changes
              in thickness of grounded ice in the Ross Sea up to the present day. The
              deglaciation chronology of Reedy Glacier therefore can indicate whether
              Holocene retreat of the WAIS ended thousands of years ago, or is still
              continuing at present. This integrated glaciologic, glacial-geologic, and
              cosmogenic-isotope exposure- dating project will reconstruct past levels of
              Reedy Glacier. Over two field seasons, moraines will be mapped, dated and
              correlated at sites along the length of the glacier. Radar and GPS measurements
              will be made to supplement existing ice thickness and velocity data, which are
              needed as input for a model of glacier dynamics. The model will be used to
              relate geologic measurements to the grounding-line position downstream.
              Ultimately, the mapping, dating and ice-modeling components of the study will
              be integrated into a reconstruction that defines changes in ice thickness in
              the southern Ross Sea since the LGM, and relates these changes to the history
              of grounding-line retreat. This work directly addresses key goals of the West
              Antarctic Ice Sheet Initiative, which are to understand the dynamics, recent
              history and possible future behavior of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet.




