Title       : SGER: Room-Temperature Reactive Ion Plasmas for the Generation of Low-Friction
               Carbon Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0229204

Award Number: 0229204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gouri Radhakrishnan gouri.radhakrishnan@aero.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. McNallan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aerospace Corporation
	      
	      Los Angeles, CA  90009    /   -

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ROOM-TEMPERATURE REACTIVE-ION-PLASMAS 
FOR GENERATION OF LOW-FRICTION CARBON
              FILMS
Small Grant for Exploratory Research 
G. Radhakrishnan (The Aerospace
              Corporation) and Michael McNallan (University of Illinois at Chicago)

In
              this exploratory research program, a novel room-temperature process for the
              generation of low-friction carbon films from hard carbides is proposed.  This
              offers an alternative to high-temperature chlorination (on the order of
              1000oC), typically used to generate such films from carbides. There are
              practical limitations when applying the high-temperature process to fabrication
              of microscale devices. Such devices are typically produced by photolithography
              on a silicon substrate.  The Si substrates are highly susceptible to attack by
              Cl. or F. radicals and must be protected from the halogenation process.
              However, neither organic photoresist, nor phospho-silicate glass, commonly used
              as mask materials in device fabrication, are capable of withstanding the high
              temperatures employed in the chlorination process. For these reasons, an
              alternative low-temperature is highly desirable. 
We will investigate the use
              of reactive halogen-ion plasmas, generated from low-pressure halogen gases
              using a radio-frequency source, as an alternate method of producing
              low-friction carbon coatings at or near room-temperature on bulk TiC and SiC as
              well as thin films of these carbides. Such coatings will simultaneously reduce
              friction and wear on sliding interfaces in micro and macro-scale devices and
              surmount key and complex problems that result from high-temperature processing
              during fabrication of devices with new materials. Specifically, room
              temperature processing will allow such a technique to be applied to the
              fabrication of devices using standard photoresist as a masking layer for
              lithographic patterning. This approach to depositing low-friction and hard
              coatings at room temperature is new and exploratory.  It has the potential of
              significantly impoacting the MEMS industry by becoming a processing step in the
              manufacture of many types of complex MEMS devices.
This investigation will
              provide insight into the fundamental mechanisms responsible for the generation
              of low-friction carbon from carbides by comparing carbon films generated by
              room-temperature reactive halogen plasmas to those produced by high-temperature
              chlorination of carbides. In parallel, this investigation could provide a
              technological breakthrough for fabricating hybrid, multi-functional
              low-friction coatings for MEMS or other devices impacting micro and
              nanotechnologies.  Novel coatings and hybrid deposition and surface engineering
              schemes will emerge from this research.  This program will also provide an
              excellent opportunity for students to participate in new developments and
              applications in materials processing and surface engineering.
This
              collaborative program between the Aerospace Corporation and UIC makes use of
              complementary experimental capabilities at the two institutions to achieve its
              research and educational goals.  UIC has pioneered the development of high
              temperature chlorination processes for formation of carbon structures on
              ceramic carbides, and is well equipped with characterization equipment. The
              Aerospace Corporation has particular expertise in room-temperature coating
              technologies, fabrication of MEMS devices, and can offer additional equipment,
              which can supplement that available at UIC.  The technologies used at the two
              institutions are sufficiently different that a student with experience in both
              laboratories will be uniquely prepared to contribute to the development of new
              nanoscale technologies.  The collaboration between the two institutions will
              enable a graduate student from UIC to participate in investigations at The
              Aerospace Corporation as part of his/her thesis research and gain valuable
              experience and exposure to the advanced laboratory facilities at The Aerospace
              Corporation.

