Title       : Collaborative Research: Uplift and Exhumation Along the San Andreas Fault Zone;
               An Empirical Study of Transpression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0229913

Award Number: 0229913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35296              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Brady rbrady2@csub.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St Univ-Bakersfld Fdn
	      9001 Stockdale Highway
	      Bakersfield, CA  933111022    661/664-2252

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Transpression occurs along 42% of the San Andreas fault system. Its influence
              on
the behavior of the transform fault is thus of first-order importance and
              may represent one
of the most important complications in developing a
              comprehensive understanding of
how strike-slip faults and plate boundaries
              behave. With this in mind, the PI's propose a
collaborative study that will
              systematically and quantitatively integrate geological
constraints on the
              manner in which transpressional deformation is accommodated at
several sites
              along the San Andreas fault. A functional understanding of transpression would
              make patterns of vertical deformation easy to predict where primary boundary
              conditions, such as the degree of plate motion obliquity and the mechanics of
              the main transform fault, are known. However, the material properties of the
              San Andreas fault are debated, and considerable evidence suggests that
              secondary factors (structural and lithologic heterogeneity, erosivity) play a
              significant role in shaping the geologic response to transpression. As a
              result, a general understanding of how transpressional plate motion becomes
              manifest as deformation in the crust has not been developed. One of the PI's
              objectives is to quantitatively evaluate the effects of external factors on
              deformation partitioning, so that we may ultimately evaluate models of
              transpressional deformation that are predicated on assumptions of the
              mechanical properties of the San Andreas fault. Their approach will be to use
              the spatial and temporal distribution of vertical motion, manifested in bedrock
              uplift (surface uplift + exhumation), as a representation of transpression.
              They will combine thermochronologic constraints ((U-Th)/He dating) on the age
              and magnitude of exhumation with geomorphic and structural constraints on
              surface uplift, erosion, and the architecture of deformation that drives this
              bedrock uplift. They will use these complementary techniques to determine how
              patterns of vertical motion are spatially distributed with respect to the San
              Andreas fault (i.e. near vs. far field) and its obliquity to plate motion. The
              PI's objective is thus to develop a functional relationship between
              transpressive deformation and these key variables. This will require developing
              controls on how the chronology of vertical motion relates to the emergence of
              transpression at each site as well as controls on the effects of independent
              boundary conditions (e.g. geological, structural, climatic) along strike. They
              will focus on four sites (Carrizo Plain/Temblor Range, San Emigdio Mountains,
              northern San Gabriel
Mountains, and Coachella Valley), each of which
              represents a major gap in understanding of transpression along the San Andreas
              fault. The integrated results from
these sites, when synthesized with previous
              studies, will provide the full range in
boundary conditions and transpressive
              parameters needed to create specific tests of
different models of
              transpressional deformation. A key aspect of this proposal is the collaboration
              that will be employed in attaining our goal. The PI's have extensive knowledge
              of southern California geology and the analytical techniques to be employed.
              Spotila was among the first to apply this type of integrated approach to
              understanding portions of the Transverse Ranges. House has actively pursued new
              applications of the thermochronologic technique that will be employed in this
              study. Brady provides a robust foundation in structural geology and geophysics
              that will link uplift estimates with individual structures. Post-doctoral
              associate Niemi will add an additional expertise in Cenozoic stratigraphy,
              structural geology, and field mapping. This number of PI's will also enable us
              to begin work at all field sites concurrently and represents a science team
              strong enough to tackle this significant problem.

