Title       : Dynamics of Ice Streams: A Physical Statistical Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2002   
File        : a0229292

Award Number: 0229292
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366525             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cornelis J. van der Veen vanderveen.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              L. M. Berliner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Noel A. Cressie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth C. Jezek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ice streams are believed to play a major role in determining the response of
              their parent ice sheet to climate change, and in determining global sea level
              by serving as regulators on the fresh water stored in the ice sheets. Ice
              streams are characterized by rapid, laterally confined flow which makes them
              uniquely identifiable within the body of the more slowly and more homogeneously
              flowing ice sheet. But while these characteristics enable the identification of
              ice streams, the processes which control ice-stream motion and evolution, and
              differences among ice streams in the polar regions, are only partially
              understood. Understanding the relative importance of lateral and basal drags,
              as well as the role of gradients in longitudinal stress, is essential for
              developing models for future evolution of the polar ice
sheets. In this
              project, physical statistical models will be used to explore the processes that
              control ice-stream flow, and to compare these processes between seemingly
              different ice-stream systems. In particular, Whillans Ice Stream draining into
              the Ross Ice Shelf, will be compared with Recovery and RAMP glaciers draining
              into the Ronne-Filchner Ice Shelf, and the Northeast Ice Stream in Greenland. 
              Geophysical models lie at the core of the approach, but are embellished by
              modeling various components of variability statistically. One important
              component comes from the uncertainty in observations on basal elevation,
              surface elevation, and surface velocity.  In this project new observational
              data collected using remote-sensing techniques will be used. The various
              components, some of which are spatial, are combined hierarchically using
              Bayesian statistical methodology. All these components will be combined
              mathematically into a physical statistical model that yields the posterior
              distribution for basal, longitudinal, and lateral stress fields, and velocity
              fields, conditional on the data. Inference based on this distribution will be
              carried out via Markov chain Monte Carlo techniques, to obtain estimates of
              these unknown fields along with uncertainty measures associated with them.
              




