Title       : Chemically Reactive Fluid Flow During Regional Metamorphism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0229267

Award Number: 0229267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284381             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Ferry jferry@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ferry
EAR-0229267

In this project, the PI and his graduate students will
              conduct field and laboratory studies on the origin and the mineralogical,
              isotopic, and chemical evolution of metamorphic rocks.  Infiltration of rocks
              deep in the Earth's crust during episodes of mountain building by chemically
              reactive H2O-CO2 fluids is now recognized as an essential driving force of
              mineral reactions during metamorphism.  Much progress has been made over the
              last decade in understanding the sources, amounts, geometry, and geological
              controls on reactive fluid transport in contact aureoles.  Details of the
              physical and chemical behavior of reactive fluids during regional metamorphism,
              however, have remained more obscure and are the subject of research supported
              by this grant.  A fundamental characteristic of regional metamorphic terrains
              is the common occurrence in siliceous carbonate rocks of mineral reactants and
              products in proportions that vary widely on scales ranging from several mm to
              several 100 m.  The specific, pivotal question that will be addressed is
              whether these occurrences result from flow of variable amounts of reactive
              fluid within different, chemically isolated layers or whether they result from
              variations in initial amounts and compositions of minerals prior to reaction in
              different layers that maintain perfect or almost perfect chemical communication
              by diffusion.  The answer to the question, in turn, will lead to an
              understanding of the mechanism (diffusion vs. flow) and geometry of reactive
              fluid transport during regional metamorphism, the source(s) of reactive fluid,
              the driving force for reaction, and the amount of fluid involved.  In order to
              draw general conclusions, investigations will be made of carbonate rocks in
              medium-pressure terrains in eastern Vermont and the southern Swiss Alps and in
              a low-pressure terrain in south-central Maine.  Research will involve mapping
              and sample collection in the field, chemical analysis of minerals with an
              electron microprobe, chemical analysis of whole-rock samples by X-ray
              fluorescence, O and C stable isotope analysis of carbonates and silicates by
              mass spectrometry, and calculations based on geochemical thermodynamics and
              transport theory.  The project will support the training of three women Ph.D.
              students at Johns Hopkins University.

