Title       : Collaborative Research: A Multi-Disciplinary Study of Selective Adsorption of
               Chiral Molecules on Mineral Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0229763

Award Number: 0229763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123779             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Teng hteng@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Selective adsorption of aqueous solutes onto mineral surfaces
              represents an important mechanism for the concentration, sequestration and
              organization of organic molecules. Such mineral-organic interactions play key
              roles in processes as diverse as aquifer purification, biofilm formation and
              the origin of life.
In this regard, the selective adsorption of chiral
              (left-handed versus right-handed) molecules is of special interest. Strong
              chiral preference for amino acids, sugars and other essential biomolecules is a
              defining characteristic of biological systems. Abiotic processes that select
              left-handed versus right-handed molecules are thus central to geochemical
              models of life's origin. Chiral recognition and separation of molecules,
              furthermore, is vital to pharmacological activity of many drugs, biodegradation
              of packaging materials, development of improved polymers, and many other
              applications in science and industry.
Previous work described selective
              adsorption of D- and L-aspartic acid, a biological amino acid, on chiral
              crystal growth faces of calcite. Such chiral selectivity on surfaces of a
              centric mineral had been predicted by theory, but had not been demonstrated
              experimentally. This proposal seeks to document further this behavior and to
              investigate structural mechanisms by which chiral organic molecules adsorb
              selectively on mineral surfaces. A multi-disciplinary, collaborative, two-part
              research program includes:
I. Phenomenology of Chiral Adsorption on Minerals:
              Research will expand on previous studies, which demonstrated chiral selectivity
              on mineral surfaces, by establishing the range and extent of chiral adsorption
              on mineral surfaces. Proposed experiments include:
1. Investigation of the
              adsorption of other chiral amino acids, both biological and non-biological,
              onto calcite crystal growth surfaces.
2. Investigation of the adsorption of
              chiral amino acid derivatives, sugars, nucleotides and other chiral species
              onto calcite crystal growth surfaces.
3. Investigation of chiral adsorption
              onto crystal growth surfaces of gypsum and quartz, both of which are
              geochemically important minerals that display chiral crystal growth
              surfaces.
II. Adsorption Mechanisms - Experimental Approaches: Structural
              mechanisms that underlie chiral adsorption of organic molecules on these
              mineral surfaces will be investigated. Proposed experiments include:
1.
              Liquid-immersion atomic force microscopy imaging of calcite crystal growth
              surfaces: Observations will be made of both surface growth and dissolution in
              the presence and absence of chiral adsorbates.
2. Use of site-specific
              fluorescent tags: Calcite surfaces with an adsorbed layer of amino acids will
              be exposed to a variety of fluorescent tags to determine the orientation and
              distribution of adsorbed molecules.
These proposed studies, in concert with
              ongoing theoretical models of the adsorption process, will lead to an
              understanding of structural mechanisms of chiral selection. This work,
              furthermore, will lay the groundwork for future investigations that
              adapt
microarray technology to the combinatorial study numerous of mineral
              surfaces and adsorbed organic species in a single experiment.

