Title       : Investigations on Deterioration in the Historic Huts of Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  2002  
File        : a0229570

Award Number: 0229570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $403674             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Blanchette robertb@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The explorers of Antarctica's heroic era (early twentieth century) erected
              buildings and brought large amounts of supplies to survive the extreme
              environment during their Antarctic exploration. These buildings were abandoned
              once the expedition was over, leaving huts and thousands of artifacts (e.g.,
              furniture, scientific apparatus, food stores, clothing) behind. Today these
              historic sites provide a remarkable view into the past and while the extreme
              polar environment has provides some protection from rapid decay, serious
              deterioration is apparent. This project (in collaboration with New Zealand
              scientists) and is a continuation of research to identify the bacteria and
              fungi attacking these historic structures and artifacts and to elucidate the
              mechanisms of biodegradation occurring in the polar environment. Studies will
              also be done to better understand the non-biological (e.g., salt, UV light,
              wind) deterioration processes taking place and to test methods for protecting
              the historic woods from continued attack. Pollutants (e.g., polyaromatic
              hydrocarbons) that contaminate the historic sites pose serious problems to the
              Antarctic environment and investigations will assess the extent of
              contamination and develop appropriate protocols for remediation. 
This project
              will provide opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to become
              involved in research. The preservation of the historic wooden structures will
              be of great interest to those in the international community and the general
              public who are intrigued by the last great age of polar exploration. Results
              will provide the scientific data needed by conservators to help protect these
              important Antarctic historic sites for future generations. This research will
              also add significantly to our knowledge of the biology and ecology of the
              Antarctic microorganisms, the biodiversity of microbes present in the polar
              environment and elucidate unique deterioration processes.
