Title       : Santa Cruz Tayata and Emergent Social Complexity in the Mixteca Alta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0229778

Award Number: 0229778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91374              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew K. Balkansky abalkan@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In 2003 and 2004, the National Science Foundation will support archaeological
              field research in the Mixteca Alta of Oaxaca, a mountainous area in southern
              Mexico.  Recent NSF-sponsored research suggests that this little known area had
              some of the highest population densities, and most politically complex
              societies, anywhere in Mexico during the Formative Period (ca. 1500 B.C. to
              A.D. 200).  One important site in the Mixteca Alta, called Santa Cruz Tayata,
              was the apparent political center for a chiefly society lasting more than 1,000
              years.  By about 300 B.C., however, this center was abandoned and a new urban
              capital and state-level society established nearby.  This project, directed by
              Dr. Andrew Balkansky from George Washington University, will examine the
              beginnings of social inequality at Santa Cruz Tayata, the relationship of this
              site to its contemporaries in ancient Mexico, and the reasons for this site's
              abandonment at the dawn of the urban era.  These research questions are
              regional in scope, and derive from earlier regional surveys encompassing
              several thousand square kilometers of highland Oaxaca, including Santa Cruz
              Tayata and many of its contemporary centers.  The field methods for this new
              project will involve controlled mapping and surface collection of artifacts
              from Santa Cruz Tayata, using a total station and systematic sampling
              procedure.  The map and surface data will then be used to identify the changing
              site boundaries through time, detect intra-site variation, and select promising
              excavation contexts.  Excavations will follow, designed to uncover both public
              structures and private residences.  The household will be the basic unit of
              analysis, providing links between individual features through the household,
              residential ward, site-level organization, and finally the regional settlement
              pattern.  It is anticipated that relationships among households, in terms of
              status, wealth, and exchange patterns will change over time, as will the
              political organization of the site and it relationships with neighboring
              centers.  These results will answer specific questions about how social
              hierarchies formed in the Mixteca Alta, and how interregional dynamics among
              competing centers (including exchange patterns, belief systems, and warfare)
              shaped these developments.  We will also have a better understanding of the
              urban transition by examining the context from which the first cities formed. 
              This project will also have broader impacts, including the training of a new
              generation of students for archaeological research.  The collaboration with
              colleagues and students from Mexico also contributes to the emerging "global
              archaeology" and the preservation of this important site for the future.  
