Title       : The Science Behind Our Food
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0229577

Award Number: 0229577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1449117            (Estimated)
Investigator: David Knauft   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph S. Oliver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne Parrott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew H. Paterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia
	      616 Boyd Grad Studies Rsrch Cntr
	      Athens, GA  306027411    404/542-3030

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Science Behind Our Food Program is improving achievement, comprehension and
              mastery of scientific concepts by middle and high school students. The program
              provides inquiry-based education in biology and chemistry by focusing on the
              application of these disciplines to solve real-world problems centered on the
              theme of science behind our food. The program creates a science community that
              includes graduate teaching fellows, science teachers, and University of Georgia
              (UGA) faculty. Research and teaching expertise is shared among the members of
              the group in a collaborative style. Teachers and fellows identify science
              concepts that students find difficult to grasp and/or that are inaccessible
              given the current resources. Through the use of a resource called Lessons In A
              Trunk, lesson plans and materials needed to conduct demonstrations and/or
              student-centered experiments are being created and used in classrooms. Weekend
              Discovery Kits contain resources for students to conduct experiments at home
              with family members. Thematic focus of lessons and kits are tied to
              food-related research being conducted by faculty on the UGA campuses. Through
              press releases, newsletters, and monthly videoconferencing, this community of
              scientists is introduced to the individual students. Videographic examples
              provide virtual field trips allowing students to visit these scientists'
              facilities. In all activities, fellows provide on-site support and expertise in
              collaboration with teachers' needs, including alignment to the State of
              Georgia's Quality Core Curriculum (QCC). All components of the grant-supported
              activities are created as resources for the broadest possible dissemination
              during and after the project, and are being designed for maximum
              sustainability. The specific lesson plans and newsletter content are being
              added to materials already available at www.uga.edu/discover/educators.
              Participating teachers are conducting in-service training for fellow teachers
              and are conducting workshops at state and national science teacher association
              meetings. Lessons In A Trunk and Weekend Discovery Kits are being maintained
              and expanded by science-based student clubs at the University of Georgia that
              charge a minimal fee for their services. Coordination of the "replenishment"
              program, continued newsletters, and web site maintenance, are the
              responsibility of a permanent graduate assistant who is currently a part of our
              program. The broader impacts of these activities accrue to a variety of
              beneficiaries. Science teachers are obtaining further expertise in the
              disciplines they teach and obtaining additional materials and lesson plans for
              inquiry-based instruction. Science faculty are obtaining enhanced teaching
              skills for classroom use, as well as enhanced communication skills to provide
              the general public with information about science. Teaching fellows are leaving
              the university with a set of science, teaching, and communication skills
              generally not found in graduates of a science program in a research
              institution.

Title: The Science Behind our Food
Institution:  University of
              Georgia
PI/Co-PI:  David knauft, Joseph Oliver, Wayne parrott, Andrew
              Paterson
Partner School Districts:  Ogelthorpe County, Tift County Public,
              Walton County, Turner County
Funding: $1,449,117 
Number of fellows/year: 10
              graduate
Setting:  Urban, Suburban, Rural
Target audience:  middle-high
              school
NSF supported disciplines involved: Biology 

