Title       : Collaborative Research: Toward an Erosion Rule for Glacial Quarrying: Modeling
               and Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0229692

Award Number: 0229692
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228032             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denis O. Cohen denis.cohen@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neal R. Iverson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative research toward an erosion rule for glacial quarrying: Modeling
              and measurements

Denis Cohen and Neal Iverson EAR-0229692  Iowa State
              University
Thomas Hooyer EAR-0229526 Wisconsin Geological
              Survey

Abstract

Erosion of rock by glaciers results in spectacular
              landforms, such as horn peaks and U-shaped valleys, and can also have a
              dramatic effect on rates of rock uplift in mountain belts and associated
              changes in weathering rates, CO2 production, and climate. Quarrying, the
              process in which glaciers crack underlying rock and remove resultant rock
              fragments is thought to be the most important process of glacial erosion. 
              There is at present, however, no comprehensive quantitative model of quarrying
              that fully links glaciological variables, such as sliding speed and basal water
              pressure, to quarrying rate. Thus, results of models of glacial erosion applied
              over broad areas (e.g., mountain belts) and long periods (10^5-10^6 years) are
              uncertain, both quantitatively and conceptually.

With this research, a
              versatile theoretical model of quarrying will be constructed and then tested,
              both with real-time measurements of crack growth in bedrock beneath a glacier
              and with mapping of crack patterns in bedrock recently exposed by glacier
              retreat. Ice flow will be modeled over bedrock consisting of inclined steps by
              fully coupling water pressure in cavities in the lee of these steps with
              sliding speed and cavity size for both steady and transient cases. Results will
              be used to calculate the stress distribution in the rock bed and the consequent
              speeds and paths of cracks, as they slowly extend and isolate rock blocks that
              can be extracted easily by the glacier. The model will be tested by installing
              inclined rock steps beneath 210 m of sliding ice at Engabreen, a temperate
              glacier in northern Norway, where the Svartisen Glaciological Observatory
              provides human access to the glacier-rock interface. Sound waves generated by
              growth of cracks in the steps will be used to determine the relation between
              glaciological variables and crack-growth speeds and paths in the steps. To
              further test aspects of the quarrying model, sizes of former subglacial
              cavities and distributions and orientations of associated glacially-induced
              cracks will be mapped on stepped bedrock in front of Castelguard Glacier,
              Alberta, and compared with model predictions. The overall result of this work
              will be a quarrying rule that can serve as the basis for large-scale models of
              glacial erosion.


