Title       : A Microstructural Study of Simulated and Natural Fault Gouge Using Digital Image
               Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a0229654

Award Number: 0229654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jafar Hadizadeh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent large-displacement experiments with simulated gouge indicate that
              velocity-dependence of gouge friction evolves to, and out of velocity weakening
              behavior, dependent upon cumulative slip history. Such rate-dependence
              transitions appear to coincide with certain shear localization and
              delocalization microstructures. Do the microstructures appear and disappear in
              a systematic way with cumulative displacement? The PI's propose to investigate
              the question through specific models with built-in tendency for shear
              localization and recurrent delocalization. In one model the state of gouge is
              determined by interaction of shear bands and surfaces at the scale of gouge
              thickness, in another the observed rate-dependence transitions result directly
              from grain-scale processes. They will investigate the validity of the models in
              both simulated and natural fault gouge. Simulated gouge samples will be
              produced by a series of rotary shear experiments; natural gouges will be
              collected from previously studied San Gabriel and
Punchbowl fault outcrops in
              southern California. The rate-and state-dependent friction laws are to a large
              extent empirical expressions of the processes of cataclasis, healing, and
              development of internal structures in gouge. Microstructural parameters known
              to control these processes include particle size, particle size distribution,
              gouge layer thickness, porosity, and gouge fabrics. The coupling between
              microstructural and mechanical analysis is weak due to difficulties in working
              with randomness, variability, and discontinuity that is inherent in brittle
              deformation microstructures. Do cataclastic
microstructures offer
              significantly more information than have been acquired so far by traditional
              methods? The PI's propose to use digital image techniques, which allow
              matrix-type manipulations of image data and application of statistical, massive
              and sequential data analyses. They believe that the project has clear
              implications for the physical definition of the evolution laws in friction
              constitutive equations, laboratory-to-field scaling relations, and computer
              simulation of gouge evolution. Furthermore, large-scale fault mechanics
              investigations (e.g. SAFOD) are expected to benefit from the portability and
              efficiency of digital image techniques that will be developed by this project.
