Title       : Space-Time Progression of Faulting in the Northernmost Basin and Range:
               Implications for Crustal-Scale Processes During Extension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  2002  
File        : a0229854

Award Number: 0229854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth L. Miller miller@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Basin and Range extensional province is the world's premier region for the
              study of continental stretching as faults are moving and volcanic activity is
              ongoing today.  The northwestern part of the Basin and Range Province, in
              northern Nevada, has fault-bounded mountains and valleys like elsewhere in the
              Basin and Range, but, based on geologic studies, the upper part of the
              continental crust has undergone much less extension by faulting than elsewhere.
               Paradoxically, the crust as a whole is thin (only 28 km) and appears to be
              just as stretched or thinned, or more stretched than the rest of the Basin and
              Range, which is on average 30-35 km thick).  In addition, the age span of
              extension, its relationship to volcanic activity, and the nature of the
              transition from this region of apparent low upper crustal extension to the more
              highly extended areas to the south and east in the Basin and Range are not
              clearly known.  Magmatic/volcanic activity is thought to heat and weaken the
              crust, leading to thinning and rifting.  However, most magmatism and volcanic
              activity in northern Nevada occurred at about 16 million years ago (associated
              with the Snake River-Yellowstone volcanic trend), but ongoing studies show that
              extensional faulting happened almost 10 million years later.

This
              investigation of northern Nevada extensional faulting relies on existing and
              ongoing geologic field studies and their compilation into a digital data base
              to better document the distribution, geometry and the age of faulting in the
              region.  Combined with state-of-the-art geochronologic and thermochronologic
              dating of rocks and minerals, the age or time and the amount of extension that
              took place in this part of the Basin and Range will be determined accurately. 
              This new data base will help answer several important questions:  What
              conditions lead to the thinning of continents and their rupture and rifting
              apart?  What role does magmatism play in crustal extension?  How does
              stretching and thinning happen on the scale of the entire crust, and can the
              lower crust thin or stretching independently of the upper crust?  Answers to
              these questions are applicable to a variety of regions beyond northern Nevada,
              and in particular, will help address fundamental questions about the origin and
              evolution of sedimentary basins developed on thinned continental crust of the
              world's vast offshore continental shelves.
