Title       : SGER: Adaptive Shoring for Robot-Assisted Search and Rescue
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0229809

Award Number: 0229809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96146              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin R. Murphy murphy@csee.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Award number: 0229809
PI: Robin R. Murphy
Institution: University of South
              Florida
Title: Adaptive Shoring for Robot-Assisted Search and Rescue
The
              long-term goal for this project is to contribute to the science and engineering
              that will enable development of a network of distributed shoring mobile robots.
              Each robot would be able to position itself in the rubble pile in places where
              humans and other tools could not go (mobile), adapt the pressure in the air
              bags to shifts in the structure as well as identify better positions to provide
              support (adaptive), and would work in concert with other shoring robots to
              maintain stability (distributive). This type of system would be an important
              addition to urban search and rescue teams and has been specifically requested
              by FEMA and regional response teams in the aftermath of the WTC.

While
              immediate progress in shoring can be made by simply coupling air bags with
              man-packable robots (such at those used by the PIs at the WTC), a true
              breakthrough depends on advances in sensing, distributed control and
              communications technology. The adaptive shoring application is both novel in
              its demands on distributed, real-time cooperative control of robots and its
              need for sensors for damage assessment. As a result, there is a high risk that
              a traditional multi-year research project is premature because the demands of
              the domain and the relevant state of the art are unknown.

This one-year
              exploratory project will investigate the feasibility of contact and remote
              sensors for local adaptive shoring (e.g., load on the air bag) and for dynamic
              placement of the robots (e.g., location of the load based on damage).
              Laboratory and field experiments with a distributed team of two air bags and
              robots will also be conducted. The results are expected to be a trade study of
              sensing, an assessment of the requirements of adaptive shoring for sensing,
              distributed control and communications, and prototype equipment that will be
              available for use in real emergencies. The lessons learned will be captured
              through journal publications for both the robotics and structural engineering
              communities and, should the data support it, as a full proposal.

