Title       : Physics of On-State Breakdown in InAIAs/InGaAs High Electron Mobility
               Transistors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0229321

Award Number: 0229321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86562              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark H. Somerville mark.somerville@olin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin W. Olin College
	      1735 Great Plain Avenue
	      Needham, MA  024921245    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906552
Somerville

The goal of this proposal is to illuminate experimentally
              the physics of burnout and on-state breakdown in InAlAs/InGaAs high electron
              mobility transistors (HEMTs).  These devices are extremely attractive for a
              growing number of high frequency applications, including collision avoidance
              radar systems, wireless LANS, and ultra high speed switching networks.  Many of
              the applications require high breakdown voltage; as a result, great effort has
              been devoted to understanding and improving off-state breakdown in
              InAlAs/InGaAs HEMTs.  However, as off-state breakdown has improved, it has
              become clear that the bottleneck is the problem of on-state breakdown and
              associated burnout.  Relatively little work has been done in this area.  It is
              thought that impact ionization is involved, but the details of the mechanism
              are unknown, as are the impact of various device design parameters.  By
              investigating the physics of on-state breakdown and burnout, the proposed
              research program will identify promising design directions for InAlAs/InGaAs
              HEMTs to help alleviate the problem.


The research program involves
              development of a customized measurement system to allow visible and NIR
              spectroscopy of on-state breakdown in InAlAs/InGaAs HEMTs under a variety of
              thermal and bias conditions; the use of the system for extensive measurements
              on a large sample set of state-of-the-art devices; and extensive data reduction
              and model development.  The project is designed with student participation in
              mind; much of the work will be done by undergraduate researchers under the
              supervision of the PI.  Thus, in addition to enhancing understanding of the
              problem of on-state breakdown, the proposed research program will introduce
              undergraduate students to modern research techniques and instrumentation in the
              area of device physics, and will afford these students the opportunity to do
              real research on a critical technology.
***





