Title       : Using Viscoelastic Material to Reduce the Dynamic Response of Woodframe
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0229724

Award Number: 0229724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Dinehart david.dinehart@.villanova.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry W. Shenton, III  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1624,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

	The objective of the proposed research is to develop an advanced
              panel system for improving the seismic performance of wood frame structures
              using thin laminates of viscoelastic (VE) damping materials. The VE will be
              integrated into the lateral load resisting system of the structure material
              between the wall frame and the sheathing and/or finishing material. It is
              anticipated that the final panel system will utilize little to no fasteners to
              connect the sheathing and drywall to the stud frame and provide increased
              durability at significant cost savings.
	VE material is self-adhesive and
              comes in rolls (similar to tape).  The material is readily available, very
              flexible, easy to apply, and can be layered.  The results of one preliminary
              full-scale test of one thin layer (0.005") of the material applied to a wall
              show that significant improvements can be realized without affecting the
              overall wall dimensions.  Innovative applications of viscoelastic sheet
              material may potentially have a profound impact on the design, construction and
              rehabilitation of wood frame structures. 
	The proposed research program will
              test and evaluate the application of viscoelastic material in wood frame
              structures, typical of residential housing, for improving the seismic
              performance and durability of the structure.  An experimental program has been
              proposed to evaluate the application of VE material to wood frame construction
              at the connection/component level.  A non-linear finite element model will be
              used to conduct parametric studies to optimize the placement of the VE material
              within the wall. The model can account for the supplemental damping and
              stiffness of the VE material and will be used to predict the full-scale wall
              behavior. Baseline full-scale tests (static and cyclic) will be conducted on
              conventional walls with and without drywall.  Based on the connection and
              analytical work, an optimal design will be determined and full-scale wall tests
              will be conducted on walls with and without drywall and compared to the
              analytical results.
	The research proposed reduces the risk of life, injury,
              and property destruction and improves durability by developing a
              state-of-the-art shearwall panel system. Wood frame structures continue to
              experience significant structural and non-structural damage during moderate to
              large earthquakes. In many cases the structure may remain standing after the
              disaster, only for there to be serious non-structural damage that renders the
              residence uninhabitable. Having just high ductility is no longer satisfactory;
              today's structures must be engineered and designed to perform better and to
              insure more than just life safety. Increasing the energy dissipation capacity
              of the primary lateral load resisting system of the structure would
              significantly reduce the risk to loss of life, injury and non-structural damage
              during seismic events. The concept proposed makes use of existing materials and
              incorporates them into the structure in such as way as to not disrupt the
              design of the wood frame shear wall and simplifies the construction process.

