Title       : NSF/USDOT: Agent-based Coordination in Public Logistics Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0229720

Award Number: 0229720
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115254             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Kay kay@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              A public logistics network is proposed as means to provide fast, flexible, and
              low-cost parcel transport. Similar to the dynamic pricing used to sell airline
              seats, a price for each available space on a truck and storage space at a
              distribution center (DC) could be negotiated in real time for each individual
              item. A third party can search the network for any type of item in transit,
              negotiate the purchase of the item, and redirected it to a new destination. As
              compared to private logistics networks, scale economies could be realized in
              performing each logistics function since each element of the network has access
              to potentially all of the network's demand. It would be possible for small
              cities and towns to have access to the same low-cost parcel delivery services
              that are currently only available in larger cities, and the need for on-site
              inventory storage would be reduced since finished-goods and safety stocks would
              be mobile and could be re-routed only when needed.

The proposed research
              will focus on developing a specification of the information infrastructure
              necessary to realize public logistics networks together with a prototype
              implementation of the specification. A network covering the entire U.S. will be
              created and used as the base network structure in all subsequent work. The core
              of the specification will be an agent architecture and protocols for adaptive
              routing and in-transit trade. Based on the local price of transport and storage
              at each DC, the "best" route for the package is determined. Until the package
              reaches its final destination, its agents would remain at the DCs both to make
              it possible to re-route a package in case of any disruptions in the network and
              to serve as trading agents to negotiate the possible resale of the package. An
              important research issue is to determine what is the best combination of market
              and pricing mechanisms for the transport services in a public logistics
              network.


