Title       : A Study of the Incorporation of Water in Earth Materials Based on Electron
               Density Distributions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0229472

Award Number: 0229472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Ross nross@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald V. Gibbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ross
EAR-0229472

Research will be undertaken to advance the geochemist's -
              mineralogist's understanding of the mechanisms controlling the incorporation of
              water in earth materials and properties of the bonded interactions, both in
              minerals and representative molecules. Sites that are susceptible to
              electrophilic attack will be located, at the atomic level, within the crystal
              structures and on the surfaces of minerals. These calculations will identify
              potential sites for incorporation of hydrogen in nominally anhydrous minerals,
              both as hydroxyl groups and as water molecules. In addition, the adsorption and
              alignment of molecules like water, the hydronium and hydroxyl ions within the
              structures will be determined. These goals will be accomplished by evaluating
              the bond critical point properties of the calculated electron density
              distributions for a wide variety of minerals.  The properties of the electron
              density will be determined and the local maxima in the Laplacian distributions
              for the valence shell electrons of the bonded atoms will be located. Electron
              density distributions will also be studied at pressure to monitor how these
              sites behave when compressed.

A knowledge of the location and structure of
              the internal and surface sites that are susceptible to electrophilic attack
              will advance our understanding, at the atomic level, of the incorporation of
              hydrogen in minerals as well as the chemical reactivities of silicates and
              oxides.  It is further anticipated that this work will not only provide a
              theoretical basis for the modeling of internal and surface reactions of earth
              materials, but that it will lead, in future studies, to a better understanding
              of the atomistic properties and pathways involved in weathering, bacterial
              attack, chemisorption and other important geochemical processes.

