Title       : Winter Precipitation, Sublimation, and Snow-Depth in the Pan-Arctic: Critical
               Processes and a Half Century of Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0229973

Award Number: 0229973
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1556546            (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger A. Pielke Sr. pielke@atmos.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Glen E. Liston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry J. Mahrt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew Sturm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1079,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate winter sublimation processes in order to improve
              and develop models and methods, which will accurately and reliably estimate
              sublimation rates. This study is as a five-year field campaign using eddy
              correlation tower to measure surface fluxes of hat, moisture and momentum. Eddy
              correlation observations will provide the total moisture flux from the snow
              surface, which can be attributed to sublimation in cold conditions.  The
              measurements will be made along a transect extending from Fairbanks in the
              boreal forest, across the tundra of the Arctic Alaska and on tom the sea-ice in
              Prudhoe Bay.  The field measurement program is designed to cover the key
              environments found throughout the Arctic and will be conducted during a wide
              range of temperature, humidity and win conditions as well as landscapes covered
              by continuous and discontinuous snow covers containing forests, tundra, shrubs
              lakes and ice. This sampling process will determine sublimation processes
              applicable throughout the Arctic. This will further guide formulation of new
              physical models of sublimation. 

In the Arctic, the winter surface moisture
              budget is a function of precipitation and sublimation. An improved knowledge of
              sublimation from the field and modeling components coupled with snow-depth
              information will allow for the determination of precipitation in areas where
              precipitation is either not reported or inaccurate. Using past data records, a
              long-term pan-Arctic reanalysis data set of precipitation, sublimation and
              snow-water equivalent on the ground will be generated. These data will allow
              trend analysis and relate changes to climatic conditions. 


