Title       : Synthesis of Antarctic Temperature Observations and Model Output
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2002  
File        : a0229430

Award Number: 0229430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188041             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Walsh walsh@atmos.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Chapman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this project is to make a realistic estimate of antarctic
              climate change through a quantitative trend assessment of observed surface
              temperatures in Antarctica.  While antarctic temperature changes have
              potentially major consequences for the global system, the highly heterogeneous
              network of surface stations in Antarctica has limited quantitative studies and
              has led to a confusing mix of results reported to the public. The first
              objective of the proposed project is an Antarctic temperature trend assessment
              that (1) makes optimum use of the available information, (2) is technically
              justified by demonstrable properties of the data, and (3) can be clearly
              conveyed to nonscientists. The trends will be interpolated spatially in
              accordance with the correlation length scales deduced from data obtained by
              automated weather stations and conventional stations. The spatial, seasonal,
              and temporal sensitivities of the trends will be thoroughly documented and an
              alternative approach to Antarctic-wide trend determinations, based on empirical
              orthogonal function reconstructions of monthly temperature anomaly fields will
              be explored.  A second objective is the synthesis of climate model simulations
              of Antarctic changes against which recent and ongoing variations of Antarctic
              climate can be compared. This synthesis will draw upon the output of five
              state-of-the-art global models, all forced by the same moderate scenario of
              greenhouse gas and aerosol concentrations. A web-based archive, suitable for
              use by non-scientists, will contain spatial and seasonal depictions of
              projected changes of Antarctic temperature, precipitation, pressure and sea ice
              in several time slices of the 20th and 21st centuries. 
***

