Title       : STI: Starlight: Strategic Technologies for Internet Discovery and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0229642

Award Number: 0229642
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. DeFanti tom@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Oliver Yu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jason Leigh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maxine D. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Intellectual Merit of StarLight: StarLight is a research support facility
              planned by researchers for researchers that follows the mode of Research and
              Operations now established by the "STARTAP" project.  These researchers are
              networking engineers, electrical engineers, computer engineers, computer
              scientists, e-Scientists and application programmers. StarLight will anchor
              future wavelength-rich LambdaGrids, with switching and routing at the highest
              experimental levels, laying the foundation for fully optical switching in three
              years.  Following the tradition of the earlier "STARTAP" project, this project
              will enable the next cycle of network operations growth with
              researchers.

Optical networking technology is rapidly migrating from
              ultra-expensive long-haul carrier implementations to affordable regional- and
              metro-area community networks. The next step is to expand, integrate and tune
              these resources with specific large-scale scientific applications. The
              commercial trend is to provide a general infrastructure with a wide range of
              common services for a very broad client base. However, optical networking
              technologies provide networking researchers with an opportunity to move far
              beyond general requirements, and support large-scale e-Science applications
              that exploit very advanced networking to tackle complex problems. 

Until
              recently, STAR TAP, an NSF-funded project providing interoperability and
              interconnectivity of advanced networks, adequately served the ATM connections
              in Chicago among the US Federal Networks (Fednets), Internet2.s Abilene,
              Chicago's Metropolitan Research and Education Network, and several
              international networks. 
However, several months ago, as domestic and foreign
              networks began to request 1-to-10Gb switched connections in Chicago, STAR TAP
              quickly migrated its focus and connections to StarLight, a new colocation
              facility.  

The Nation needs a persistent facility, staffed and equipped, to
              serve researchers using IP-over-lambda networks, addressing restoration issues,
              building LambdaGrids, optimizing DNS services, and testing novel protocols for
              long, fat connections. StarLight will be a persistent meeting point as a node
              on various LambdaGrids and will support advanced applications and middleware
              research, and aggressive advanced services. StarLight will grow into a: 

(1)
              Multi-vendor, multi-lambda 1Gb, 2.5Gb, 10Gb (and perhaps higher) experimental
              exchange and LambdaGrid nodal point that provides the "other end" or switching
              point for National and international experiments; Starlight has 3-year plans to
              make available 60 fully-powered and fiber-optic-connected racks to researchers.
              
(2) Facility to support 3D protocol stack development (for optical
              management, control and data planes). 
(3) Middleware research environment, in
              which application-oriented middleware, like Globus, and data transport
              protocols are implemented and tested by the middleware community with major
              experimental e-Science drivers.  
(4) Host for national and global research
              activities in application-centric network measurement and monitoring. 
(5)
              Inter-domain security testbed to research and deploy encryption at lambda
              speeds and to test getting data out to crisis management personnel involved in
              natural or human-caused disasters.  
(6) Laboratory for developing/testing
              means for high-performance application provisioning on optical networks.  
(7)
              Facilitator of broad outreach efforts to communities, using a cultural heritage
              project to bring in under-represented communities as content developers,
              providers and users of data and visualization LambdaGrids. 
(8) Metro-scale
              laboratory for CISE students' access to the interdependent worlds of computing
              and networking.
