Title       : CAREER: Directed Assembly of Nanoparticles; A Tool to Enable the Fabrication of
               Nanoparticle Based Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0229087

Award Number: 0229087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heiko O. Jacobs hjacobs@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Goals. The first research objective of this CAREER program is to develop a
              parallel tool to position nanoparticles and small components onto surfaces. The
              strategy that will be developed is based on directed self-assembly; it uses a
              patterned surface with areas (receptors) that interact with nanoparticle based
              device components. The interaction driving the assembly process is based on
              electrostatic forces. The central goal of the research is to demonstrate that
              nanotechnological devices can be assembled by the directed self-assembly of
              nanoparticle building blocks. As a first device example the research will focus
              on the fabrication of a vertical flow field effect transistor that uses a
              silicon nanoparticle as channel element. The specific CAREER objectives
              are:

To develop a parallel tool that is based on directed self-assembly to
              position nanoparticles and small components on surfaces with sub 100 nm
              resolution. 
To study the key factors and ultimate resolution in theory and
              experiment.
To apply the developed tool to fabricate nanotechnological devices
              in general and a vertical flow FET in particular.
To foster a
              cross-disciplinary education and outreach to a broad community.
              

Intellectual merits. Nanoparticles can provide a variety of functions and
              are considered as building blocks for future nanotechnological devices.
              Examples of such devices are single electron transistors, quantum-effect-based
              lasers, photonic bandgap materials, filters, and wave-guides. Device prototypes
              have been realized using random particle deposition and single particle
              manipulation. Such strategies are useful to fabricate and explore new device
              architectures; however, their lag in yield and speed will have to be overcome
              in the future. Fabrication strategies that are based on self-assembly and
              directed assembly may overcome these difficulties. This program will advance
              the knowledge in the area of directed self-assembly. 
The research will focus
              on electrostatic interactions because they are long-range and non-material
              specific (any particle can be trapped). The PI invented a parallel process to
              pattern charge at 100 nm resolution (published in Science 2001, see
              bibliography). In a preliminary experiment, these charge patterns allowed to
              direct the assembly of nanoparticles from the gas phase and liquid phase. These
              findings demonstrate that electrostatic forces resulting from surface charges
              or externally biased electrodes can be used to guide nanoparticles to specific
              locations on a substrate. The investigator believes that such an
              electrostatically-directed self-assembly, because it is based on long-range
              electrostatic interactions, will give a significant advantage over other
              strategies that use protein recognition, DNA hybridization,
              hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity, and magnetic interaction. The CAREER program
              lays down the ground work to accomplish the PI's long term research goal, which
              is to use a variety of different short range and long range interactions to
              direct the assembly of small components and nanoparticles to fabricate
              functional devices in two- and three dimensions. 

Broader impact. It is
              difficult to overstate the broader impact of the research component of this
              CAREER pogram, if it proves successful.  For example, materials could be
              created as nanoparticles in the vapor or in solution, where they could be
              processed using well established methods. The ability to localize particles and
              small components of arbitrary materials on arbitrary substrates could allow the
              merging of technologies based on otherwise incompatible materials. Examples of
              applications include quantum electronic devices (addressed in this program),
              integrated circuits on plastics or fabrics for wearable intelligence, and
              merged optical/electronic structures for optical off-chip and cross-chip
              communication. 

Educational objectives. The educational objectives of the
              CAREER program focuses on creating awareness and transmitting excitement about
              the PI's research as well as exploratory, interdisciplinary research in
              general. It emphasizes on the importance of providing continuous opportunities
              for student involvement throughout their academic careers. Strongly influenced
              by the PI's educational experiences, the educational approach includes the
              following key points: 1) outreach to high school students and teachers, 2)
              undergraduate education, 3) undergraduate research, 4) graduate education, 5)
              graduate research, and 6) outreach to the general public.

Societal
              implications. "Advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology promise to have major
              implications for health, wealth, and peace in the upcoming decades. Knowledge
              in this field is growing worldwide, leading to fundamental scientific advances.
              In turn, this will lead to dramatic changes in the ways that materials,
              devices, and systems are understood and create." - after Mihail C. Roco. This
              research is one element to advance knowledge. It suggests a dramatic change in
              the way that devices and systems are created.

