Title       : Diving Physiology and Behavior of Emperor Penguins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0229638

Award Number: 0229638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $582530             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Ponganis pponganis@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The emperor penguin, Aptenodytes forsteri, is the premier avian diver and a top
              predator in the Antarctic ecosystem. The routine occurrence of 500-m diver
              during foraging trips to sea is both a physiological and behavior enigma. The
              objectives of this project address how and why emperors dive as deep and long
              as they do. The project examines four major topics in the diving biology of
              emperor penguins: pressure tolerance, oxygen store management, end-organ
              tolerance of diving hypoxemia/ischemia, and deep-dive foraging behavior. These
              subjects are relevant to the role of the emperor as a top predator in the
              Antarctic ecosystem, and to critical concepts in diving physiology, including
              decompression sickness, nitrogen narcosis, shallow water blackout, hypoxemic
              tolerance, and extension of aerobic dive time. The following hypotheses will be
              tested: 1) Prevention of nitrogen narcosis and decompression sickness in
              emperor penguins is achieved by inhibition of pulmonary gas exchange at depth.
              2) Shallow water black out does not occur because of greater cerebral hypoxemic
              tolerance, and, in deep dives, because of resumption of pulmonary gas exchange
              during final ascent. 3) The rate of depletion of the blood oxygen store is a
              function of depth of dive and heart rate. 4) The aerobic dive limit (ADL)
              reflects the onset of lactate accumulation in locomotory muscle, not total
              depletion of all oxygen stores. 5) Elevation of tissue antioxidant capacity and
              free-radical scavenging enzyme activities protect against the routine
              ischemia/reperfusion which occur during diving. 6) During deep dives, the
              Antarctic silverfish, Pleuorogramma antarcticum, is the primary prey item for
              emperors. 

In addition to evaluation of the hypotheses below, the project
              has broader impacts in several areas such as partnership with foreign and
              national institutes and organizations (e.g., the National Institute of Polar
              Research of Japan, Centro de Investigacioines del Noroeste of Mexico, National
              Geographic, the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, and Sea
              World). Participation in National Geographic television documentaries will
              provide unique educational opportunities for the general public; development of
              state-of-the-art technology (e.g., blood oxygen electrode recorders, blood
              samplers, and miniaturized digital cameras) will lay the groundwork for future
              research by this group and others; and the effects of the B15 iceberg on
              breeding success of emperor penguins will continue to be evaluated with
              population censuses during planned fieldwork at several Ross Sea emperor
              penguin colonies. 



