Title       : RUI: A Laboratory Model for the Solidification of the Earth's Core
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0229670

Award Number: 0229670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael I. Bergman bergman@simons-rock.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Simon's Rock of Bard Col
	      Alford Road
	      Great Barrington, MA  01230    413/528-0771

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bergman
EAR-0229670

This grant is for a study of a laboratory model for the
              solidification of the Earth's core. The Earth's inner core is solidifying from
              the molten iron alloy outer core. Recent seismic studies have inferred some
              interesting properties of the inner core: it is elastically anisotropic, with
              the direction close to the spin axis being fast, it may exhibit both depth and
              lateral variations in this elastic anisotropy, it may have an anomalously high
              attenuation as well as an attenuation anisotropy, and there may be evidence for
              prograde rotation relative to the mantle. The physical origins of these remain
              uncertain, but most hypotheses for the elastic anisotropy arise from texturing
              of the individually anisotropic iron crystals in the inner core. Many means of
              texturing have been suggested, falling broadly into those involving
              solidification and those involving post-solidification deformation. In either
              case the importance of rotation on outer core convection seems likely to play
              at least an indirect role.

The Principal Investigator will use the
              centrifugal acceleration to provide a component of gravity that is
              perpendicular to the rotation axis, as in a self-gravitating planet. By cooling
              at the center of a hemispherical shell, both the temperature gradient and the
              direction of effective gravity, at least in the lower hemisphere, are reversed.
              The rotation also provides for the Coriolis force. The Principal Investigator
              will solidify salt (NaCl) water, because salt water forms a eutectic system,
              which captures the likely essential features of the core phase diagram, because
              salt water is transparent, and because ice has a hexagonal closest packed (hcp)
              crystal structure, the likely crystal structure of iron under inner core
              conditions.

One goal of the Principal Investigator is to assess the extent
              to which the Coriolis force and rotational constraints control convective heat
              transfer, and hence the latitudinal dependence of the solidification rate.
              Lateral variations in this rate have been invoked as a possible texturing
              mechanism. A second, related goal is to assess the tendency towards cylindrical
              symmetry of the dendritic, columnar crystals as a function of the rotation and
              solidification rates. These goals will be accomplished by means of temperature
              measurements and post-solidification optical and texture analysis of the ice as
              a whole, and the individual grains.

In addition, it has been observed that
              fluid flow during solidification of hcp sea ice can cause a texture transverse
              to the growth direction. The Principal Investigator has also found similar flow
              effects in hcp metallic alloys. If these effects also occur in hcp iron alloys,
              then it is possible that the complexity of the inner core anisotropy reflects
              the varied flow at the base of the outer core during solidification. Thus, a
              third goal of this project is to compare the solidification texture recorded in
              the solid with the flow imaged in the melt by means of long time exposure
              photographs of neutrally buoyant, reflective particles. The experiments will be
              carried out for a range of rotation and solidification rates, so that it will
              be possible to extrapolate to the Earth's core. Future work may also involve
              studies of deformation during solidification.

As an RUI grant a significant
              component of this project is that undergraduates will carry out much of the
              design, building, and running of the experiments, as well as perform the data
              analysis and interpretation. Much of the theory and techniques involved are
              accessible to undergraduate science majors, and the Principal Investigator's
              prior research has involved undergraduates, many of whom have gone on to
              graduate education and careers in science and engineering.
