Title       : Experimental Determination of the Solubility of PGE in Hydrothermal Chloride
               Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2002   
File        : a0229495

Award Number: 0229495
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Wood swood@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Wood
0229495

There is debate in the scientific literature as to the extent
              to which the platinum-group elements (PGE, e.g., platinum, palladium, iridium)
              can be transported and concentrated by hydrothermal fluids to form ore
              deposits. The debate is hampered by a lack of experimental data with which to
              test the hypothesis that hydrothermal processes play a role in the
              concentration of the PGE to economic levels. To redress this lack of data, a
              series of experiments will be conducted. Some of these experiments will attempt
              to determine the relative solubilities of palladium, platinum, and iridium in
              hydrothermal solutions of geological relevance. Other experiments will be
              conducted to simulate the effect of hydrothermal fluids on magnesium-rich;
              PGE-bearing rocks similar to those in many PGE occurrences. The latter
              experiments will attempt to directly model hydrothermal processes that have
              occurred in the Marathon copper-palladium deposit in the Coldwell Complex,
              Ontario. The mineral assemblages and conditions employed in the latter
              experiments will be based on concurrent field-based research on the deposit
              being conducted by colleagues at the University of Windsor (I.M. Samson, B.J.
              Fryer) and the University of Waterloo (R. Linnen). A postdoctoral fellow, an
              undergraduate student, and a graduate student will participate in the project
              and will be trained in aqueous geochemistry. Both will be encouraged to present
              their work at national scientific meetings, and the postdoctoral fellow will
              participate in teaching of undergraduate geochemistry. The project will
              strengthen and expand existing collaboration between the PI and Canadian
              colleagues. The results of this research will be of direct socioeconomic
              benefit via the development of improved exploration models for PGE deposits.
              They may also lead to improved methods of hydrometallurgical treatment of PGE
              ores and to a better understanding of the corrosion of PGE and PGE-alloys in
              hydrothermal solutions.

