Title       : RUI: Web-Based Tools to Enhance Understanding of Microscopic Biodiversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0229531

Award Number: 0229531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74916              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Siver pasiv@conncoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Connecticut College
	      Route 32, North
	      New London, CT  06320    203/447-1911

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Hidden from view by the human eye are literally millions of microscopic
              organisms that are essential for maintaining the health and integrity of all
              ecosystems. Indeed, the roles microbes play in basic functions such as
              photosynthesis, energy flow and nutrient recycling are necessary for
              maintaining life on Earth. Irrespective of their overwhelming importance in the
              biosphere, microbes remain poorly understood. Because little is known about the
              true number of microbes and their genetic diversity, it is especially troubling
              to realize that taxonomic expertise in this group is declining worldwide.
This
              project is developing an innovative, fun-to-use, and highly informative
              computerized guide for use in introductory courses that will ignite interest
              and understanding of microscopic biodiversity, and help attract young people to
              careers in the study of microbes. The project is focusing on the algae, a
              diverse array of colorful and fascinating organisms that catch the imagination
              of students. Each year in introductory courses throughout the country literally
              hundreds of students are asked to use a dichotomous key to identify algae
              supplied by commercial venders. Often, due to insufficient illustrations and
              the unforgiving nature of dichotomous keys, students leave these laboratory
              sessions frustrated. We are developing a highly illustrative key to be used
              with cultures from commercial suppliers that is fundamentally different from
              standard
dichotomous keys in being nonhierarchical in design and inherently
              easier to use. Because the key is being widely distributed over the web it can
              potentially be used by thousands of students.
