Title       : Quantification of Hexavalent Cr Reduction in Groundwater Using Cr Stable
               Isotopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0229079

Award Number: 0229079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207292             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Johnson tmjohnsn@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0229079
Johnson

This project will develop chromium (Cr) stable isotope
              ratios as a new tool for understanding how this toxic element moves in
              contaminated groundwater.  Cr contamination is widespread, because the
              electroplating, leather tanning, and wood treatment industries use large
              volumes of highly concentrated Cr(VI) (hexavalent Cr) solutions.  Cr(VI) moves
              readily with groundwater as a highly soluble oxyanion, but in many groundwater
              systems, it undergoes chemical reduction to Cr(III), which is less soluble and
              less toxic.  Preliminary work by this group has demonstrated that this
              reduction reaction involves a fractionation of the stable isotopes 53Cr and
              52Cr.  The products of the reduction reaction are enriched in 52Cr, the lighter
              isotope, relative to the reactants, and as reduction proceeds, the remaining
              unreduced Cr(VI) becomes progressively more enriched in the heavier isotope
              relative to its starting composition.  The working hypothesis of this project
              is that the 53Cr/52Cr ratio of the Cr(VI) in groundwater provides a
              quantitative indication of the amount of Cr(VI) reduction that has occurred. 
              
This project addresses several basic questions raised in previous work that
              must be answered before this new approach can be used quantitatively and with
              confidence in practical applications.  The primary objectives are 1) to assess
              variability in the size of the isotopic fractionation during Cr(VI) reduction,
              2) determine the isotope fractionations, if any, that are induced by Cr(VI)
              sorption and Cr(III) oxidation, and 3) assess 53Cr/52Cr variability among
              contaminant sources. The work will involve several experiments in the
              laboratory, analysis of groundwater samples from Cr(VI) contamination plumes,
              and analysis of industrial and natural Cr.  This laboratory-based study will be
              complemented by a field study to be funded from other sources.  It will be
              carried out as three separate projects for graduate students, who will be
              trained in environmental geochemistry, hydrogeology, and isotope geochemistry. 
              The focus is on groundwater contamination, but most of what is learned here may
              be applied to other areas of geochemistry and oceanography.  

