Title       : Drinking and Na/K-ATPase Alpha-Subunit Isoform Expression in Antarctic Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0229462

Award Number: 0229462
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deneb Karentz                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407069             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Petzel dpetzel@creighton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Dowd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip R. Brauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret Scofield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Creighton University
	      2500 California Plaza
	      Omaha, NE  68178    402/280-2360

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Nototheniid fishes inhabiting the near freezing (-2C) waters of McMurdo Sound
              have some of the highest serum and cellular sodium (Na) concentrations and
              lowest gill sodium/potassium-ATPase (Na/K-ATPase, the sodium/potassium pump)
              activities of any marine teleost. The enzyme Na/K-ATPase regulates the Na
              concentration in the cells of many organisms. Maintaining a high salt content
              in the cells of these fish lowers the freezing point to allow habitation of
              cold Antarctic waters and reduces the salt gradient between the fish and the
              seawater. Based on previous studies of temperature effects, it is hypothesized
              that Antarctic nototheniids have lower drinking rates, lower salt excretion
              rates and a higher proportion of the low intracellular Na affinity for a
              specific subunit of the Na/K-ATPase (a3-isoform) compared to New Zealand
              nototheniids that inhabit warmer waters. These unique osmoregulatory properties
              explain the high serum and cellular Na concentrations found in nototheniids
              south of the Antarctic Polar Front. The proposed studies will compare and
              contrast the unique osmoregulatory mechanisms of Antarctic nototheniids with
              those of New Zealand nototheniids with respect to 1) seawater drinking rates
              and serum and cellular chemical composition of the fish, 2) enzymatic
              properties and expression pattern of mRNA and protein and 3) temporal and
              spatial localization of the Na/K-ATPase a3-isoform subunit in the fish gills.
              To accomplish these objectives four species of nototheniids, representing
              ecologically diverse habits above and below the Antarctic Polar Front will be
              studied. 

The broader impacts of this project include increasing our
              knowledge about the role of Na-K-ATPase in the cellular function in many
              organisms, strengthening our understanding of the biochemical and physiological
              adaptations of the Antarctic nototheniids that allow them to survive and thrive
              in the ice-laden waters south of the Antarctic Polar Front, providing field and
              laboratory research experience for graduate and undergraduate students, and
              significant outreach activities in science education to elementary and high
              school students and teachers. 
