Title       : Rheology of Mantle Minerals at High Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0229260

Award Number: 0229260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Weidner donald.weidner@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0229260
Weidner

The Earth is a dynamic body, constantly evolving,
              changing the shapes of oceans, building mountains.  Our understanding of these
              phenomena includes a recognition of the plastic behavior of minerals at high
              temperature.  Plate tectonics asserts that stable surface plates are
              mechanically isolated from the deep Earth.  Thermal evolutionary models
              transport heat by vertical flow of minerals.  The rebound from glaciers is
              testimony to the viscous flow beneath. 


This is a proposal to study the
              effects of pressure on the plastic character of the major minerals of the
              Earth's mantle.  While we have vastly improved our understanding of the flow
              properties of minerals over the past several years, the effects of pressure are
              still poorly constrained.  Estimates of activation volume for olivine flow in
              the power law creep regime give rise to an uncertainty in viscosity at the base
              of the lithosphere of 1000 fold.  This uncertainty is greater that the total
              effect of water content or partial melting.  Furthermore, the flow
              characteristics of the high-pressure forms of olivine, the phases that control
              flow in the deep Earth, are virtually unknown.


The investigators have been
              developing new tools capable of attacking this problem.  Using synchrotron
              x-ray sources, it is possible to measure both diffraction spectra and direct
              images of samples in a multi-anvil press while the sample is at high pressure
              and temperature.  They can now determine the stress field from the x-ray
              diffraction signal and strain from shadow-graph images.  One complete data
              collection cycle takes about three minutes.  Thus, time resolution of 200
              seconds is possible and time derivatives of these parameters can be obtained. 
              Stress accuracy is a few tens of MPa, and strain rates of 10-7 s-1 can be
              resolved.  The investigators have demonstrated that they can create a stress
              field in the sample during each of several heating/compression cycles.  Thus,
              texture and defect structures can equilibrate during the experiment.


With
              this award, the researchers will investigate the flow properties of olivine,
              wadsleyite, ringwoodite, garnet, and perovskite at high pressure.  They will
              synthesize the samples in the high-pressure laboratory at Stony Brook, and will
              use the synchrotrons at Brookhaven National Labs and at Argonne National Labs
              for the rheology study.  Results will be interpreted in terms of their
              implications on deep focus earthquakes and mantle viscosity structure.   
              


-- 


