Title       : Geochemistry of Metal and Metalloid Thioanions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0229387

Award Number: 0229387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370476             (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Helz gh17@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Helz
EAR-0229387

This project will explore the geochemistry of selected
              aqueous thioanions.  Thioanions consist of a metal or metalloid cation
              coordinated at least partially by sulfide ions.  The chemical behavior of these
              anions in nature has received little study.  The information obtained could
              have applications in such diverse areas as managing solid (including nuclear)
              wastes, improving our understanding of ore formation, reconstructing the past
              redox status of the ocean and healing coastal ecosystems.

Using previous
              studies of Mo behavior in sulfidic waters as a prototype, we will explore
              mechanisms that trigger particle-association of Re.  This element is of
              interest in paleoenvironmental studies, in geochronology and as a laboratory
              model of the nuclear waste component, Tc.  In oxic environments, the stable
              form is strongly hydrophilic ReO4-.  In suboxic to anoxic environments, Re
              becomes particle-associated.  Mechanisms that could trigger this change in
              behavior include transformation to thioperrhenates or reduction to ReIV
              complexes.  The nature of the products formed and equilibrium constants
              characterizing such changes are the objective of this portion of the
              project.

Thiomolybdate ions have been observed to dissolve very insoluble Fe
              minerals, like pyrite.  Formation of strong Fe-Mo-S complexes is implied.  We
              will study this phenomenon systematically in order to characterize the
              dissolved complexes.  If such complexes are capable of reversible equilibrium
              with pyrite, then they may catalyze formation of this mineral from Fe
              monosulfide.  Mechanisms of pyrite formation remain an area of active interest
              (and some dispute) among geochemists, despite considerable previous work.
              

Our discovery of very strong complexing between CuI and the oxythioarsenite
              ion, AsS(OH)(SH)-, has sparked interest from theorists and led to predictions
              of similarly strong thioarsenite complexes involving other potentially
              hazardous metals (e.g. Pb2+, Hg2+).  We will test these predictions.  Complexes
              of this kind result in synergistic co-transport of hazardous metals and
              metalloids.  They should be accounted for in computational models used for
              designing hazardous waste sites and making decisions about disposal options for
              dredge spoil, mine tailings, etc.

