Title       : Collaborative Research: Tidal Modulation of Ice-Stream Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0229659

Award Number: 0229659
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96878              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Bindschadler bob@igloo.gsfc.nasa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian Joughin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NASA-Goddard Space Flight
	      
	      Greenbelt, MD  20771    /   -

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a project to investigate the new-found, startling
              sensitivity of two major West Antarctic ice streams to tidal oscillations  to
              learn the extent and character of the effect and its ramifications for future
              ice-stream behavior. Ice streams D, C and Whillans (B) all show strong but
              distinct tidal signals. The ice plain of Whillans is usually stopped outright,
              forward motion being limited to two brief periods each day, at high tide and on
              the falling tide. Motion events propagate across the ice plain at seismic wave
              velocities. Near the mouth of D, tides cause a diurnal plus or minus 50%
              variation in ice-stream speed that propagates upglacier more slowly than on
              Whillans, and seismic data show that C experiences even slower upglacier
              propagation of tidal signals. Tidal influences are observed more than 100 km
              upglacier on C, more than 40 km upglacier on D, and may be responsible for
              fluctuations in basal water pressure reported 400 km upstream on Whillans,
              nearly the full length of the ice stream.  During the first year, the spatial
              extent of this behavior will be measured on Whillans Ice Stream and ice stream
              D by five coordinated seismic and GPS instrument packages at 100-km spacing on
              each ice stream. These packages will be deployed by Twin Otter at sites
              selected by review of satellite imagery and will operate autonomously through a
              combination of solar and battery power for two lunar cycles to study the
              sensitivity of the ice stream motion to spring and neap tides. Additionally,
              existing  data sets will be examined further for clues to the mechanisms
              involved, and preliminary models will be developed to reconcile the seemingly
              contrasting behaviors observed on the ice streams.  The second and third field
              seasons will examine in greater detail the tidal behavior of Whillans (year 2)
              and D (year 3). Work will especially focus on detailed study of at least one
              source area for events on Whillans, assuming that source areas inferred from
              preliminary data remain active. Vertical motions have not yet been detected,
              but differential GPS will increase our detection sensitivity. Seismic
              instrumentation will greatly increase temporal resolution and the ability to
              measure the propagation speed and any spatial heterogeneity. Modeling will be
              refined as more is learned from the field experiments. The project should yield
              numerous broader impacts. The improved knowledge of ice-stream behavior from
              this study will contribute to assessment of the potential for rapid ice-sheet
              change affecting global sea level with societal consequences. Results will be
              disseminated through scientific publication and talks at professional meetings,
              as well as contacts with the press, university classes taught by the PIs,
              visits to schools and community groups, and other activities. Two graduate
              students will be educated through the project.


