Title       : Collaborative Research: Testing and Constitutive Modeling of Fine-Grained Tills
               Deposited by the Laurentide Ice Sheets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0229889

Award Number: 0229889
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324556             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chandra S. Desai csdesai@email.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dinshaw N. Contractor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: TESTING & CONSTITUTIVE MODELING
OF FINE-GRAINED TILLS
              DEPOSITED BY THE LAURENTIDE ICE SHEET
J.W. Jenson, P.U. Clark, C.S. Desai &
              D.N. Contractor

EAR-0229907, -0229513, -0229889


This project will
              provide a more complete empirical basis for constraining and testing hypotheses
              regarding the role of sediment deformation, sliding, and ploughing in
              influencing ice-sheet behavior over soft sediment beds.  An accurate and
              complete description of the deformational behavior of subglacial tills is
              required for understanding ice sheet dynamics and their linkages to the Earth's
              climate system.  In conjunction with climate models, such ice sheet models may
              be used to investigate the stability of ice sheets-both Pleistocene and
              modern-and their interaction with global climate.

This collaborative project
              by specialists in glacial geology, soil mechanics and materials engineering,
              and geophysical modeling will address this important issue by obtaining a
              comprehensive evaluation of the mechanical properties of two representative
              fine-grained tills deposited by the Laurentide Ice Sheet.  Specifically, the
              PIs proposed laboratory program will apply an inclusive general model that will
              enable us to comprehensively evaluate behavior through the entire deformation
              history of these sediments, from the onset of strain to late-stage behavior. 
              For each till, fifteen mechanical parameters will be quantified in terms of the
              highly general constitutive model that has been successfully applied elsewhere
              in a variety of geotechnical and other materials engineering applications.  The
              experiments will encompass 80 or more tests over about 30 months utilizing
              proven equipment and methodologies, as well as some innovative techniques
              recently developed by one of the members of the research team.  To help
              validate the experimentally determined parameters, the project includes
              development of a non-linear back-prediction model, which will be used to verify
              the consistency of the experimentally determined values with predicted values,
              given the physical conditions and responses observed during the
              experiments.


