Title       : Investigation of the Glacial History of the Siple Coast Using Radar-Detected
               Internal Layers and the Ice Core from Siple Dome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2002   
File        : a0229490

Award Number: 0229490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard B. Conway conway@ess.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale Winebrenner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a project  to improve understanding of post-glacial retreat
              and thinning of the Siple Coast region.  Research has shown how age-depth
              relationships from ice cores can be extrapolated over wide areas by tracking
              continuous radar layers. By comparing radar-derived timescales with one from a
              model of ice- flow, glacial conditions over regional scales were inferred. 
              High-resolution radar profiles have been collected across most of the
              inter-stream ridges in the Siple Coast region, and an age- depth relationship
              has been established from the Siple Dome ice core.  Application of the
              techniques used by others is problematic because the ice streams that surround
              Siple Dome have disrupted the continuity of the internal layers.  A specific
              goal of this project is to search for other less direct ways to match radar
              layers between unconnected profiles. The correspondence between radar
              reflections and measurements of electrical conductivity and volcanic sulfates
              along the Siple Dome core will be investigated. The strategy is to search for
              distinctive patterns in the echoes that will facilitate layer matching.
              Preliminary results are encouraging: at least four distinct echoes at Siple
              Dome can be matched to spikes in the conductivity profile and the signature of
              one (at 210m depth, which is ~1,800 yrs BP) closely resembles that of a layer
              at ~200m on Ridge BC. Matching layers (and hence timescales) across the ice
              streams will allow reconstruction of spatial patterns of past flow, thinning
              and accumulation rate in the Siple Coast region, which is needed to predict
              future possible changes of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. Data necessary for the
              proposed work are already available; additional fieldwork in Antarctica is not
              required. The project will take two years to complete and will provide core
              education for a doctoral student in Earth and Space Sciences, with an emphasis
              on radioglaciology.


