Title       : Improving Calibration, Sensitivity and Uncertainty Analysis of Data Based Models
               of the Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0229176

Award Number: 0229176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine A. Shoemaker cas12@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0229176   Shoemaker   Site-specific pollution transport models are based on
              field data and the calibration of the parameter values that cannot be directly
              measured. This combination of field data and calibrated model is a powerful
              tool in environmental analysis. However, one of the difficulties in using such
              models is that the calibration process can be computationally very demanding if
              it is done thoroughly. An even more serious computational obstacle is the
              quantification of the uncertainty associated with model forecasts of pollution
              transport.
This proposal develops a new computational procedure (acronym
              ROCUS) that can be applied to a range of pollution transport problems. In the
              proposed research, ROCUS will be applied to a large watershed in New York, for
              which the PI's research model results are currently being used in formulating
              regulatory policy. ROCUS will also be used for anaerobic bioremediation of
              chlorinated ethenes using field data collected by DOD and an 18 species
              reactive transport model developed by the PI and her students.
The ROCUS
              procedure involves a group of computationally efficient algorithms for
              calibration, combined sensitivity and uncertainty analysis that is integrated
              through the use of response surface methods. One of the hypothesis of the study
              is that computation time to find good values for model calibration can be
              significantly reduced by replacing methods currently in use with one or both of
              the two new optimization algorithms to be investigated. These two methods both
              involve the use of a Radial Basis Function response surface coupled with a new
              optimization algorithm. Previously published papers and the PI's computational
              experiments support this hypothesis. The extent to which this hypothesis is
              valid will be assessed in the proposed research by a systematic comparison of
              accuracy and computational speed of the two response surface optimization
              algorithms with two existing heuristic methods. These tests will be performed
              on the two environmental applications and on standard global optimization test
              problems.
The applications represented are very serious pollution problems,
              and the results will add to scientific understanding and to methods for
              environmental protection. The teaching and research objectives will be obtained
              by incorporation of research results into two courses the PI teaches. Research
              infrastructure contributions will follow from the interdisciplinary nature of
              the research. In addition, the PI has a long history of working to promote
              underrepresented groups, especially women engineers, and this research project
              will continue that effort.

