Title       : Conference: Microbial Forensics: A Scientific Assessment, to be held in
               Burlington, Vermont, Summer 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0229098

Award Number: 0229098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Abigail A. Salyers   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert John Collier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Soc For Microbiology
	      1752 N Street
	      Washington, DC  200362804    202/737-3600

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Microbes and their products have important uses in forensics. Diatoms have
              been used to identify where drowning victims went into the water and PCR tests
              have established paternity and relationships between crime victims and alleged
              perpetrators. New technologies, like PCR and genome sequencing, could be used
              to establish the origin of an infectious disease outbreak, whether natural or
              due to intentional human intervention (bioterrorism). Questions of how to
              interpret molecular data should not wait until case law determines their
              validity. For any new technology to be accepted, it is first important to
              determine what standards should be applied.  Knowledge of the genome sequences
              of Bacillis anthracis (the cause of anthrax) and other pathogens on the Center
              for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) list of potential bioterrorism agents
              must be augmented by knowledge of how this information can best be used. While
              there are well-established criteria for evaluating and interpreting the results
              of such classical methods as cultivation or serological testing, no similar
              criteria have been developed for the new molecular methods. This colloquium
              will 1) consider the use of microbial forensics in responses to disease
              outbreaks (including bioterrorist attacks on human populations or agriculture);
              2) assess when and under what conditions new molecular techniques might  be
              appropriate and whether they could be used in conjunction with more traditional
              approaches; 3) determine how genome sequences and other molecular data can be
              best used and interpreted; 4) suggest which standards can be defined and which
              cannot; and 5) identify potential problems and areas that need to be addressed
              experimentally  so that criteria may be defined.

The American Academy of
              Microbiology, the honorific leadership group of the American Society for
              Microbiology, will convene a colloquium June 6-9, 2002, in Burlington, Vermont.
              The colloquium will bring together 25-30 interdisciplinary, expert scientists
              representing evolutionary microbiology, ecology, genomics, genetics,
              bioinformatics, forensics, chemistry, and clinical microbiology for structured
              deliberation on issues in microbial forensics. Participants will consider
              several theoretical scenarios and survey current molecular technologies,
              including genome sequencing, with a view to recommending standards for
              evaluation and validation of the data these technologies produce. The
              colloquium will produce the intellectual material for a published report with
              unbiased statements of the issues and practical recommendations for the
              future.

