Title       : Biogeochemical Tracers in Arctic Rivers: Linking the Pan-Arctic Watershed to the
               Arctic Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0229302

Award Number: 0229302
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1648366            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce J. Peterson peterson@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Holmes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1079,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of this proposal is to use river water chemistry as a
              means to study the origins and fates of continental runoff.  Tracers in
              addition to temperature and salinity are needed to identify river contributions
              to surface waters of the Arctic Ocean because melting of sea ice confounds
              interpretation of temperature-salinity mixing models.  Furthermore, tracers
              provide a means to distinguish contributions from different rivers regionally.
              A 5-year project is proposed in which selected parameters focusing on tracers
              of river water will be measured in the largest 6 rivers that drain the
              watershed of the Arctic Ocean: the Yenisey, Lena, Ob', Mackenzie, Yukon, and
              Kolyma. Tracers to be measured include H218O, barium, organic matter,
              alkalinity, and nutrients.  Sampling will be conducted during the high flow
              season in Years 1 and 4 and during all seasons in Years 2 and 3. Synthesis and
              modeling will occur throughout the 5-year project. Samples will be collected
              near the mouths of the rivers (but above tidal influence) in order to get fully
              integrated watershed signals and the most relevant freshwater end member values
              for oceanographic tracking.  To investigate transport pathways of river waters
              through the Arctic Ocean, newly defined end member values will be examined in
              the context of existing and growing oceanographic tracer databases.  To study
              watershed sources, tracers will be examined in the context of geomorphology,
              land cover, and hydrology models.  The proposed work will also generate a
              synoptic pan-arctic database on river biogeochemistry for comparison with past
              and future data in trend analyses. A collaborative network of expertise to
              successfully sample the 6 largest arctic rivers was assembled. Scientists from
              4 nations are involved, including representatives of agencies responsible for
              water quality monitoring in the Russian, Canadian, and US Arctic. The research
              group is also in a strong position to analyze and synthesize information on
              river tracer fluxes into and through the Arctic Ocean at the pan-Arctic scale
              because of the diverse expertise brought to the project by hydrologists,
              biogeochemists, and oceanographers.  

Outreach will involve participation of
              high school students living in villages near the study sites. Under the
              supervision of local teachers or researchers, these students will collect water
              samples from their rivers. They will perform basic analyses such as
              temperature, pH, and conductivity. Participating students will also be active
              in exchange of data via the web where available. Scientists from the research
              group will visit the students and discuss the project, present lectures to
              their classes, and involve the students in as many aspects of the project as
              possible.

