Title       : Statistical Physics in Random Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2002   
File        : a0229243

Award Number: 0229243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daryl W. Hess                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel S. Fisher fisher@physics.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0229243
Fisher
This award supports theoretical research on the statistical
              physics of random media.  Quenched randomness drastically alters the properties
              of many systems, especially their dynamics.  A variety of systems in which many
              degrees of freedom interact in random media will be studied focusing on long
              time scale universal aspects of their behavior.

One class of such system can
              undergo equilibrium phase transitions but they evolve extremely slowly towards
              equilibrium because of the necessity of overcoming large free energy barriers. 
              For these, in particular spin glasses, both the nature of the non-equilibrium
              configurations that dominate observations and the equilibrium states towards
              which they strive are of interest.  Many fundamental questions remain
              unanswered.  

A second class of random systems are those in which the
              dynamics and equilibrium properties are inextricably linked because of quantum
              mechanics.  The destruction of superconductivity by quantum fluctuations will
              be investigated, focusing on the combined effects of randomness, quantum
              mechanics and dissipation.

A third class, driven systems which are
              intrinsically far from equilibrium, can undergo novel types of non-equilibrium
              transitions, such as depinning from a stationary to a sliding "phase." 
              Progress towards a better understanding of such transitions will be used to
              investigate the dynamics and statistics of earthquakes both on single faults
              and on interacting faults.  Related issues in laboratory scale fracture will
              also be studied.
%%%
This theoretical research will study a variety of random
              systems ranging from magnetic glasses to earthquakes.  The research addresses
              fundamental issues.  The results of these studies may have broader applications
              to real materials.
***   

