Title       : Push Moraine Deformation - Experimental and Field Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0229985

Award Number: 0229985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52857              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel M. Davis daniel.davis@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Push Moraine Deformation - Experimental and Field Studies

GEOLOGY &
              PALEONTOLOGY PROGRAM
EAR-0229985
SUNY Stony Brook

Daniel M.
              Davis

ABSTRACT

      This project is directed toward the study of
              deformation in Pleistocene push moraines, using a combination of laboratory
              analog modeling and structural field mapping.  The experimental component of
              the project is designed to explore how the distribution and style of
              deformation in sediment pushed by a glacier depends upon the kinematics of the
              push and the composition and frozen or unfrozen state of the deforming
              sediment.  The goal is to use quantitatively analyzed lab models in order to
              understand better the great variety of folds, faults, and associated structures
              that are widely observed in push moraines.
      The field component of the
              project is directed towards applying to the push moraines of Long Island two
              techniques potentially capable of shedding light on deformation of the kind
              being modeled in the lab component of this project.  Measurements of clast
              fabric axes in various parts of the lobate Harbor Hill Moraine allow comparison
              with the results
of lab models, testing the idea that clast orientations
              record the distribution of strain in the moraine.  Ground Penetrating Radar
              (GPR) is ideally suited to porous sediments, but has not been extensively
              applied to push moraine deformation.  Imaging of buried structures using GPR
              offers the possibility of mapping otherwise unobservable folds and faults. 
              In
combination with the results of lab modeling, these field investigations
              are intended to advance the application of structural and tectonic techniques
              to understanding the development of glacial push moraines. 

