Title       : Victoria Land Latitudinal Gradient Project: Benthic Marine Habitat
               Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2002  
File        : a0229991

Award Number: 0229991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deneb Karentz                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95279              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rikk G. Kvitek rikk_kvitek@csumb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St U Monterey Bay Fdn
	      100 Campus Drive, Bldg. 86C
	      Seaside, CA  939558001    /   -

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is part of a multi-national and multidisciplinary program in
              Antarctica, the Victoria Land Latitudinal Gradient Project (VLLGP), that
              includes scientists from both the Italian Antarctic Research Program (PNRA) and
              the Antarctica New Zealand research program (ANZ). The overall goal of the
              VLLGP is to take a latitudinal gradient approach to ecosystem studies in
              Victoria Land, Antarctica. Personnel from the California State University
              Monterey Bay Seafloor Mapping Lab (SFML) will participate in a 20-day PNRA
              cruise on the R/V Italica during January 2004. The specific goals of the
              Italian/U.S. collaboration are to: 1) identify the environmental gradients
              linked to latitude and to relate community transitions along the Victoria Land
              Coast to climatic, geomorphologic and oceanographic features;. 2) identify
              biochemical, physiological and other adaptive responses of representative
              organisms;. 3) quantify biodiversity patterns and test the hypothesis of
              "progressive emergence" of marine assemblages with latitude; and 4) use biotic
              changes associated with steep environmental gradients to predict potential
              effects of climate change. The role of the SFML will be to use high-resolution
              acoustic remote sensing (multibeam and sidescan sonar) and spatial data
              modeling tools in the identification and characterization of benthic habitats
              and species/habitat associations along the gradient from 0-200 m water depth.
              Accurate mapping and classification of habitat types within each study area
              will be critical to the selection of comparable sampling sites if valid
              community comparisons are to be made along the latitudinal gradient. Since the
              Ross Sea coast extends across one of the longest latitudinal gradients in the
              Antarctic (15 degrees), this study offers a unique opportunity for predicting
              and establishing a baseline to detect environmental and community responses to
              global change and anthropogenic disturbance. The broader impacts of this work
              include not only efforts to foster research, logistic and data management
              collaborations among scientists from different disciplines
and national
              programs; but will also provide the opportunity for undergraduate students to
              participate in the research.
