Title       : Time and Mechanism(s) of Accretion of the Laurentia-Derived Argentine
               Precordillera to Western Gondwana: the Record in the Foreland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0229522

Award Number: 0229522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101500             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Thomas geowat@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Precordillera in northwestern Argentina is an exotic Laurentian (North
              American) terrane that collided with and was accreted to western Gondwana
              (South America).  General consensus holds that the Precordillera was rifted
              from the Ouachita embayment of southern Laurentia, and the Precordillera
              arguably has the best-constrained original location of any known exotic
              continental terrane.  For that reason, the Precordillera provides a place to
              address fundamental questions of mechanisms and rates of transfer of a
              continental terrane from one continent to another.  In addition, the
              Precordillera may serve as model for processes and responses that characterize
              the collision of a microcontinent (small plate) with a continent.  Finally, the
              history of the transfer of the Precordillera from Laurentia to Gondwana is an
              important constraint on global paleogeographic reconstructions.

Even with
              the consensus both for the original location of the Argentine Precordillera in
              the Ouachita embayment and for collision of the Precordillera with western
              Gondwana, interpretations of the time of collision differ from Middle-Late
              Ordovician to Silurian-Devonian.  Middle-Late Ordovician events are recognized
              in each of the interpretations, but those events are considered to represent
              collision with Gondwana in some interpretations and to represent rifting from
              Laurentia in others.  New data gathered in this research help to constrain both
              the timing and mechanism(s) of collision of the Precordillera with Gondwana. 
              This research integrates the history of subsidence and sedimentary filling of
              the Precordillera foreland basin in the context of temporal and mechanical
              links to the Famatina volcanic arc and a continental suture zone between the
              rocks of western Gondwana and the eastern Precordillera. Specifically, the
              research is examining the subsidence history of the basin, role of high-relief
              fault blocks as sources of carbonate olistoliths, significance of possible
              fault blocks for extension or transpression/transtension, provenance of igneous
              and metamorphic clasts, patterns of clastic sediment dispersal on Precordillera
              platform, relation of Famatina arch and suture zone to basin subsidence and
              sediment progradation on platform, and relation of succession to southern
              Laurentia.
