Title       : The Development of Olfactory Foraging Strategies in Antarctic Procellariiform
               Seabirds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  2002  
File        : a0229775

Award Number: 0229775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136515             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabrielle A. Nevitt ganevitt@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Procellariiform seabirds (petrels, albatrosses, shearwaters) are distinguished
              by their acute sense of smell. These birds have pelagic lifestyles and forage
              over thousands of miles of ocean to find patchily distributed resources. This
              project will explore the hypothesis that, during development chicks become
              tuned to odors associated with feeding in a manner analogous to olfactory
              imprinting. The development of olfactory sensitivity in burrow-nesting
              procellariiform seabirds will be studied within the Kerguelen Archipelago.
              There are three primary objectives. First, behavioral responses of chicks to
              two prey-related odors (dimethyl sulfide and cod liver oil), one novel odor
              (phenyl ethyl alcohol - rose scent) and burrow-related odors (burrow and colony
              dirt) will be characterized using videotape documentation. Second, it will be
              determined whether chicks can learn odor cues by pre-exposing chicks to a
              non-prey related odor during the egg stage, and then testing for increased
              sensitivity to that odor post-hatching. Finally, key behavioral responses
              induced when a chick is exposed to an odor plume within a portable wind flume
              will be quantified. Only a handful of studies have addressed olfactory
              abilities of procellariiform seabirds, or indeed any bird. Results from the
              proposed research will be among the first to address the development of
              olfaction in an ecologically important context. Overall, the results will
              greatly extend our knowledge of the foraging ecology of these fascinating
              birds. Such knowledge not only is useful to basic science, but also may help
              bolster efforts to ensure the conservation of procellariiforms, given the
              threatened or endangered status of many species. The broader impacts of this
              work include research experience for a graduate student and an active
              international collaboration with the French Institute for Polar Research and
              Technology. Furthermore, the results may be transferable to other potentially
              important organisms such as salmon and insects, where there is commercial
              importance in understanding the developmental stages of olfaction.
