Title       : Intracrystalline Boron Isotope Fractionation in Illite/Smectite: A Potential
               Geothermometer and Paleo-Fluid indicator r
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0229583

Award Number: 0229583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281945             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynda Williams Lynda.Williams@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Hervig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Intra-crystalline Boron Isotope Fractionation in Illite/Smectite

Boron is
              found in two different crystallographic sites of the 2:1 clay minerals
              illite/smectite. Boron is present in the interlayers of these clay minerals and
              also substitutes in the tetrahedral layers. Our pilot study (NSF SGER #0108852)
              developed a technique to analyze the boron isotopic ratio in these two sites,
              and we found that in natural samples the difference in the B-isotope ratios
              between each crystallographic site can be as high as 40. The present work is to
              study the factors that affect intra-crystalline B isotope variations. These
              results have the potential to provide a major advance in our understanding of
              clay mineral diagenesis and may also be a useful low temperature
              geothermometer. The research combines two different approaches: the synthesis
              of illite/smectite under carefully controlled conditions of temperature,
              pressure, and fluid composition and the analysis of natural samples from
              well-characterized localities.
Our experimental work will react a variety of
              smectites to illite in the presence of fluids with different aqueous d11B
              starting compositions. In order to test the B selectivity for tetrahedral
              sites, we will examine beidellite and montmorillonite compositions and di- and
              tri-octahedral clays to determine the effect of octahedral cation exchange
              relative to tetrahedral cation exchange on the d11Bint compositions. Isotope
              equilibration of I/S phases can be tested in experimental samples by changing
              the fluid d11B during reaction progress.
It is critical to compare the
              experimental work to natural I/S undergoing illitization in different
              hydrothermal regimes. The mechanisms of illitization may be different for
              closed (mudstone or bentonite) versus open (sandstone or geothermal) systems.
              We need to test the dependence of the intracrystalline d11B variations in
              different thermal regimes and varying the fluid/rock ratio. To do this we
              propose to study samples from a bentonite (closed system), a rapidly buried
              shale versus slowly buried mudstones and geothermal samples from 180-400C (open
              system). The geothermal system holds the most promise for finding fluids and
              natural I/S in equilibrium.
The combined experiments and analysis of natural
              samples will allow us to assess the role of fluid composition, mineral
              composition, temperature, temperature gradient, and fluid/rock ratios on the
              composition of B in the interlayers and tetrahedral layers of I/S. This new
              research will produce important information relating to the illitization
              process and may prove the potential for a novel low-temperature
              geothermometer.

