Title       : Renewable and Resource Efficient Composite Materials for Affordable Housing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0229731

Award Number: 0229731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151025             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Chandrashekhara chandra@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio Nanni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Virgil J. Flanigan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shubhender Kapila  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1624,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              RENEWABLE AND RESOURCE EFFICIENT COMPOSITE MATERIALS FOR AFFORDABLE
              HOUSING

Abstract    
 	A program aimed at development of renewable and
              resource efficient composite material for affordable housing is proposed. Fiber
              reinforced polymer (FRP) composites offer inherent advantages over traditional
              materials with regard to high strength-to-weight ratio, design flexibility,
              corrosion resistance, low maintenance, and extended service life. FRP materials
              can be used for both new construction and repair/rehabilitation of existing
              structures. One such application involves creating durable and affordable
              housing products. It is well known that properly designed FRP materials and
              systems can improve product durability.  
	High cost has been the key barrier
              to wide spread use of composites. Two of the major cost drivers for composites
              are labor and raw materials.  Automated manufacturing processes can
              substantially reduce labor hours and improve material utilization. Use of plant
              derived materials such as soybased resin system and soyhull derived foams offer
              low cost and environmentally benign raw materials. 
The research will focus on
              the following challenging issues: Development of composite structural
              components using resource-efficient and durable materials, and performance
              evaluation of these components are the key goals of the proposed research. To
              achieve these goals, an interdisciplinary team has been formed with backgrounds
              in materials, composite manufacturing, chemistry, and structural engineering.
              
 
 Pultruded glass fiber composite using soybased resin system for floor,
              roof, and wall panels
 Natural fiber reinforced insulation panels
 Variable
              density soybean hull based foam core  
 Manufacturing of panels using
              core-filled pultrusion and vacuum assisted RTM processes
 Experimental testing
              and analysis to provide the basis for safe use of these new materials.

              

	To accomplish the goal of transferring viable technologies from the
              laboratory to housing industry, we will collaborate with construction
              industries to evaluate the performance of products in the field. The successful
              completion of this project will generate data to initiate construction of a
              composite house and enhance technology's  general acceptance. The project is
              expected to have significant impact on research, education, technology transfer
              and interdisciplinary activities.
