Title       : The Time Averaged Field at the Equator: Ecuador
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0229130

Award Number: 0229130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83802              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil D. Opdyke drno@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,5926,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Opdyke
EAR-0229130

This study will undertake a time averaged field (TAF)
              study of late Pliocene - Pleistocene lava flows in the equatorial volcanic
              province of Ecuador, where abundant volcanism offers excellent possibilities of
              sampling. More than 54 stratovolcanoes in Ecuador form part of the northern
              segment of the Andean volcanic belt, called the Northern Volcanic Zone (NVZ),
              which extends from 5o N to 2o S latitude (covering parts of Colombia and
              Ecuador).  Paleomagnetic sampling and rock sampling for 40Ar/39Ar dating is
              planned on at least 40 sites.   Fieldwork will be carried out with the
              collaboration of Dr. Minard Hall, professor of the Department of Geophysics
              (Escuela Politecnica Nacional, Quito), who is the person with the most
              knowledge and experience of the volcanology of Ecuador. His knowledge of the
              volcanic stratigraphy of the area will expedite and optimize fieldwork.
              Paleomagnetic and Ar/Ar laboratory analysis will be made at the University of
              Florida. Paleointensity studies will be carried out on as many sites as
              possible.
 
This study will help to fill an existing gap in the paleomagnetic
              database of suitable secular variation studies at equatorial latitudes.  State
              of the art measurements during fieldwork, laboratory and data analysis will be
              applied in this study in order to obtain results sensitive to non-dipole
              contributions of the magnetic field (about 5% of the total magnetic field).
              This study will comply with present day selection criteria of paleomagnetic
              databases According to model G of secular variation, angular dispersion at the
              equator can be attributed solely to the quadrupole family of harmonics and not
              to the main dipole, thus making Ecuador a strategic point of observation of the
              paleomagnetic field. The agreement observed in many studies between latitudinal
              variations of the angular dispersion (relative to the Earth's axis of rotation)
              of the present field and the paleomagnetic field will be tested. This study
              will contribute to enhance the paleomagnetic database of lava flows which at
              the present moment seem to indicate, although not conclusively due to
              deficiencies of the database, the coincidence between longitudinal structures
              in the TAF of the last 5 Ma and the present field. On the other hand changes of
              the present field in the last two decades have lead some to suggest an on-going
              reversal scenario (Hulot et al., 2002) which could be hardly considered a
              normal state of the magnetic field. This study will undertake a much-needed
              secular variation study in Ecuador, following rigorous paleomagnetic techniques
              with excellent age control.

