Title       : Collaborative Research: Extrusion and Rotation During Intracontinental
               Deformation: The Role of the Kunlun Fault in the Indo-Asia Collision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a0229911

Award Number: 0229911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas W. Burbank burbank@crustal.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Despite recent advances in understanding of the mechanical and thermal
              response of
continental lithosphere to collisional orogenesis, important
              controversies remain. One of these centers on the role of large strike-slip
              faults during intracontinental deformation, and whether these structures 1)
              control the lateral 'escape' of quasi-rigid blocks in response to continental
              convergence (e.g., Tapponnier et al., 1982), or 2) reflect the passive
              localization of strain in a pervasively deforming and shearing crust (e.g.,
              England and Molnar, 1990). The models make very different predictions regarding
              the variation of displacement along strike-slip faults, the relationship of
              fault displacement to deformation of the surrounding crustal blocks, and the
              nature of accommodation of slip at the terminations of the faults. In eastern
              Tibet, continuing debate over the nature of active deformation reflects, to a
              large degree, the limited number of rigorous geologic tests of these
              predictions.

The Kunlun fault is a first-order structural feature in the
              central and eastern Tibetan Plateau, where it presents a key opportunity to
              test among competing hypotheses for the role of strike-slip faults in the
              active deformation of eastern Tibet. Although Holocene slip rates appear to be
              uniform at ~11mm/yr along the central portion of the fault (Van der Woerd et
              al., 2000), several observations suggest that significant left-lateral shear
              along the eastern Kunlun fault does not reach the margin of the Tibetan
              Plateau: 1) the active trace of the fault on remote sensing (e.g., Tapponnier
              and Molnar, 1977) cannot be distinguished east of ~102E; 2) field observations
              (Kirby) confirm that scarps associated with the Kunlun fault are not present
              east of this region; and 3) geodetic surveys indicate that, at present, little
              resolvable left-lateral shear passes through the eastern margin of the plateau
              (Chen et al., 2000). Determining what happens to left-lateral shear along the
              easternmost portion of the Kunlun fault is critical if we are to understand its
              kinematic and dynamic role in deformation of eastern Tibet and more generally
              the role of strike-slip faults during intracontinental deformation.

The PI's
              propose to test several hypotheses regarding the mechanisms of transfer
              and/or
accommodation of displacement at the apparent termination of an
              intracontinental strike-slip fault: 
ce Hypothesis 1: Displacement is
              transferred to kinematically linked, strike-slip faults that:
a. transmit
              displacement across and beyond the plateau margin, or
b. transmit displacement
              to shortening structures at the plateau margin.
ce Hypothesis 2: Displacement
              is absorbed by distributed shortening within the plateau resulting in crustal
              thickening.
ce Hypothesis 3: Displacement represents passive rotation of
              faults in response to a diffuse, clockwise regional shear.

Testing these
              hypotheses will focus on the following tasks:
ce Determining Late
              Pleistocene-Holocene slip rates along the easternmost segment of the Kunlun
              fault, with special attention to potential variations along strike.
ce
              Establishing the geometry, kinematics, and rates of displacement on candidate
              accommodation structures (both within the plateau and at its margin).
ce
              Assessing the magnitude and distribution of differential rock uplift and river
              incision in the Anyemaqen Shan (the prime candidate for shortening within the
              plateau)
This study promises to bring a detailed chronologic perspective to
              bear on the nature of
accommodation of strain at the terminations of large,
              intracontinental strike-slip faults. The PI's will document the presence or
              absence of displacement gradients present near the ends of such structures. The
              study will define the relationship of fault displacement to regional
              deformation patterns and will determine some of the mechanisms by which
              displacement is transferred to other structures. Finally, it will determine to
              what degree fault displacements are linked to deformation of the bounding
              blocks. The combined results will yield critical new insights into the problem
              of extrusion versus rotation during continental deformation.
