Title       : Austral High-Latitude Atmospheric Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0229251

Award Number: 0229251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vladimir Papitashvili                   
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gonzalo Hernandez hernandez@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5115      ANTARCTIC AERONOMY & ASTROPHYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The study and determination of the latitudinal extent of the high-latitude zonal
              wavenumber one character mesospheric waves recently discovered (by the PI and
              others) near the South Pole are the most compelling and contemporary
              investigations in the polar aeronomy. These mesospheric waves have not been
              observed elsewhere, because at lower latitudes the spectrum is much richer in
              larger zonal wavenumbers of mesospheric waves that are seldom directly
              measured. As one approaches the very high latitudes near the rotational poles,
              the higher wavenumber oscillations observed at lower latitudes must either
              transform into the observed higher latitude wavenumber one oscillations, or
              else lose their energy to the mean flow and as heat dissipation. A unique
              opportunity to determine where and how this oscillation wavenumber mode
              transition region occurs is offered by the combined and simultaneous
              observation from the combined and presently-existing ground-based sites at
              South Pole and Arrival Heights, in conjunction with the TIMED satellite. This
              is a unique opportunity for investigating this problem, which is unlikely to
              happen again in the next ten to fifteen years. These investigations can only be
              carried out in Antarctica because the defining observations must be made from
              the rotational pole. Another special problem at high geomagnetic latitudes is
              the existence of persistent and predictable thermospheric vertical neutral
              winds, first reported by the PI from the South Pole observations. The existence
              of these vertical winds, likely to be caused by the divergence of the
              horizontal wind motions due to ion drag, has profound effects on the energetics
              of this region of the atmosphere. With the present solar activity maximum, a
              more complete characterization and investigation of these vertical winds
              becomes possible, because they are geomagnetic activity dependent. These
              investigations from South Pole, simultaneously with Arrival Heights and the
              observations of our Austral Alliance colleagues at Mawson and Davis stations,
              as well as those with the TIMED satellite will enlarge the geographic and
              geomagnetic coverage of this neutral vertical wind study. These investigations
              are possible because of the existing highly versatile ground-based Fabry-Perot
              spectrometers present at South Pole and Arrival Heights. These devices are able
              to simultaneously and independently address both of these investigations in the
              mesosphere and thermosphere. The instruments are capable of resolving the zonal
              wavenumber structure at mesospheric heights while, at the same time, gathering
              thermospheric neutral wind observations. In addition to the wind motion, the
              neutral atmosphere kinetic temperatures can simultaneously be observed. These
              latter measurements provide another powerful tool to understand the behavior
              and properties of the upper atmosphere at the very high latitudes. The polar
              aeronomy has become one of the four initiatives in the CEDAR atmospheric
              community addressing the Global Climate Change effects and their implications.
