Title       : Igniting Continental Arcs; A Petrologic Study Of Mafic Rocks And Peridotites
               From The Coast Ridge Belt, Santa Lucia Mountains (California)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0229470

Award Number: 0229470
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221727             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mihai N. Ducea ducea@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Chesley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ducea and Chesley 
EAR-0229470  

There is strong evidence that major
              continental magmatic arcs are being built in episodic "flare-ups" separated by
              periods of magmatic quiescence, although the mechanisms responsible for the
              high magmatic fluxes are not resolved. Moreover, flare- up events appears to be
              fueled by a mafic input, thought to be largely derived from continental
              lithospheric mantle. This requires the existence of a mantle lithosphere an
              order of magnitude thicker than allowed by observations in mantle wedges and
              tectonic models. However, most of this evidence comes from subordinate mafic
              rocks found in shallow exposures of batholithic terranes. Either the voluminous
              mafic input to the arc lower crust is not (predominantly) from the lithospheric
              mantle during high magmatic fluxes, or if it is, we need to revise our thinking
              regarding the dynamics of subduction beneath continents and the ability of
              continental lids to episodically feed melt-fertile mass to the mantle wedge.
              

These issues will be addressed in a petrologic study of mafic rocks from a
              mid-crustal arc exposure in the Big Sur area of the Santa Lucia Mountains,
              central coastal California. The basement rocks exposed there represent a tilted
              exposure of a magmatic arc representing paleo-depths ranging from 25 km to 10
              km. At about 25 km beneath the arc there is a transition from large intrusions
              of tonalite to granodiorite composition separated by steeply dipping screens
              typical of the Sierra Nevada batholith to near horizontal, foliated gneissic
              rocks with numerous mafic intrusions. Mafic intrusions, now either amphibolites
              or granulites, are abundant at this level, where they stalled due to buoyancy
              reasons. Our mapping, petrographic, chemical and isotopic results will be used
              to resolve crustal vs. sub-crustal, and lithospheric vs. asthenospheric
              reservoirs involved in continental arc magmatism and provide new constraints
              for the mechanisms of generation of large batholiths. 

