Title       : Improving Preservice Mathematics Teachers' Understanding of Fundamental Concepts
               in the Secondary Mathematics Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2002   
File        : a0229805

Award Number: 0229805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74388              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Lorch jdlorch@math.bsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph J. Bremigan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Bremigan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ball State University
	      
	      Muncie, IN  47306    317/289-1241

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Recent reports indicate that secondary mathematics teachers are most effective
              when they have a deep understanding of the mathematics they teach, and that
              teachers trained in the United States generally do not possess this depth of
              knowledge. In this proof of concept, the grantees address this problem by
              writing an innovative college-level mathematics textbook focusing on the
              secondary mathematics curriculum, and show that the use of this book by
              pre-service secondary mathematics teachers in a newly designed undergraduate
              course improves their knowledge of the mathematics they are teaching. 

The
              intellectual merit of  "Improving Pre-service Mathematics Teachers'
              Understanding of Fundamental Concepts in the Secondary Mathematics Curriculum"
              is that it aims to improve the knowledge base of pre-service teachers allowing
              for an increase in the depth of their mathematics knowledge. The intent is to
              produce a book ready for national dissemination that could be used in a wide
              variety of situations on both the undergraduate and graduate level, either as a
              main textbook or as a resource. Roughly speaking, the book exhibits three main
              features: First, coverage of carefully selected basic secondary mathematics
              topics (many of which are not explored sufficiently in high school due to the
              rush to calculus); second, an emphasis on connections between these topics; and
              finally extensions of these topics to challenging college-level problems and
              projects.

 The broader impact of "Improving Pre-service Mathematics
              Teachers' Understanding of Fundamental Concepts in the Secondary Mathematics
              Curriculum" is realized through the development, testing, and revision of
              innovative materials through a collaboration of mathematics faculty,
              mathematics education faculty, and current high school teachers. These
              materials serve as the basis for a textbook, a draft of which is completed and
              field tested by the end of the grant period. At the same time, student
              knowledge is assessed via a variety of evaluation methods.


