Title       : Department-Level Reform of Undergraduate Industrial Engineering Education: A New
               Paradigm for Engineering Curriculum Renewal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0229093

Award Number: 0229093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95036              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Leonard mike.leonard@ces.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Kurz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Currie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Delbert L. Kimbler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anand K. Gramopadhye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0229093
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Leonard, Michael
INSTITUTION
              NAME: Clemson University
TITLE: Department-Level Reform of Undergraduate
              Industrial Engineering Education: A New Paradigm for Engineering Curriculum
              Renewal

Abstract

The  primary  objective  of  the  proposed  planning 
              project  is  the  development  of  a  new  scalable  and deployable  industrial
               engineering  baccalaureate-degree  renewal  model.  This  model  will  be 
              designed  to  permit scaling up  from an information technology  kernel to a
              fully integrated industrial  engineering  undergraduate curriculum.  The  model
               will  also  serve  as  a  deployable  template  for  the  redesign  of  other 
              baccalaureate  degree engineering programs through its use of problem-solving
              approaches that draw directly from fundamental models in the physical and
              biological sciences, and its emphasis on the use of nontraditional learning
              methods.  A secondary objective for the planning project is an assessment of
              the appropriateness and likely impact of the new model.  
  
For the first
              time, a planning process will be developed that will lead to the identification
              of opportunities to extend tested asynchronous learning mechanism and synthetic
              environments to support an industrial engineering curriculum in systems and
              engineering design as it relates to the three emphasis areas of information
              technology, biotechnology and cognitive theory. The successful completion of
              this effort will lead to the ability to fill a state and national need for
              well-prepared industrial engineering graduates. 
 
Impact:  The planning
              project activities presented in this proposal are expected to lead to a novel
              curriculum model that will impact both the education of industrial engineering
              students and, through time, the education of students in other engineering
              disciplines.  
 
   

