Title       : SGER: Path Dissolution in Propositional Logic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0229339

Award Number: 0229339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik Rosenthal erosenthal@newhaven.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Haven
	      300 Orange Avenue
	      West Haven, CT  065161916    203/932-7000

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0229339
Erik Rosenthal 
U of New Haven

The problem SAT 
              determining whether a formula in propositional logic is satisfiable  has
a
              long history in computer science. It is important in complexity theory and has
              myriad applications
in fields such as robotics, optical character recognition,
              database systems, computer
architecture, circuit design, and verification, to
              name but a few.
The traditional view of much of the mechanical theorem proving
              community has been that
interesting applications of automated deduction
              require first-order rather than propositional
logic. That view has begun to
              change in light of recent successes with propositional logic.
Propositional
              logic is of course intractiable (unless NP = P). One approach to this
              problem
with knowledge representaion and database systems is knowledge
              compilation  preprocessing
the underlying propositional theory. The idea is to
              do as much computation as possible in an
offline phase. Then queries in the
              online phase can be handled quickly. Horn clauses, ordered
binary decision
              diagrams, sets of prime implicates/implicants, and decomposable
              negation
normal form (DNNF) have all been proposed as targets of such
              compilation.
Path dissolution is an inference mechanism that works naturally
              with formulas in NNF. It
is strongly complete in the sense that any sequence
              of link activations will eventually terminate,
producing a linkless formula
              called the full dissolvent. The paths that remain are models of the
original
              formula. Full dissolvents have been used effectively for computing the prime
              implicants
and implicates of a formula.
Decomposable negation normal form was
              first introduced in 1998 and is currently being
studied for application to
              knowledge representation and database systems. A formula in DNNF
is a full
              dissolvent, and it appears that many of the advantages of DNNF exist with full
              dissolvents.
It also appears that a full dissolvent of a formula can be
              obtained more effciently than
a DNNF representation of the formula. The main
              thrust of this project will be to examine the
relationship of DNNF and full
              dissolvents.
