Title       : Experimental Studies of the Mechanism of Diamond Crystallization From COH
               Supercritical Fluid in SiO2-Rich Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a0229666

Award Number: 0229666
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201515             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larissa Dobrzhinetskaya larissa@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry W. Green  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Krassimir N. Bozhilov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dobrzhinetskaya
EAR-0229666

The recognition of microdiamonds within
              ultra-high pressure metamorphic rocks a decade ago initiated a revolution in
              the understanding of continental collision terranes. Two concepts are known to
              explain the origin of such diamonds: (1) crystallization from a supercritical
              COH fluid; (2) crystallization from fluid-bearing alkaline-carbonate melt.
              Traditionally, experimental attempts to replicate natural diamond formation
              have been based on synthesis in metal-carbon systems in a highly reduced
              environment. Only recently has experimental modeling of natural diamonds at
              high P and T conditions been extended to the alkaline-carbonate-carbon system
              in the presence of H2O. We have established experimentally that H2O is an
              active catalyst promoting diamond crystallization from graphite at high
              pressure and high temperature and that incubation time is dependent on metal
              ions in solution.  In particular, we find that Mg facilitates nucleation and Si
              does not. This work will extend our work in diamond synthesis with a focus on
              diamond nucleation in the COH-SiO2 system at varying parameters such as
              pressure, temperature, time and oxygen fugacity to constrain the mechanism of
              diamond growth in quartzofeldspathic gneisses and quartzites from ultra-high
              pressure metamorphic terranes. Experimental investigations related to diamond
              synthesis from supercritical COH fluid in the diamond stability field is a new
              but fast-growing research field of great importance for understanding of the
              mechanism of diamond crystallization within subducted rocks of continental
              affinity and may bring interesting application for industrial diamond
              synthesis.

