Title       : Collaborative Research: Fusion of Tomography Tests for DNAPL Source Zone
               Characterization: Technology Development and Validation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0229717

Award Number: 0229717
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Allen G. Hunt                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tian-Chyi  Jim Yeh yeh@hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0229717
Yeh

Dense Nonaqueous Phase Liquids (DNAPLs) are prevalent at a large
              number of 
sites throughout the world. The variable release history and
              geologic 
heterogeneity make the distribution of DNAPLs in the source zone
              complex. 
These source zones can contribute to long-term groundwater
              contamination 
for decades to centuries. Therefore, the spatial distribution,
              mass, and 
composition of DNAPLs present in the source zone need to be
              characterized 
in great detail so that efficient remediation schemes can be
              designed. 
During the last few years, many tracer techniques have been
              introduced to 
enhance the characterization of DNAPL source zones. While these
              tracer 
techniques allow for the in situ estimation of volume-averaged values
              of 
DNAPL saturation, there is an urgent need for the development of a
              
cost-effective technology to characterize the spatial distribution of
              
DNAPLs at high resolutions.

The objectives of this proposed study are: 1)
              to develop a 
software/hardware package that fuses different types of
              information using a 
stochastic approach to provide a cost-effective
              characterization, 
monitoring, and predictive tool for the DNAPL source zone,
              2) to conduct 
laboratory experiments to test and verify this proposed
              technology, and 3) 
to distribute the results of the research to assist
              scientists, engineers, 
and managers to solve DNAPL contamination
              problems.

              Intellectual Merit: The proposed new data processing
              
technique, stochastic information fusion, combines different types of
              
measurements taken at different locations over different scales in an
              
iterative manner to provide the best estimate of the DNAPL residual
              
distribution and its uncertainty.  Specifically, it analyzes the
              
information derived from hydraulic tomography to identify hydraulic
              
heterogeneity first in three-dimensions.  It then improves the estimate of
              
the heterogeneity by incorporating new information acquired from the
              
conservative tracer tomography.  Afterward, the improved estimate of
              
hydraulic heterogeneity is used to simulate the hydraulic tomography such
              
that more detailed information about the response of the subsurface becomes
              
available. This new information again is fed back to the technique to
              
update the estimate of hydraulic heterogeneity.  The iterative process
              
continues until all available information and measurements are fully
              
utilized in identifying the processes and variables that control the
              
spatial distribution of DNAPLs.  Upon completion, the newly derived
              
knowledge of the processes and variables are then combined with data
              
derived from the partitioning tracer tomography to effectively delineate
              
the spatial distribution of DNAPL residual saturation in the source 
zone. 
              The proposed tomography technique and the stochastic fusion of 
information
              algorithm are to be tested and validated in a sandbox. Success 
of the
              proposed research advances not only estimation theory in general but 
also our
              technologies for characterizing and monitoring the subsurface.

Broader
              Impacts: The proposed stochastic fusion technology can be 
integrated with
              different characterization techniques in diverse geological 
conditions. It is
              also amenable to all stages of DNAPL source zone 
characterization including
              initial screening, site characterization, 
remediation, and long-term
              monitoring.  A web-based virtual 
hydraulic/tracer tomography laboratory will
              be created and be available to 
any student, educator, practitioner, and
              researcher around the world.    We 
believe this virtual laboratory will
              stimulate creativity to revolutionize 
not only classical subsurface hydrology
              but also other disciplines of 
hydrologic sciences.  For example, using our
              stochastic information fusion 
technology, one may be able to assimilate
              meteorological information such 
as lighting and precipitation as alternative
              excitation sources for 
tomographic surveys of the subsurface environment at
              large scalesseeing 
into the earth.

