Title       : The Topology of Manifolds of Dimensions 3 and 4
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0229035

Award Number: 0229035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cameron M. Gordon gordon@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan W. Reid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Luecke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Gompf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Award: DMS 0229035
Principal Investigator: Cameron Gordon

The
              project is a conference in 3- and 4-dimensional topology.
Satisfactory
              accounts of manifolds of dimension greater than or equal
to 5 were achieved by
              the late 1960's. Since then, attention has
naturally focused on dimensions 3
              and 4.  Despite dramatic advances
(Thurston, Freedman, Donaldson, Jones,
              Witten...), many major problems
in these low dimensions remain unsolved, for
              example the classical
3-dimensional Poincare Conjecture and its smooth
              4-dimensional analog.
The topological classification of 1-connected
              4-manifolds was achieved
by Freedman in the early 1980's, but in the smooth
              case there is not
even a conjectural picture. By contrast, Thurston's
              Geometrization
Conjecture provides a beautiful and coherent description of
              all
3-manifolds, but is far from established.  In the mid 1980's,
              Jones'
discovery of his polynomial link invariant, together with work
              of
Witten, led to the introduction into 3-dimensional topology of
              methods
from quantum physics.  The current situation in
              low-dimensional
topology is that there are many different directions and
              methods, but
little understanding of the relations between them.  Thus in
              dimension
3 we have hyperbolic geometry, foliations and laminations,
              normal
surfaces, combinatorial geometric methods, quantum invariants,
              finite
type invariants, Floer homology,..., while in dimension 4 there
              are
the Donaldson and Seiberg-Witten theories, symplectic structures,....
The
              aim of the conference is to address these topics, and the
connections between
              them, and to provide a forum for interaction and
exchange of ideas between
              experts in the different areas.

Geometric topology aims to understand
              n-dimensional manifolds, which
are objects that locally look like ordinary
              n-dimensional Euclidean
space (whose points are described by n co-ordinates),
              but whose global
structure might be quite complicated. The cases of dimensions
              3 and 4
are particularly interesting, being the dimensions of our spatial
              and
spatial-temporal universes, and it is a striking fact that it
              is
precisely these dimensions that are mathematically anomalous.  There
have
              been many developments and considerable progress in the fields of
3- and
              4-dimensional topology over the last twenty-five years, but, in
both
              dimensions, a complete picture is still lacking.  One of the aims
of the
              conference is to encourage interaction and collaboration
between experts in
              the several different aspects and techniques that
are currently being pursued
              in low-dimensional topology, and in
particular between those people working in
              dimension 3 and those in
dimension 4, where the methods in the two areas tend
              to be quite
different, but where there are several hints of connections
              between
them.  The current disparate state of the subject makes it
              difficult
for people beginning research in low-dimensional topology to get
              a
good overview of the area, and so by encouraging the participation
              of
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, we intend that
              the
conference should also provide an opportunity for young researchers
              to
get a broad perspective of the present state of knowledge,
              directions
begin pursued, and the main open problems. The invited
              speakers
include some of the world's leading 3- and 4-dimensional
              topologists,
whose expertise together covers all the major aspects of the
              two
fields.

