Title       : Intertidal Marsh Hydrology and Geomorphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0229358

Award Number: 0229358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110996             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Voulgaris   (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond Torres  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1325,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0229358
Voulgaris

Sea level rise and coastal urbanization have unknown
              effects on tidal creek habitats because feedback between tidal forcing and
              marsh morphology are not well constrained.  In the south Atlantic Bight, tidal
              creek networks etch marsh surfaces and produce subtle but well-defined drainage
              basins.  We propose to conduct exploratory research designed to elucidate the
              interactions between process and form in a pristine marsh, representative of
              marshes in the south Atlantic Bight.  The objectives of this proposal are to
              analyze the linear, aerial and 3-D structure of a marsh basin, and investigate
              how interactions between tidal flow and topography influence basin evolution
              and stability. Our research goal is based on the modification and application
              of terrestrial geomorphology models that rely on the watershed basin area
              (process) to explain river networks (form). In a similar manner we seek to
              identify if a creek basin area can be used to characterize creek form and
              further to define such creek basin area. This can be accomplished using
              high-resolution DTM (digital terrain model) of a marsh area and evaluating the
              morphology of its tidal creek basins Delineation of basins identified in the
              DTM (using topographic highs) will be compared to basins defined by flow
              divides, which in a tidal environment might not coincide with the marsh
              topographic highs. Flow divides will be defined for various tidal stages and
              ranges using a 2-D depth averaged, finite element hydrodynamic model. Both
              types of basins will be compared and analyzed for creek length, basin area,
              slope and drainage density, hypsometry and inundation frequency, and these
              parameters will be tested for scale invariance. This initial pilot study will
              be carried at a location in North Inlet, SC a pristine marsh system. The
              results of this work will help set guidelines for intertidal zone habitat
              restoration and rehabilitation.


