Title       : Emerging Science of Environmental Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2002  
File        : a0229516

Award Number: 0229516
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1124613            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen T. Curwood scurwood@post.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : World Media Fdtn
	      8 Story Street
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    617/868-8810

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The World Media Foundation is producing and distributing "Emerging Science of
              Environmental Change."  This radio-based project presents new and cutting edge
              research to the public through National Public Radio broadcasts, Internet radio
              broadcasts, multi-media web presentations, Internet-based discussion, formal
              school curricula and public lectures.  The goal of the project is to provide
              the public with a longitudinal view of how those engaged in cutting-edge
              science formulate theories, structure their inquiries and monitor the ongoing
              processes, pitfalls, unexpected results and successes of their research.  The
              production team will closely follow the work and processes of one or more
              research teams over major portions of the 36-month project in order to provide
              an in-depth understanding of the research process.  

The project will
              deliver nine one-hour radio specials and nine additional hours of shorter
              program segments that will be included in the NPR "Living on Earth" series. 
              The online component of the project will present expanded versions of the audio
              through its daily web radio service, as well as multi-media web pages with
              references and discussions linked to the core subjects of the specials.  School
              outreach will be directed primarily at largely urban, under-served middle and
              high schools.  It will use the audio and multi-media web presentations of
              current research as frames of reference for student instruction in
              environmental science.

