Title       : Manufactured Housing Production Process Analysis and Facility Layout
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0229856

Award Number: 0229856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Makarand Hastak hastak@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Madan (Matt) G. Syal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1624,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The overall goal of the proposed research, jointly proposed by
              Purdue University and Michigan State University is to improve the production
              process planning and facility layout design through a "Whole House and Building
              Process Redesign" approach. The main objectives in support of the stated goal
              include, developing an optimal production process model for manufactured
              housing that would resolve the production bottlenecks identified through
              previous NSF-PATH research; developing innovative design alternatives for
              factory layout; simulating the facility layout alternatives based on the
              optimal process model to identify the optimal facility layout(s); and
              investigating radical and innovative changes in the production system and the
              house design itself that would integrate advanced technology and innovative
              design into the production system and identify progressive avenues for future
              research and advancements.  The research results will be developed as a
              continuing education program for the industry and will be disseminated in
              conjunction with industry partners.
The proposed research has a direct focus
              on the 3rd milestone identified by the PATH technology road-map "Whole House
              and building process redesign". Furthermore, if the broader definition of the
              proposed research is taken into account then it will also substantially affect
              the 1st milestone, i.e. application of information technology in housing.  This
              research would have a significant impact on both criteria 1 and 2 through
              integration of research & education (criterion-1) and in integrating diversity
              into the research process (criterion-2).

