Title       : Digital Libraries Supporting Innovative Approaches to Learning and Teaching in
               Geography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0229210

Award Number: 0229210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $939853             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Freeston freeston@alexandria.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith C. Clarke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark N. Gahegan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David DiBiase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terence R. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 6857      SPECIAL PROJECTS (IIS)
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal :      IIS-0229210
Institution: University of California, Santa
              Barbara
PI:              Michael Freeston


This project, entitled "Digital
              Libraries Supporting Innovative Approaches to Learning and Teaching in
              Geography" is a collaborative effort of University of California, Santa Barbara
               and the Pennsylvania State University in the USA and the Universities and
              Southampton and Leeds in the United Kingdom. The project also informally
              engages partners at other institutions.   The primary aims of the proposed
              project are to develop a distributed enabling information infrastructure for
              the support of learning and teaching Geography and to devise innovative
              approaches to teaching and learning based on this infrastructure.  The project
              will deliver shared UK/US electronic resources associated with course in
              several topic areas, including Human Geography, Geographical Information
              Science, Geomorphology and Earth Observation.  The project will build on a
              variety of impressive digital resources which have been created by government
              agencies, universities and other organizations.  A primary resource will be the
              Alexandria geo-referenced digital library, developed within the previous
              NSF-led Digital Library Initiatives.

