Title       : Metal Binding Ligands: Evolution, Transport, and Transformations Along
               Hydrologic Flowpaths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0229650

Award Number: 0229650
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336248             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin M. Shafer mmshafer@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Armstrong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0229650
Shafer
Trace metals in natural waters exist in a myriad of chemical
              and physical forms that influence their transport, bioavailability, and
              toxicity.  The speciation of these metals is regulated by their interactions
              with metal-binding ligands comprised of natural organic and inorganic solutes,
              colloids, and particles.  Despite their importance, information on the sources,
              nature, and stability of these ligands is lacking.  In particular, the roles of
              the diverse biogeochemical and hydrologic processes that regulate the
              production and transport of strong-binding ligands along a hydrologic flow path
              are poorly understood.

Our goal is to provide information on changes in the
              nature and abundance of strong metal-binding ligands along representative
              hydrologic flow paths, and the fluxes of strong ligands into streams from both
              groundwater and hyporheic sources and processes.  Specifically, we intend to
              determine: (1) the abundance and strength-spectrum of metal-binding ligands
              along key segments of hydrologic flow paths and associate ligand properties
              with hydrologic and geochemical conditions and biogeochemical processes; (2)
              the influences of hydrologic events (recharge, discharge) and biogeochemical
              processes (iron redox reactions, sulfate redox reactions, primary production)
              on temporal variability in ligand characteristics and abundance; and (3) the
              stability of strong ligands to chemical and biochemical transformations.  We
              expect interface margins such as the hyporheic zone to be important sites of
              ligand production.

Our research is centered at Alequash Creek, within the
              site of the co-located NSF North Temperate Lake LTER and the USGS Trout Lake
              WEBB projects where the hydrologic system is especially well characterized and
              instrumented.   Our approach is based on sampling and characterizing strong
              metal-binding ligands at key segments along the flow path while also
              quantifying transport.  Ligands will be isolated on-site using filtration and
              ultrafiltration and characterized using detailed chemical analysis,
              spectroscopy, and related techniques.  We expect strong ligands to be
              associated with organic carbon, iron oxide, and/or reduced sulfur-containing
              phases. We will emphasize the metals Cu, Pb, and Zn as both environmental
              contaminants and probes of ligand character.  Assessment of binding strength
              using voltammetry is a key component of our approach, supported by biochemical
              response measurements.  Using our study site as a model, our research will be
              structured to address two key areas: the importance of groundwater as a source
              of strong ligands to the riparian and hyporheic zones and the production of
              strong ligands within the hyporheic zone and transport into streams and lakes. 
              These questions are central to understanding watershed linkages to streams and
              lakes and their influences on the abundance and bioavailability of metals in
              surface waters

