Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Distinguishing Regional Tectonic, Global Eustatic, and
               'Isotopic' Events in Chesterian Rocks of East-Central Idaho and Southwestern
               Montana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0229369

Award Number: 0229369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87792              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter E. Isaacson isaacson@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Recent stratigraphic and isotopic studies reveal a more complex
              nature to Carboniferous
glaciation than previously considered, and highlight a
              need for further study of the timing and mode of initiation of Gondwanan
              glaciation, and its mechanistic link to eustatic fluctuations, changes in
              continental weathering rates, and paleoceanographic and climatic
              conditions.
Furthermore, some isotopic proxy data suggest that the
              mid-Carboniferous (Chesterian) may even have been a time of global warming and
              deglaciation between glacial episodes. We hypothesize that the changes in sea
              level, continental weathering patterns, and oceanographic and paleoclimatic
              conditions that would have accompanied the significant change in ice-sheet
              dynamics associated with either onset of main-stage glaciation or potentially
              intermittent
deglaciation during the Late Mississippian should be recorded in
              the stratigraphy and isotopic compositions of Chesterian strata. We further
              hypothesize that each of the two aforementioned scenarios would have imparted,
              on Chesterian deposits, a unique set of stratigraphic and
geochemical
              signatures that can be used to place quantitative constraints on the
              hypothesized evolutionary paths of Gondwanan glaciation.
In order to test
              these hypotheses, we propose to carry out an integrated, high-resolution cycle-
              and sequence-stratigraphic, and isotopic study of Chesterian carbonates and
              siliciclastics from east-central Idaho and southwestern Montana focused on
              developing a record of environmental change during the Chesterian in this
              portion of Panthalassa. A detailed regional reassessment of the Chesterian
              macrofossil and microfossil biostratigraphy will be made from proximal and
              distal settings of the study area in order to maximize the resolution of
              chronostratigraphic correlation in the proposed sequence stratigraphic
              framework. We will carry out a hierarchical sequence stratigraphic analysis of
              the Chesterian rocks in order to decipher their depositional history, and to
              determine the nature and distribution of peritidal and subtidal parasequences,
              major sequence-bounding unconformities and parasequence boundaries at a local-
              and regional-scale. This will allow for evaluation of how the parasequences and
              surfaces relate to subtle tectonic movements or record eustatic fluctuations.
              Paleontologic analysis will provide important qualitative and quantitative
              constraints on the amount of relative sea level rise and/or fall recorded in
              each parasequence or sequence. We propose to build on the recently derived set
              of stable and radiogenic isotope curves for the Carboniferous by developing a
              set of integrated stable (d13C, d18O, and d34S) and radiogenic (87Sr/86Sr)
              isotope records for the Chesterian that should contribute uniquely by: (1)
              refining a portion of the existing isotope curves, (2) defining a coupled
              d13Ccarb and d13Corg record, and (2) testing the potential for reconstructing O
              and C isotope vertical gradients for the Antler foreland basin.
By developing
              a series of high-resolution proxies from the same set of
              chronostratigraphically well-constrained deposits, we will be able to evaluate
              the relative rates and phase (i.e., lead-lag) relationships of the
              stratigraphic and isotopic proxy records, an aspect that has been variably
              compromised in previous intrabasinal studies. This approach should allow for
              differentiation of long-term tectonic events from higher frequency eustatic
              events in this basin, and thus provide considerable insight into the role of
              tectonic forcing on the stratigraphic and isotopic character of the Chesterian
              strata. In turn this should provide insight into the role of tectonic forcing
              in controlling basin accommodation, and regional oceanographic conditions and
              circulation. Moreover, we anticipate that this study should quantitatively
              constrain the spectrum of environmental changes that occurred during the
              Chesterian in this portion of Panthalassa, including global paleoceanographic
              and paleoclimatic perturbations. Lastly, the results of this study should
              provide insight into the nature of any mechanistic links between eustasy,
              physical and chemical oceanographic conditions and paleoclimate, thus
              ultimately contributing towards constraining the timing and mode of initiation
              of Gondwanan glaciation.

