Title       : Collaborative Research: Geochemistry and Whole Mantle Convection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0229962

Award Number: 0229962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144959             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter E. van Keken keken@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Van Keken, Hauri
EAR-0229962, 0229755

The investigators are interested in
              the role that the generation and recycling
of oceanic crust plays in the
              formation of geochemical heterogeneity.
The formation of oceanic crust is a
              fundamental differentiation process that
causes distinct variations in trace
              element and bulk composition. The related
variations in density and rheology
              have important consequences for mantle
dynamics and mantle mixing. Our main
              hypothesis is that the formation and
recycling of oceanic crust can explain a
              vast proportion of the geochemical
observations. The central goal of this
              project is to study the role that
compositional density plays in preserving
              geochemical heterogeneity.
As part of the investigators' hypothesis testing
              approach they will 
address following questions:
   1) How does the recycling
              of oceanic crust affect mantle chemistry?
   2) What are the relationships
              between noble gas and lithophile 
isotope ratios?
   3) Is it possible that
              the large-scale differentiation during Earth's
formation accounts for the
              presently observed heterogeneity?
     The team will use a combination of
              geodynamical and geochemical modeling to
answer these questions. This provides
              an excellent tool to test conceptual
ideas by quantifying the effects of
              mantle mixing, fractionation,
differentiation, and degassing. The approach is
              based on previously established
collaboration between Van Keken, Ballentine
              and Hauri. Previous models will be
improved by the modeling of oceanic crust
              formation, incorporation of
lithophile isotopes, and significantly higher
              spatial and temporal resolution.
Van Keken and a graduate student will be
              responsible for the model improvements
and dynamical computations, while Hauri
              and Ballentine will guide the 
hypothesis
testing approach and aid the
              geochemical modeling. The collaborative 
aspects are
an essential component
              of this proposal.
     This project will lead to a better understanding of the
              processes that are
responsible for the thermal and chemical evolution of our
              planet. It will aid
in the development of essential dynamical modeling tools
              and provide
cross-disciplinary integration, international collaboration, and
              education
of students in quantitative geophysics and geochemistry.

