Title       : Experimental and Textural Constraints on the Eruptive Behavior of Basic Magmas
               in Subduction Zones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0229290

Award Number: 0229290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas P. Wagner                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181863             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Gardner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jessica F. Larsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Gardner
EAR-0229290

Eruptions of basaltic and basaltic andesitic (basic)
              magma in subduction zones can vary in style between strombolian to intense
              sub-Plinian (and rarely Plinian). Why can subduction-zone basic magmas erupt in
              such dramatically different styles, as compared to Hawaiian eruptions? Is it
              because subduction-related magmas contain greater amounts of gas, or are their
              ascent paths or ascent rates more conducive to explosive eruptions? This study
              seeks to answer those questions by investigating the influences that gas
              content, storage, ascent, and degassing have on the eruptive style of basic
              magma in subduction zones. The investigators' study focuses on three key
              eruptions of basic magma from the Aleutian volcanic arc: Shishaldin volcano in
              1999, Okmok volcano in 1997, and Westdahl volcano in 1991-92. Those eruptions
              are ideal for this study because they varied greatly in eruptive style
              (strombolian, fire fountain, and sub-Plinian), including during each eruption.
              In addition, all three eruptions were monitored with seismic and geodetic
              measurements, which place important constraints on magma motion and eruptive
              character. The investigators propose to examine influences on eruptive style in
              three related tasks. Task 1 will define textural differences (both crystals and
              vesicles) between the three eruptions and between different phases of the
              eruptions. Task 2 will define pre-eruptive gas contents and pre-eruptive
              storage conditions of the three magmas, with a combination of glass inclusion
              measurements and experimental petrologic work. Task 3 will define the
              relationship between decompression (ascent) rate and textural differences in
              the resulting products, through a series of experimental petrologic work.
              Results from the three tasks, combined with the existing geophysical
              constraints on the eruptions, will allow the investigation of the gas contents,
              storage, ascent, degassing, and eruption of basic magma in the Aleutians.
              Experiments will be performed in the Experimental Petrology Laboratory at the
              University of Alaska Fairbanks, and all products will be analyzed in the
              Advanced Instrumentation Laboratory at the University of Alaska Fairbanks.

