Title       : Collaborative Research: Integrated Study Linking Paleosol Biotic Communities and
               Ancient Alluvial Landscapes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0229300

Award Number: 0229300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen T. Hasiotis hasiotis@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative Research: Integrated Study Linking Paleosol Biotic Communities and
              Ancient Alluvial Landscapes

Mary Kraus-EAR-0228858 University of
              Colorado
Stephen T. Hasiotis-EAR-0229300 University of
              Kansas

ABSTRACT

	This project is a collaborative study of the different
              kinds of trace fossils (ancient burrows, tracks, and trails) found in fossil
              soils or paleosols that developed on river floodplains.  The paleosols are of
              early Eocene age (~55 million years old) and are located in northern Wyoming. 
              The principal investigators, together with graduate and undergraduate students,
              will use detailed fieldwork and laboratory analyses to describe the different
              kinds of trace fossils and to determine how the various trace fossils are
              distributed within different kinds of paleosols.  Because different paleosols
              represent different ancient environmental conditions, the project will
              determine which trace fossils are environmentally sensitive and can be used in
              other rocks to interpret ancient environmental conditions.  The paleosol and
              trace fossil data will also be combined with available climatic data to
              determine if changes in the trace fossils coincided with documented climatic
              fluctuations during the early Eocene in northern Wyoming.  

Combining the
              study of trace fossils with the study of paleosols offers a valuable new tool
              for interpreting ancient floodplain environments.  Results from this project
              will provide new insights into the relationships among soil organisms
              (represented by trace fossils), the soil environment in a particular area of
              the ancient floodplain, and climate.  Results from this study can be used to
              determine which trace fossils can be used in other ancient floodplain deposits
              to identify ancient ecologic and climatic settings.  This study provides a
              unique opportunity to develop an interpretational tool that can delineate among
              environmental, hydrologic, and climatic factors that control the distribution
              of trace fossils in the ancient floodplain record and clarify their
              distribution.   


