Title       : Collaborative Research: Detection and attribution of changes in the hydrologic
               regimes of the Mackenzie, the Kuparuk and the Lena River Basins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0229559

Award Number: 0229559
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50233              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Gutowski gutowski@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1079,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this research are to detect and document changes in the
              storage of freshwater in the Arctic regions of the Western Canadian, Alaskan,
              and Eastern Siberian Arctic, to ascribe those changes to their land cover or
              climate source, and assess the impacts of past and future variations in storage
              components (e.g., active layer depth, lake volume) on freshwater inputs into
              the Arctic Ocean. The aim is to characterize the changing hydrologic regime
              spatially to facilitate accurate projections of future hydrologic conditions
              and to develop a numerical modeling capability that 1) accurately captures
              contemporary climatic and hydrologic dynamics, 2) projects reasonably accurate
              responses to future scenarios and 3) incorporates well documented algorithms
              that will be distributed to other modeling groups wishing to include dynamic
              land surface processes in arctic regions (e.g., for studies of vegetation
              dynamics or gas flux). The investigators will also provide a pan-Arctic
              perspective by using spatially-based model results to develop a
              statistically-based model. 
The research is divided broadly into two main
              components: process-level hydrologic studies and large-scale atmospheric
              studies, with a well-defined approach to bridge the scale differences.
              Process-level studies include field observations and analyses of the storage
              components in the hydrological cycle as well as modeling of their role in the
              hydrological cycle. Field studies include surveys of the main storage
              components, with literature searches and remote sensing filling in many of the
              gaps. Field studies on the watershed scale will also be conducted at several
              small watersheds along North/South transects covering the Middle Yukon,
              Kuparuk, Upper Yukon, Mackenzie and Lena watersheds where long-term records and
              on-going measurement programs exist. The WaterWERCs model will be applied to
              these small sub-watersheds for calibration and validation using contemporary
              records, and to the entire watersheds for both climate scenarios of the past,
              present and future driven from our atmospheric modeling. The atmospheric model,
              PAM, is a state-of-the-art regional climate model that will be tailored for use
              in a pan-Arctic setting and will be driven by gridded atmospheric re-analyses.
              The atmospheric model results will be validated with available observational
              data and the gridded model output will be used to force a hydrologic model. 

