Title       : Water is Life: Immersing the Public in Aquatic Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0229918

Award Number: 0229918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Orrin C. Shane                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2467240            (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret G. Burke mburke@calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda G. Kulik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Jenkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terrence M. Gosliner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      Golden Gate Park
	      San Francisco, CA  941184599    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The California Academy of Sciences will produce"Water is Life," a 30,383
              square-foot permanent exhibit with educational programming.  The exhibit is
              designed to engage the public with the living world of water, to foster
              environmental stewardship and increase science literacy.  Three habitat
              components -- Philippine Coral Reef, California Coast and Global Rainforests --
              are conceptually and experientially linked through "Water Planet," which
              explores water's physical properties and how they impact living organisms and
              lead to aquatic diversity.  Each component also reinforces the importance of
              conserving aquatic resources.  Educational programming takes "Water is Life" to
              local schools and community events and onto the World Wide Web, as well as
              provides venues for formative evaluation of exhibit design elements.  The
              development of lending kits, plus supporting manuals and workshops, will extend
              the reach of "Water is Life" regionally and nationally.  Similarly, instruction
              manuals and workshops for creating desktop, living reefs will have national
              impact.   The compelling draw of live organisms, hands-on activities, and
              exhibit enrichment through educational programming provide accessibility to a
              large, diverse audience.  The exhibit will reach over one million annual
              visitors, and a larger audience will experience distributed educational
              programs.
