Title       : Curriculum Reform of the Mechanical Engineering Program at City College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0229381

Award Number: 0229381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Feridun Delale delale@ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Latif M. Jiji  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin Liaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Benenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles B. Watkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0229381
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Delale, Feridun
INSTITUTION
              NAME: CUNY City College
TITLE: Curriculum Reform of the Mechanical Engineering
              Program at City College

Abstract


This project plans for the systemic
              reform of the mechanical engineering curriculum at the City College of New
              York. Building on our previous experience in educational projects, five current
              members of the Mechanical Engineering Faculty and a current and former
              Associate Dean will spearhead the planning process.

The purpose of the plan
              will be to develop means for achieving the following objectives:
a)
              Integration of emerging technologies into the curriculum. These technologies
              include
micro-electro mechanical systems (MEMS), nanotechnology,
              biotechnology, new
application of materials, intelligent systems, and advanced
              computer aided engineering
software b) Reform of pedagogical methods by
              introducing the results of cognitive
research, industry needs and
              technological literacy concerns into the design of the
learning environment c)
              Consistency of instruction by formulating department policies on
expectations,
              responsibility, ethics, homework, report writing and team work d)
              Issues
related to retention, timely graduation and greater enrollment of women
              and e) Broader
impact of the reform effort and dissemination of
              results.

The planning activities will be carried out by involving the
              Department's stakeholders,
namely: faculty (including adjuncts and graduate
              teaching assistants), students and
employers. After gathering the views of all
              the stakeholders, each course will be analyzed
to determine a strategy for
              implementing the proposed changes. A report detailing the
curriculum reform
              plan will be prepared. The report will also include a plan for
evaluation of
              the implementation phase of this effort.


