Title       : Crustal Structure of Strike-slip Fault Systems from a down-plunge section in the
               eastern Chugach Mountains, Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a0229939

Award Number: 0229939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Pavlis tpavlis@uno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/280-7154

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Near-surface fault patterns of strike-slip systems are now reasonably well
              understood, in
large part because of extensive societal interest (seismic
              hazard) and a wealth of
subsurface information obtained from petroleum
              exploration. What happens to these
faults at depth, however, is poorly
              understood. One approach to resolve these questions
is geophysical imaging,
              but these studies are expensive and typically ambiguous because
of imaging
              problems of structures ranging from low to high angle in crystalline rocks
              that
often lack sufficient variation in physical properties for clear imaging.
              A much higher
resolution technique to resolve these issues is to examine
              well-exposed down-plunge
sections of strike-slip shear zones. Such a structure
              exists in eastern Chugach Mountains
of southern Alaska, and this project
              proposes to examine this structure in detail to
investigate the
              three-dimensional architecture of strike-slip systems at mid to lower
crustal
              depths. Previous NSF funded research by the PI and V.B. Sisson has
              documented
the structural geometry of the lower and upper portions of the
              system, but a mid-crustal
portion of the system has not been examined in
              detail. In light of recent theoretical
developments (e.g. Teyssier et al., in
              press) the PI's initial conclusions require re-evaluation because the classic
              hypothesis of steep shear zones penetrating through the crustal column predicts
              a different geometry than a crustal column in which the upper and lower crust
              are detached along a broad zone of distributed flow. This project will test
              these alternative predictions through a combination of field structural
              studies, kinematic analyses (finite and incremental strain, shear-sense
              determination, and strain path information through growth fibers and
              development of quartz LPO's).	
