Title       : Mantle and Crustal Xenoliths of the Puerco Necks, New Mexico: Constraints on
               Lithospheric Evolution at the Transition Between the Colorado Plateau and the
               Rio Grande Rift
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0229238

Award Number: 0229238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194652             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Selverstone selver@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zachary D. Sharp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Adrian J. Brearley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Rio Puerco volcanic necks in northwestern New Mexico contain a rich and
              varied xenolith suite that has received almost no prior attention. The necks
              lie within the Jemez Lineament at the transition between the Colorado Plateau
              and the Rio Grande rift, and the xenoliths thus have the potential to provide a
              large amount of information on lithospheric structure, chemistry, and
              alteration in a tectonically important region. This study addresses a number of
              questions regarding the nature and significance of the Jemez Lineament, the
              physical and chemical processes whereby lithosphere is transformed into
              asthenosphere during extension, and the variations in magma ascent
              characteristics that lead to preservation of different xenolith suites. The
              project focuses on three specific hypotheses:  (1) incipient extension at the
              boundary between the Colorado Plateau and the Rio Grande rift modified the
              mantle both chemically and physically. Many geochemical and isotopic studies of
              basalts from continental rifts imply a transition from enriched lithospheric
              melt sources to depleted asthenospheric sources as extension progresses. Mantle
              xenoliths should provide direct evidence for this transition. The degree of
              mantle modification that has occurred in the early stages of extension is being
              determined through comparisons of chemical, isotopic, and microstructural
              features of the Puerco xenoliths with xenoliths from the adjacent regions.  (2)
              The Jemez Lineament is a lithospheric-scale structure that marks a major
              Proterozoic province boundary in the subsurface. The Jemez Lineament is defined
              on the basis of a northeast-trending alignment of Cenozoic volcanic centers;
              these volcanoes are thought to have taken advantage of a plumbing system
              established during Proterozoic assembly of the region. There is, however,
              little surface expression of faulting along the Lineament, and the geophysical
              evidence for the existence of a major province boundary at depth is ambiguous.
              If the Jemez Lineament does represent a major crustal boundary, crustal
              xenoliths should show pronounced deformational fabrics and different
              pressure-temperature histories from different sides of the boundary.
              Microstructural and metamorphic studies are in progress to test this
              hypothesis.  (3) The abundance, size, and type of xenoliths brought to the
              surface by different volcanic necks varies systematically with the chemistry of
              the host basalts. There are approximately 50 volcanic necks within the Rio
              Puerco valley, some of which carry abundant mantle xenoliths, others that
              contain only crustal xenoliths, some with both mantle and crustal xenoliths and
              some of which are entirely devoid of xenoliths. Correlations between xenolith
              populations and host basalt chemistry place constraints on magma ascent
              velocities, degree of fractionation and wallrock interaction en route to the
              surface, magma volatile contents, changes in magma source region, and thermal
              evolution within the volcanic field as a function of time.
