Title       : A Grant Proposal for a Contextually Relevant Mathematics and Science Evaluation
               Training Institute for Mid-Level Experienced Evaluators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0229308

Award Number: 0229308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elmima C. Johnson                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1089089            (Estimated)
Investigator: Veronica G. Thomas vthomas@howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vinetta C. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 7261      PROGRAM EVALUATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The proposed project would provide for completing the development and the
              implementation of a two-week summer training institute for practicing
              evaluators at Howard University, Washington, D.C. beginning in Summer 2003. The
              goal of the Institute would be to provide intensive professional development
              for mid-level evaluators focusing on the impact of contextually relevant
              factors (ethnic group, language, culture, etc.) on the entire evaluation
              process, from design to data analysis to dissemination of results.  The
              Institute would enhance participant knowledge of critical relevant issues in
              science and mathematics and their relationship to contextual factors in the
              learning process.  Further the Institute would provide participants with the
              skills and methodology to conduct an evaluation within a cultural context. The
              goal is to create a new model of evaluator training based on the influence of
              contextual factors, which would increase participant awareness of and
              competency in educational evaluation, particularly in math and science
              programs. The goals would be accomplished through: (a) a series of
              instructional activities that include the analysis of on-going and completed
              evaluation projects, (b) discussions with nationally known practicing
              evaluators who utilize a contextually relevant approach in their work and, (c)
              the implementation of a real-time project using appropriate methodology by each
              participant.   

As part of the planning grant an administrative team,
              instructional faculty and an external advisory committee have defined the
              participant group, are finalizing the curriculum and completing logistical
              arrangements (obtaining housing, course credit, etc.). The project evaluator is
              completing the development of the evaluation plan.

