Title       : RUI: Fabric in Granite: the Vinalhaven and Cadillac Mountain Intrusive
               Complexes, Maine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  2002  
File        : a0229269

Award Number: 0229269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109551             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle J. Markley mmarkley@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Granitoid plutons constitute much of the earth's crust, and most show magmatic
              foliation and lineation (i.e. fabric). Although structural geologists have made
              great strides in quantifying magmatic fabric and interpreting its significance
              in the context of pluton emplacement, problems remain in using fabric to
              understand tectonic and magmatic processes, identifying fabric overprinting or
              modification, and integrating different scales of observation. Does fabric form
              during magma chamber processes such as deposition of crystal mush on the magma
              chamber floor, during tectonic processes such as deformation in an active shear
              zone, or as a composite record of multiple events? Although many processes
              probably contribute to fabric formation in granites, and the mechanisms by
              which fabric forms in one pluton may be different from those in another, few
              widely accepted criteria exist for testing the different models of fabric
              formation against one another. This project integrates structural and
              petrological methods in order to test
hypotheses about fabric formation in and
              emplacement of two shallow Silurian plutons in coastal Maine: the Cadillac
              Mountain and Vinalhaven Intrusive Complexes. Both plutons show quantifiable
              variations in magmatic fabric, and neither shows evidence for solid-state
              deformation. In addition to developing new methods for quantifying magmatic
              fabric in granite, this proposal takes a hypothesis-testing approach to
              interpreting the origins of fabric. It also supports research by six
              undergraduate women in a field in which they are under-represented. The
              research goals are three-fold:
Goal 1: Test models for fabric development and
              modification by quantifying outcrop-
scale gradients in granite fabric,
              texture, and composition. Working on mutually  orthogonal faces of large,
              oriented hand samples of granite, the PI's will use a state-of-the-art fabric
              analysis technique to quantify the strength and symmetry of fabric defined by
              each mineral population. They will also use a petrological technique that has
              never been integrated into a structural study: qualitative assessment of the
              relative volumes of cumulus crystals and melt present during fabric
              development. The focus is on gradients in three settings: (a) granite that is
              associated with a preserved magma chamber floor because it is interlayered with
              mafic sheets, (b) typical homogeneous granite, and (c) granite associated with
              mafic schlieren. 
Goal 2: Conduct pluton-scale studies of magmatic fabric in
              order to further constrain our
interpretations of the origin and the
              significance of magmatic fabric in both plutons. Using the anisotropy of
              magnetic susceptibility (AMS), the PI's will map the orientations of magmatic
              foliation and lineation with respect to both the wall-rock contact and major
              boundaries between granite facies. The AMS study will be accompanied by
              detailed work on magnetic mineralogy and the relation of the AMS ellipsoid to
              rock fabric.
Goal 3: Test the hypothesis that the magma chamber floor sagged
              during pluton emplacement. Previous work, based on mapping of polarity criteria
              and paleo-horizontal
indicators preserved in mafic and felsic layers, has
              generated a testable model for the
emplacement of these plutons by the
              downward sagging of the pluton floor. With alternating field demagnetization
              measurements on all cores collected for Goal #2, the PI's will use a
              paleomagnetic study to attempt to quantify the relative rotation of different
              parts of the pluton. 
