Title       : Study of Natural Ventilation in Buildings by Large Eddy Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0229450

Award Number: 0229450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qingyan Chen yanchen@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9877118
Chen
MIT
Study of Natural Ventilation in Buildings by Large Eddy
              Simulation

U.S. buildings use about onethird of the total energy used in the
              nation, and
the Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning (HVAQ systems in
              the buildings
use a major part of it. The use of HVAC systems does not
              necessarily create a
more comfortable and healthy indoor environment. On the
              other hand, natural
ventilation generally improves indoor air quality,
              provides the occupants a
high comfort level, and saves the energy used by the
              HVAC systems. The U.S. has
a great potential to use natural ventilation. In
              many regions in the U.S., no
air-conditioning system is needed during the
              summer with proper natural
ventilation. This will save the first costs of the
              airconditioning systems.

The overall objectives of the proposed research are
              to develop a reliable
method to study natural ventilation in buildings, and to
              study the impact of
the thermal and geometrical conditions in buildings on
              natural ventilation. 
The empirical data and equations available in literature
              are not suitable for
accurate estimation of natural ventilation. The study of
              natural ventilation
requires either experimental measurements or computer
              simulations. The
experimental approach needs a wind tunnel to study the
              airflow around buildings
and a full-scale environmental chamber to study the
              airflow in buildings.
Although the approach can generate reliable data, it is
              expensive and time
consuming. The computational approach includes Direct
              Numerical Simulation
(DNS), Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equation
              modeling and Large Eddy
Simulation (LES). DNS requires a computer not
              available at present. RANS is not
accurate enough and cannot predict
              single-side natural ventilation. Only LES
seems most appropriate for natural
              ventilation study.

The investigation will develop a reliable Sub-Grid-Scale
              model for LES. The new
SGS model will be validated by the experimental data
              from the literature and an
environmental chamber. Then the validated LES model
              will be used to study the
impact of thermal and geometrical conditions of a
              building on natural
ventilation. The thermal conditions to be studied are: 
              forced convection (no
thermal buoyancy); natural convection (no wind); and
              mixed convection (the
momentum force due to the wind is comparable to the
              buoyant force due to the
heat gain in the building and the solar radiation on
              the outside of the
building).  The geometrical conditions to be studied are
              cross natural
ventilation (an indoor space with openings in two or more walls)
              and
single-side natural ventilation (an indoor space with only one
              opening)

The LES program will calculate instantaneous and averaged
              distributions of air
pressure, air velocity, air temperature, and contaminant
              concentrations, such
as CO 2, in and around the building. The study is to
              understand how momentum
and buoyancy forces can change the airflow pattern and
              pressure distribution
around the building and how natural ventilation is
              interacted with the building
opening location. The results are useful to
              determine the ventilation rate as a
function of the flow Reynolds and Grashof
              numbers. Measurements in a wind
tunnel at a Taiwanese university and in the
              environmental chamber will be
conducted to further validate the computed
              results.

A Chinese university will conduct on site measurements in an actual
              apartment
building in Beijing. The LES model will be used to simulate the
              situations
measured on site. The LES results are useful to analyze the impact
              of wind
velocity and direction on natural ventilation, the impact of thermal
              buoyancy
on natural ventilation, and the feasibility to design single-side
              ventilation

LES should be a next-generation tool to study natural
              ventilation in buildings.
The results of this project will provide detailed
              and accurate information to
analyze indoor air quality and thermal comfort in
              buildings with natural
ventilation. The results present a scientific basis to
              architects and HVAC
engineers to design healthy and comfortable buildings and
              to save energy used
by the HVAC systems. This will increase occupants'
              productivity and efficiency.

