Title       : Regional Paleosol Variability on a Dissected Alluvial/Coastal Plain: A Proposal
               to Develop an Empirical Paleosol-Landscape Model for Nonmarine Sequence
               Stratigraphy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0229196

Award Number: 0229196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115792             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. McCarthy mccarthy@gi.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Regional Paleosol Variability on a Dissected Alluvial/Coastal Plain:
A Proposal
              to Develop an Empirical Paleosol-Landscape Model
For Nonmarine Sequence
              Stratigraphy and Terrestrial Basin Analysis

Paul
              McCarthy
EAR-0229196

	The use of paleosols (fossil soils) for partitioning
              continental rocks and understanding changing sedimentation rates in terrestrial
              sedimentary basins is now firmly established.  Early successes in applying
              paleopedological techniques to the recognition and correlation of terrestrial
              unconformities (sequence boundaries) have built largely upon paleosol-landscape
              models that were developed primarily from aggradational basin settings.  In
              contrast, relatively little attention has been paid to paleosol variability in
              an alluvial/coastal plain undergoing dissection during the falling stage on the
              relative sea level curve.	This research will document the spatial variability
              of paleosols across a single interfluve surface in the Cretaceous (Cenomanian)
              Dunvegan Fm. with respect to distance from associated valley margins and the
              coeval paleo-shoreline.  The Dunvegan Fm. is ideally suited for this study
              because it is both spatially extensive and stratigraphically well understood;
              because coeval shallow marine and shoreline environments can be confidently
              correlated with nonmarine deposits updip; and because paleo-valley deposits
              have been mapped in detail and the distance from any interfluve paleosol to the
              valley margin can be fairly accurately determined.  Ten paleosols will be
              sampled from a single interfluve at distances from less than 1 km to more than
              20 km from adjacent valley margins along a transect extending more than 250 km
              updip from the coeval shoreline.  Paleosols will be described in the field and
              analyzed for micromorphological features, geochemistry and mineralogy. 
              Micromorphological features will be quantified and paleosols will be
              objectively compared using a soil micromorphology index.  These
              paleopedological data will be used to reconstruct the pedosedimentary histories
              of these paleosols, to develop a paleosol-landscape model for dissected
              alluvial/coastal plain settings, and to assess the value of the soil
              micromorphology index for objective description and comparison of paleosols
              both within and between basins.

