Title       : International Collaborative Network of Geographers: U.S. and the Southern Tier
               of Post-Socialist States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0229240

Award Number: 0229240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116245             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Kaiser rjkaise1@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510200   Economic Instability                    
              0511603   Societal Aspects                        
Program Ref : 0000,5915,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Prof. Robert Kaiser of the University of Wisconsin, Madison, will lead this
              effort to construct an international collaborative network of geographers that
              involves U.S. researchers and Eurasian counterparts from post socialist
              countries in Central Asia, the Caucasus, and the Balkans.  On the US side,
              members of the Russian, Central Eurasian and Eastern European Specialty Group
              (RCEE) of the Association of American Geographers will serve as core
              participants.  The overall goals are to identify and connect geographers and
              scholars working in disciplines related to priority subfields and to build a
              virtual network linked electronically and through research partnerships. 
              

To accomplish their objectives, Prof. Kaiser and University of Wisconsin
              graduate students will create and maintain a specialized website and a
              listserver for this participant community.  They also will organize and hold a
              first year planning workshop in Madison to define a future research agenda. 
              Topics of special interest include: new forms of reterritorization of power and
              identity across a multiplicity of geographic scales; socioeconomic
              transformation of the states in the region; environmental conditions and issues
              related to environmental justice, and regional geopolitical and geocultural
              realignments at differing geographic scales.  Initial results will be presented
              at a substantive conference in Baku during the second year.  The establishment
              of this geographers' network and the anticipated research results should add
              significantly to our understanding of the dynamic ways in which these regions
              are being transformed socio-economically, culturally, demographically, and
              politically.  If successful, results may be useful to national and
              international decision-makers, including those in the nations of the study
              region. 

These collaborative networking activities fulfill the program
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United
              States and Central and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and
              share research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. 
