Title       : Collaborative Research: Examining Origination, Extinction, and Recovery in
               Terebratulide Brachiopods: The Integration of Phylogeny, Morphometrics, and
               Biogeography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0229897

Award Number: 0229897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra J. Carlson carlson@geology.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mass extinctions, or episodes of dramatically increased species mortality, have
              repeatedly perturbed the standing diversity of life on Earth.  Although there
              is a good idea of the general effect such perturbations have had on taxonomic
              diversity, there are relatively poor ideas of several other dimensions of these
              perturbations, such as the genealogical relationships and the range of
              variation in size and shape among taxa going extinct and those surviving, as
              well as taxon distribution in space (paleobiogeographic) and time
              (stratigraphic).  PIs propose to investigate in detail one clade (organisms
              sharing a single common ancestor) of marine invertebrates, the brachiopod order
              Terebratulida, over a period of roughly 200 million years during which the
              clade experiences and rebounds from four distinct mass extinction episodes: 
              end-Emsian, end-Frasnian, end-Visean, and end-Permian.  PIs research will
              reconstruct three components of terebratulide evolutionary history, and
              interpret them in relation to extinction or survival at mass-extinction events.
               Phylogenetic relationships among early terebratulide genera (Lower Devonian
              through Triassic periods) will be reconstructed using primarily parsimony-based
              methods of phylogenetic inference.  Quantitative morphometric characteristics
              of terebratulides before and after these mass-extinction events will be
              calculated and evaluated using geometric-coordinate and outline-based methods. 
              Global paleobiogeographic patterns that accompany these changes in morphology,
              phylogeny, and taxonomy through time will be studied after compiling
              distributional data from the primary literature.  Integrating the results of
              PIs three-part study has the potential to test the intriguing but relatively
              untested hypothesis that mass extinctions act as agents of macroevolution - can
              selection for extinction survival operate at the level of species or clades,
              rather than simply on individuals or populations?
