Title       : Sedimentary Basin Development & Deformation Adjacent to the Mojave-Sonora
               Megashear, Sonora, Mexico: Evaluation of the Mid-Mesozoic Tectonics of the
               Southwestern Cordilleran Margin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0229565

Award Number: 0229565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204862             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy F. Lawton tlawton@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey M. Amato  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The identification of ancient continental transform margins has proven
              difficult
for a variety of reasons. Transform faults are commonly reactivated
              subsequent to their
active transcurrent displacement histories by younger
              tectonic processes. In addition,
piercing points that permit assessment of
              offset are commonly equivocal and subject to
multiple interpretations.
              However, analysis of sedimentary basins developed adjacent to
transform
              faults, particularly faults that transect marginal continental
              lithosphere,
provides a powerful tool for evaluation of ancient transform
              margins. Evaluation of the
timing of deposition and deformation is especially
              critical, because the two processes
should be partly coeval in strike-slip
              basins. In northern Sonora, the postulated Mesozoic
type example of a
              continental transform, the Mojave-Sonora megashear, juxtaposes a
continental
              crustal fragment, the Caborca block, against cratonal North America along
what
              is now a complex structural zone. A narrow, deformed sedimentary basin of
              Late
Jurassic-Early Cretaceous age lies along this structural boundary for a
              distance of more
than 300 km. The subsidence history of the basin largely
              coincided with the posited
displacement history of the megashear and so
              provides a unique opportunity to evaluate
the megashear hypothesis and
              understand the processes that constructed the Late
Jurassic-Early Cretaceous
              Cordilleran continental margin.
A two-year field- and laboratory-based study
              proposed here will determine the
depositional and structural evolution of the
              sedimentary basin adjacent to the megashear
and the uplift history of the
              Caborca block, which forms the present southern edge of the
basin. The
              objectives of the research fall into three major categories:
1. Basin origin
              and its Mesozoic proximity to the Caborca block.
Lithostratigraphic,
              biostratigraphic, and geochronologic analysis will determine the
lifespan and
              geometry of the basin, while provenance studies will determine if the
Caborca
              block was a sediment source for the basin. Fossils in the strata and
              interbedded
volcaniclastic rocks make this objective practicable.
2.
              Deformation kinematics and chronology of the basin. Strata in the basin
              are
locally tightly folded, cleaved, and metamorphosed. However, deformation
              intensity is
greater in older rocks than in younger ones, a variation which
              may be either temporal or
related to burial depth of strata during
              deformation. Mesoscale and microscale structural
analysis will evaluate
              kinematics and variability of deformation both stratigraphically
              and
geographically with respect to the megashear. 40 Ar/ 39 Ar geochronology
              on
metamorphosed pelites will determine the age of the deformation in the
              basin.
3. Time of uplift of Caborca block. The age of uplift of the basin
              margin will be
determined from stratigraphic relations and 40 Ar/ 39 Ar
              thermochronology in order to
establish time of uplift of the outboard block
              relative to deformation of the basin. The
uplift analysis will also permit
              evaluation of provenance results.
This integrated sedimentologic, structural
              and geochronologic study will evaluate
the transform processes that are
              inferred to have created the southwestern Cordilleran
margin beginning in the
              Late Jurassic. If the megashear hypothesis remains tenable, this
study should
              serve as a template for other analyses of ancient continental
              transform
margins. If the megashear hypothesis is refuted, the study will
              force re-evaluation of the
Mesozoic tectonics of the southwestern Cordilleran
              margin and the kinematics of
Pangean supercontinent break up in Mexico.

