Title       : Peer Instruction for Student Engagement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2002 
File        : a0229652

Award Number: 0229652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Corwin scorwin@radford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Chase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Radford University
	      Radford Univ Post Office
	      Radford, VA  24142    703/731-5000

NSF Program : 1796      STEM Talent Expansn Pgm (STEP)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Peer Instruction for Student Engagement project is placing peer instructors
              in selected
introductory courses in STEM disciplines and measure the impact
              that their use has on student
engagement with those courses. Departments have
              chosen courses (i) which students have
historically found difficult and (ii)
              which are either required of majors or from which majors 
are normally
              recruited. To keep costs down, departments were asked to determine how
              peer
instructors could be effectively used no more than three hours per week
              per class. The six
different disciplines use four different models for peer
              instruction. Geology and Chemistry 
are following the Supplemental Instruction
              model, using peer instructors to provide voluntary
problem-solving sessions.
              Computer Science and Biology are following a model already used 
by the
              Computer Science Department in one course, using peer instructors to assist
              with 
small-group learning in laboratories and to hold office hours. Physics
              is adapting a model, 
best known from the University of Washington's Physics
              Education Group, in which peer 
tutors help small groups of students to work,
              in mandatory laboratory sessions, through 
tutorials devised by faculty
              members. Mathematics is employing a modification of the 
Peer-Led Team
              Learning strategy, combining a web-based homework delivery system with
              
mandatory problem-solving workshops based around problem sets written by the
              faculty.

The project's two objectives are (1) to increase retention in STEM
              majors at Radford 
University by 15%, and (2) to measure the effect of peer
              instruction on student engagement
in STEM disciplines. Five different
              assessment measures are used: retention rates, grades, 
competency exam
              scores, surveys and interviews of participants, and the National Survey 
of
              Student Engagement. Each department involved has a department coordinator for
              the 
project who manages recruitment and departmental training of peer
              instructors, and who 
meets with peer instructors as a group during the
              semester. Global training is provided by an
experienced consultant. The
              project's co-Principal Investigators are visiting workshops and 
tutorial
              sessions, talking with faculty and students involved, and conducting extensive
              
assessment of all aspects of the project. The project addresses the NSF merit
              review criteria.

Intellectual Merit

The primary intellectual merit of
              this project is the measurement of the impact of peer 
instruction on student
              engagement with introductory courses in STEM disciplines. Peer 
instruction,
              especially when combined with small-group work, is considered a prime
              
strategy for increasing engagement; this project will determine, through a
              number of 
assessments, the extent to which this is true at Radford
              University. It will also look 
for differences in results among competing
              models for peer instruction.

Broader Impact

The project improves
              education using proven techniques while investigating the important
question
              of why those techniques work. Its results, both the expected increase in
              retention 
rates and the measurements of student engagement associated with
              peer instruction, should 
be of interest to all who wish to increase student
              learning in STEM disciplines. Peer 
instructors can add diversity to
              instruction in fields dominated by white males, and all 
departments
              participating have indicated that they could hire significant numbers of
              
female or minority students to serve in that capacity. The principal
              investigators will 
disseminate the project's results both through the web and
              through the usual outlets 
for publication and presentation.
