Title       : Collaborative Research: Miocene-Pliocene Paleoelevation of the Bolivian
               Altiplano
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2003  
File        : a0229788

Award Number: 0229788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25725              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie C. Libarkin jlibarkin@cfa.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian-Astrophys Obs
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    716/831-3051

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              High elevation plateaus are enigmatic features that form in contractional
              mountain belts.
Regional crustal shortening and thickening cause significant
              amounts of surface uplift within plateaus. However, other crustal and
              subcrustal lithospheric processes, such as lithospheric thinning, magmatic
              additions to the crust, tectonic underplating, or lower crustal flow may also
              play an important role in producing these broad, high elevation regions.
              Understanding the mechanisms responsible for plateau uplift requires knowledge
              of the history of surface elevation. Both the magnitude and time scale of
              surface uplift are controlled by the underlying mechanisms responsible for
              uplift. The PI's propose to study the uplift history of the Altiplano in
              Bolivia using oxygen isotope paleoaltimetry techniques in addition to testing a
              new cosmogenic isotope paleoaltimeter. These paleoelevation data will help
              resolve current debates over the early versus recent uplift of the Altiplano.
              In addition, these data will place constraints on the magnitudes and rates of
              uplift over time, enabling them to determine the importance of certain uplift
              mechanisms. The Altiplano has an average elevation of 3700 m, second only to
              the Tibetan plateau in size and lateral extent. This is an ideal setting in
              which to carry out a systematic study of long term surface uplift for the
              following reasons: 1) A previous paleoelevation study, based on leaf
              physiognomy, provides a record by which to compare our paleoelevation data.
              These data suggest that no more than half of the uplift of the Altiplano took
              by ~10 Ma (Gregory-Wodzicki, 1998) and also provide paleotemperature estimates
              required for oxygen isotope paleoaltimetry. 2) Oxygen isotope paleoaltimetry
              can only be applied in regions that experience minimal evaporation (humid
              environments), whereas cosmogenic isotope paleoaltimetry requires minimal
              erosion (arid environment). There is a large range of climatic variability
              within the Bolivian Altiplano, enabling us carry out oxygen isotope
              paleoaltimetry in the more humid northern Altiplano and cosmogenic isotope
              paleoaltimetry in the arid southern Altiplano. 3) There is a long-term history
              of sedimentation within the Altiplano, producing an extensive carbonate record
              from which oxygen isotope paleoelevation estimates can be obtained. The ages of
              sedimentary rocks in the Corque basin, our target section, have been determined
              to be between ~14 Ma and ~5 Ma by 40 Ar/ 39 Ar dates of interbedded tuffs
              (Marshall et al., 1992) and magnetostratigraphy (Roperch et al., 1999). 4) Data
              on the oxygen isotope composition of monthly and yearly rainfall has been
              collected providing an excellent d 18 O vs. altitude gradient (Gonfiantini et
              al., 2001). This gradient will be used to estimate the elevation of
              paleometeoric water from which carbonates were precipitated. 5) Widespread
              Miocene to recent volcanism within the Altiplano provides abundant datable
              paleosurfaces containing the mineralogies needed to apply cosmogenic isotope
              techniques to determining paleoelevation. In the southern Bolivian Altiplano
              evidence suggests that these paleosurfaces have experienced very little erosion
              over the past 15 Ma (Horton, 1998). The preliminary oxygen isotope data show a
              pronounced shift in oxygen isotopic ratios of about -7.5 between late Oligocene
              and late Miocene time, which suggests more than 3 km of surface uplift. Initial
              measurements on apatite and sanidine indicate that both cosmogenic 3 He and 38
              Ar are preserved in modern low latitude surfaces on the Altiplano. This
              research is a collaborative effort between the University of Rochester, the
              Harvard- Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, and researchers at Berkeley and
              Caltech. The broader impacts of this project are that it will provide partial
              support for two Ph.D. students and two or more undergraduate students.
              Undergraduate research will lead to the completion of senior thesis projects.
              In addition, this research will directly inform an ongoing study of student
              conceptual understanding
of earth processes. Scientific views of plate
              tectonic processes continue to evolve in response to research like that
              proposed here, and these views are the datum to which student ideas must be
              compared.
