Title       : Mathematics and Undergraduate Education: A New Framework for Mutual Invigoration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1996     
File        : a9456040

Award Number: 9456040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Maki maki@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bart S. Ng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome A. Kaminker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maynard Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1047,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9456040  Maki  This proposal seeks funding for a planning proposal to implement
              a restructuring of  undergraduate mathematics education. The planning involves
              curriculum restructuring, creation  of a general academic infrastructure for
              undergraduates, and creation of a new institutional  infrastructure. The
              curriculum restructuring will engage mathematicians and their colleagues  from
              other disciplines in the development of three types of new interdisciplinary
              courses, all  aimed at underscoring the way mathematics is used in other
              academic disciplines and in the non-  academic world: (1.) Courses based on
              real problems in a different area where mathematics is  used in the solution.
              Students will work in teams using technology to implement mathematical  tools
              developed in class for the projects. (2.) Courses designed to give a
              mathematics major a  basic understanding of a subject which is a current or
              potential area of application for  mathematics. (3 .) Courses developed in
              collaboration with the professional schools to introduce  mathematics majors to
              the possibility of using their education in one of these areas. General 
              academic infrastructure for students. The second component of the
              implementation of the general  philosophy involves the manner in which the
              students relate to their academic programs.  Institutional Infrastructure. The
              implementation of our general philosophy of undergraduate  mathematics
              instruction requires a degree of collaboration and coordination across
              departments  and disciplines that far exceeds what is commonly found on any
              campus. As the means of  accomplishing this, we propose that the preparation
              and the design of classes and activities will  take place in an Institute for
              Undergraduate Education.
