Title       : Adaptive Behavior and Cooperation in Experimental Coordination Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1991       
File        : a9013110

Award Number: 9013110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Forsythe robert-forsythe@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas V. DeJong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell W. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project continues to study coordination problems in                       
              experimental games.  It evaluates alternative theories of adaptive             
              behavior by studying the times series of past experiments on                   
              coordination games and through the design of new games.  It                    
              examines the ability of evolutionary stability and the genetic                 
              algorithm as well as individual learning models to explain the                 
              dynamics of play.  The project also studies the foundations of                 
              cooperation which pervade much of the prior work on experimental               
              coordination games.                                                            
                                                                                             
              This research has made and will continue to make an important                  
              contribution to economics.  Coordination games of the type studied             
              in this project have been used to test theories about                          
              underemployment equilibria in macroeconoimcs.  In industrial                   
              organization coordination problems occur in such areas of research             
              as standardization, the entry of new firms into an oligopolistic               
              industry, multi-agent incentive problems and network externalities.            
              The controlled laboratory experiments in this project provide one              
              of the only ways of testing the wide variety of selection and                  
              refinement criteria used by game theorists.
