Title       : Dissertation Research: Exchange of Vanport Flint Bladelets Among Hopewell Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1993    
File        : a9013065

Award Number: 9013065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Yerkes yerkes.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gunter Faure  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Foradas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Flint (a microcrystalline quartz rock) is highly resistant to                  
              weathering and fractures to produce a sharp, durable cutting                   
              edge.  It was utilized by prehistoric peoples to manufacture                   
              tools for the processing of plant and animal materials.  Its                   
              availability was directly linked to the survival of many                       
              prehistoric human populations, and it was widely exchanged in                  
              prehistoric economic systems.  However, the patterning of this                 
              exchange is poorly understood largely because existing methods of              
              sourcing flint are unreliable.  Under the direction of Drs.                    
              Richard Yerkes and Gunter Faure, Mr. James Foradas, a graduate                 
              student at Ohio State University, will develop sourcing criteria               
              from samples derived from Vanport flint which is exposed in a                  
              number of Ohio outcrops.  The project will consist of four main                
              stages.  Mr. Foradas will first collect specimens from a series                
              of outcrops.  He will then conduct analyzes to characterize each.              
              These will include trace element determinations using X-ray                    
              fluorescence, petrographic, and SEM analysis.  On this basis he                
              will then examine flints recovered in archaeological context from              
              a number of Scioto River Valley Hopewell culture sites.  Finally,              
              he will use these data to reconstruct Hopewell exchange patterns.              
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will serve to              
              develop a non-destructive analytic technique for the analysis of               
              chert which can be used, hopefully, in a wide range of                         
              archaeological situations.  This should prove a valuable tool.                 
              Archaeologists are interested in how complex societies evolve,                 
              and the Hopewell culture marks one of the earliest manifestations              
              of such a large scale development in North America.  It has been               
              postulated that the regulation of trade in such valuable objects               
              as high grade flint served as an integrating mechanism, and Mr.                
              Foradas' work will allow testing of this hypothesis.  Finally,                 
              this project will assist in the training of an extremely                       
              promising young scientist.
