Title       : RUI: Experimental Analysis of Network Flow Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1990    
File        : a9013079

Award Number: 9013079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Krishna M. Kavi                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine McGeoch ccm@cs.amherst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amherst College
	      
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/542-2000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              An experimental study will be performed to investigate algorithms for          
              problems concerned with computation of network flows, including the            
              minimum cost flow problem and possibly restrictions such as the                
              maximum flow problem, the shortest path problem, or the assignment             
              problem.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The experimental study will proceed as a cooperative competition among         
              members of the research community.  Participants will submit code for          
              evaluation or will perform specific experiments at their home sites.           
              The competition will culminate in a workshop where participants will           
              describe their results; the best implementations for several input             
              classes and computing environments will be identified.                         
                                                                                             
              Competitors will generate a large amount of data about the                     
              performance of these algorithms.  Parametric and nonparametric methods         
              of data analysis will be applied to obtain quantitative descriptions           
              of performance as a function of input parameters.  Some particular             
              results to be obtained include:  analysis of the relationship between          
              running time and standard combinatorial measures of performance;               
              identification of input properties that are "hard" for certain                 
              algorithms; and development of realistic random models of networks.            
              Besides providing substantial new knowledge about the performance of           
              these algorithms, the project will also give insight into experimental         
              methods for algorithm analysis and into the viability of using                 
              computer research networks in such cooperative projects.
