Title       : A Workshop on the Integration of Numerical and Symbolic Computing Models,
               Saratoga Springs, New York, July, l990.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1990       
File        : a9013424

Award Number: 9013424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deepak Kapur   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2865,
Abstract    :
              Over the last decade, there has been considerable development in               
              investigating methods of symbolic mathematics in many application              
              areas of computer science and artificial intelligence, for example,            
              engineering design - solid and geometric modeling, robotics and motion         
              planning, and machine vision.  Most of this research, however, has             
              been theoretical, and its application to real problems has been                
              limited because of the slow progress made in applying the                      
              combinatorially expensive symbolic techniques to real problems.  Also          
              there are no mechanisms in computer algebra and other symbolic                 
              techniques to handle issues of data error and computational precision.         
              Typically such problems are addressed in practice by using numerical           
              methods to approximate the underlying mathematical models.                     
              This workshop will focus on approaches for systematic integration of           
              symbolic techniques with numerical techniques.  Symbolic methods can           
              provide insight into the structure and stability of problem solutions          
              while numerical methods are efficient for handling the thousands of            
              data elements which arise in practical applications.  The workshop             
              will bring together experts from numerical computation, symbolic               
              computation, and application areas using such methods.  Some possible          
              topics of discussion are: methods for solving nonlinear equations,             
              homotopy methods, nonlinear optimization, exploitation of geometric            
              invariants, differential theories.
