Title       : High Resolution Bio-Optical and Physical Time Series Measurements in the
               Equatorial Pacific as Part of the JGOFS Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1993 
File        : a9013896

Award Number: 9013896
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tommy D. Dickey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              The present proposal is directed toward the acquisition of                     
              virtually continuous, concurrent biogeochemical-physical-                      
              optical data at a site (0, 140W) in the equatorial Pacific as                  
              part of the JGOFS program.  Presently, meteorological, current,                
              and temperature data are being collected from a mooring at the                 
              site by Dr. Michael McPhaden of PMEL/NOAA.  Dr. McPhaden's                     
              measurements at that site will be complemented in this effort                  
              by placing Multi-Variable Moored Systems (MVMS) at 4 depths                    
              within the upper 120m on this mooring.  The data collected from                
              the MVMS units will include:  currents, temperature,                           
              conductivity, beam attenuation coefficient, stimulated and                     
              natural fluorescence, dissolved oxygen, photosynthetically                     
              available radiation (PAR), spectral upwelling radiance, and                    
              spectral downwelling irradiance.  Derived variable products                    
              from the MVMS units and the PMEL current meters and temperature                
              recorders will include:  stratification, mixed layer depth,                    
              mixing time scales, and current shears.  Additional MVMS                       
              products will include:  the spectral diffuse attenuation of                    
              light which can be used for computation of the penetrative                     
              component of solar radiation as well as for bio-optical models,                
              particle concentrations, pigment biomass, primary production                   
              (using several methods), integrated pigment biomass and primary                
              production, oxygen respiration and utilization, the flux of                    
              oxygen across the air-sea interface, and the advection and flux                
              of particles and pigments.  The MVMS units would provide                       
              virtually continuous time series for about 6 months per                        
              deployment, thus complementing and spanning the planned                        
              JGOFS/NOAA shipboard studies.
