Title       : Dissertation Research: Neurophysiology of the Amygdaloid Complex Using
               Ethologically Significant Stimuli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1990    
File        : a9013202

Award Number: 9013202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick K. Nahm  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A major effort in modern neuroscience has been directed at                     
              understanding how the brain accomplishes sensory perception.                   
              Research on the visual system has found that different brain                   
              regions are specialized for the perception of shape, color,                    
              motion, and other aspects of the visual world.  Much less is                   
              understood about the perception of emotional aspects of visual                 
              stimuli.  It is not clear, for example, how animals or humans are              
              able to differentiate an angry or threatening facial gesture from              
              a friendly one.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Monkeys, like humans, are highly visual creatures and use subtle               
              facial gestures for communication.  Electrophysiological studies               
              have shown that neurons in the amygdaloid complex respond                      
              selectively to the presentation of static images of faces.  The                
              previous work did not determine whether or not these neurons                   
              differentiate the emotional content of the facial expressions.                 
              However, monkeys with lesions of the amygdaloid complex are                    
              indifferent to positive or negative events and are unable to                   
              appropriately interpret signals of dominance or submission by                  
              other monkeys, suggesting that the amygdaloid complex may mediate              
              the perception of species-specific emotional stimuli.                          
                                                                                             
              In Frederick K. Nahm's doctoral-dissertation research, videotapes              
              of the facial expressions of socially interacting monkeys will be              
              made.  These images will then be transferred to a digital                      
              optical-laser-disk system.  Epochs of monkey facial expressions                
              will be catalogued and divided into 1-second segments.  Series of              
              these 1-second dynamic stimuli covering all forms of monkey                    
              expression will be used as stimuli for electrophysiological                    
              studies that will survey neuronal responsivity in all portions of              
              the monkey amygdaloid complex.                                                 
                                                                                             
              These studies will contribute to an understanding of the neural                
              basis of normal emotional perception and expression in the human               
              brain.  Moreover, since the amygdaloid complex has the highest                 
              density of benzodiazepine receptors (through which the                         
              antianxiety drugs such as librium have their effects), these                   
              studies will also pave the way to an understanding of anxiety and              
              inappropriate emotional states such as phobias.
