Title       : Inquiry Into Chaotic Routing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1991        
File        : a9013274

Award Number: 9013274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Maguire                          
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224837             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Snyder snyder@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl Ebeling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gaetano Borriello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A chaotic router is a non-minimal, adaptive message router that                
              uses randomization in routing and derouting decisions.  The use of             
              randomization simplifies the router sufficiently that it's                     
              conjectured chaotic routing can be competitive with oblivious                  
              routing, achieving equivalent or better average-case performance,              
              greatly improved worst-case performance and fault tolerance.                   
              Though the principles of chaotic routing apply to some degree to               
              any topology with multiple paths between nodes, chaotic routers for            
              binary n-cubes are presently under investigation.                              
                                                                                             
              The goal of the research is to establish a compelling case for                 
              constructing an experimental version of a hypercube chaotic router.            
              Towards that end a series of studies are presently underway.                   
                                                                                             
              1.            The idealized router of the proposal is being converted          
                            to practical engineering designs; the details of the             
                            chaotic routing logic are being specified.  Alternatives         
                            include sequential and parallel channel match algorithms,        
                            a virtual cut-through alternative to the store-and-              
                            forward of the proposal, various alternates for                  
                            asynchronous channels, various queue sizes, etc.                 
                                                                                             
              2.            A detailed simulator (with a granularity of approximately        
                            a half-dozen gate delays) has been created.  Experiments         
                            are being run on a 256 node hypercube to compare the             
                            different chaotic router designs with various alternative        
                            routers, such as oblivious and priority routers.                 
                                                                                             
              3.            Simulations are being run to analyze the effect of               
                            multiqueue size on the latency and throughput of the             
                            network.  The role of message length on latency and              
                            throughput is also being analyzed.                               
                                                                                             
              4.            Probabilistic analysis, completed last summer, shows that        
                            an idealized hypercube chaotic router is                         
                            deterministically deadlock free and probabilistically            
                            livelock and starvation free.  The new engineering               
                            designs are being abstracted and analyzed to assure that         
                            they are consistent with the idealized model of this             
                            theory.                                                          
                                                                                             
              5.            The first version of a custom CMOS channel design is back        
                            from fabrication and is being tested.                            
                                                                                             
              6.            Alternate implementation strategies, besides custom CMOS,        
                            are being investigated.                                          
                                                                                             
              7.            The generality of the chaotic routing principles are             
                            being analyzed in the context of different topologies.           
                            In particular, various forms of the mesh topology are            
                            being studied as alternates.                                     
                                                                                             
              8.            The role of clocked and self-timed logic in chaotic              
                            routing is being analyzed in light of the fact                   
                            theoretical foundations are independent of the timing            
                            policy.
