Title       : Meeting on Development of Physical Methods to Sequence the Human Genome, June
               10-13, 1990, Mt McKinley Park, Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1990       
File        : a9013407

Award Number: 9013407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack D. Griffith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A central emphasis of the human genome project is at the                       
              present time on the development of novel physical and                          
              biochemical technologies for genome mapping.  Such methods                     
              will involve not only means of obtaining direct base pair by                   
              base pair sequences but also the generation of lower                           
              resolution large scale physical maps that will make it                         
              possible to arrange the individual blocks of sequences into                    
              a single map.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this meeting is to bring together experts from                  
              Europe, Japan and the United States in order to examine and                    
              evaluate new approaches and needed developments of genome                      
              technologies and methods.  Areas which will specifically be                    
              examined include the use of various imaging technologies for                   
              the generation of genomic maps.  Light and electron                            
              microscopic imaging will be examined  as well as scanning                      
              tunneling EM to directly map DNA. These methods will be                        
              compared to others such as the semi-automated gel                              
              electrophoretic methods.  Nucleic acid tagging methodologies                   
              will also be examined.  The hope is that critical examination                  
              of the advantages and disadvantages of these different methods                 
              will lead to a consensus on which should be pursued further.                   
                                                                                             
              The combination of overview presentations, talks on specific                   
              areas, and workshops, all of which will occur in this meeting,                 
              should provide a much clearer picture of where the current                     
              focus of mapping is and how individual efforts as well as the                  
              study of other animal and plant genomes fit into the larger                    
              picture.  Given the international character of this meeting,                   
              Alaska, which is easily accessible and attractive for                          
              American, European and Japanese researchers and policy makers,                 
              is an ideal setting for this conference.
