Title       : Game-Theoretic, Evolutionary, and Adaptive Approaches to Coordination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1990      
File        : a9013317

Award Number: 9013317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81133              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent Crawford vcrawfor@weber.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project is directed at understanding how coordination problems            
              are solved.  It uses complementary game-theoretic, evolutionary,               
              and adaptive techniques to study historical models of coordination.            
              Most of the research is devoted to a detailed analysis of the                  
              dynamics of strategy choices in populations repeatedly playing                 
              coordination games and adjusting their strategies in response to               
              their experience in plausible, but not necessarily rational ways.              
              The project focuses on models with the structure of evolutionary               
              games, and on specific, simple coordination games, chosen both for             
              their economic interest and for the availability of experimental               
              evidence.  The evolutionary approach has important comparative                 
              advantages in studying coordination, and provides a good foundation            
              for adaptive models.  The ultimate goal of this research is to                 
              understand how group size, the sensitivity of players' payoffs to              
              each other's decisions, and player's opportunities to communicate              
              interact to determine how well they coordinate their decisions.                
                                                                                             
              Coordination problems lie at the heart of many important questions             
              in economics.  These include the design of optimal incentive                   
              schemes; the characterization of which outcomes can be supported               
              by implicit contract in a long-term relationship; and the                      
              determination of whether, and how, bargainers share the surplus                
              from making an agreement.  The analytic tools and insights into                
              coordination problems from this project make a valuable                        
              contribution to this area of research.  The contribution consists              
              of new theories that provide more convincing characterizations of              
              behavior in coordination games than standard techniques.  For                  
              example, coordination experiments show that there are behavioral               
              regularities that can not be explained by orthodox game theory but             
              can be explained by the type of models developed in this project.
