Title       : Two-Dimensional Polymerizations in Supramolecular Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1993  
File        : a9013884

Award Number: 9013884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal R. Armstrong nra@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
              Supramolecular assemblies, e.g. monolayers, vesicles, extended                 
              bilayers, cast bilayers, and tubules, are two-dimensional arrays of            
              amphiphiles.  The recent introduction of methods to polymerize                 
              these assemblies provides a means to prepare new materials with                
              unusual properties.  The nature of these two-dimensional                       
              polymerizations and the effect of the assembly structure on the                
              polymerization reaction has been poorly understood.  However our               
              previous research has provided valuable insights into these                    
              polymerization processes.  The objective of this research is to                
              enhance our fledgling understanding of the fundamentals of two-                
              dimensional polymerizations.  Specifically, this reserch will                  
              emphasize the following:  a) the factors that control the size of              
              linear polymers formed in homolipid and mixed lipid assemblies; and            
              c) determination of the effect of the frequency of crosslinks in               
              the polymerization of the assemblies on both the rate of lateral               
              lipid diffusion, and the appearance of domains in two-dimensions.              
              These data, to be determined primarily for extended bilayer and                
              vesicle assemblies, are expected to provide a basis to evaluate how            
              two-dimensional polymerizations parallel or deviate from the                   
              established principles of isotropic polymerizations.                           
                                                                                             
              This research combines synthetic chemistry, instrumental                       
              characterization, and surface science.  It is expected to provide              
              a rational foundation for the use of two-dimensional                           
              polymerizations for the formation of new materials, such as                    
              membranes.
