Title       : Workshop on Multidatabases and Semantic Interoperability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1990 
File        : a9013205

Award Number: 9013205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ron Ashany                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18932              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuri J. Breitbart yrui@cs.engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The main objectiveof the workshop is to address technical                      
              problems that are to be solved to allow users and organizations                
              to build applications around interoperating data and knowledge                 
              bases.  This workshop, while dealing with the technology of                    
              information access and sharing will also forge a collaboration                 
              between industry and science.  The proposed workshop will advance              
              futher understanding of the issues faced by industry in utilizing              
              the results of distributed access to databases.  For some                      
              industrial problems conceptual solutions may be available.  For                
              other types of problems the interaction will provide guidance for              
              researchers  in identifying and abstracting research issues that               
              must be addressed.  Interaction among researchers will help in                 
              identifying promising approaches as well as likely deadends.  The              
              collaboration and cooperation between basic and application                    
              researchers in solving applications problem can then be based on               
              a solid basic research foundation.  The workshop's effort in                   
              resolving technical problems facing researchers in developing                  
              multidatabases is closely related to technical problems described              
              in the recent NSF report (Toward National Collaboratory, NSF                   
              1989).  Clearly that problems of Intelligent Agents,                           
              Interoperable Data Description, Information Fusion, and Smart                  
              Data Gathering listed in that report are very same problems that               
              a designer of multidatabase application should solve to make an                
              application operate with information geographically distributed                
              among various data sources.
