Title       : U.S.-UK Cooperative Research: Investigation of Dense Z-Pinch and X-Pinch Plasmas
               Using Time Revolving Optical Diagnostics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1990  
File        : a9013934

Award Number: 9013934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15400              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Hammer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1455,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between                         
              David Hammer, Cornell University, and Dr. Malcolm Haines,                      
              Plasma Physics Group, Imperial College, London, England.                       
              The objective of the proposed project is to carry out a                        
              series of experiments designed to determine conditions in                      
              detail as a function of time in dense z-pinch and x-pinch                      
              plasmas.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Such plasmas are produced by first using the initial                           
              portion of the current from submicrosecond "pulsed power"                      
              generators to explode fine wires (0.0025-0.025 cm. diameter),                  
              and then magnetically "pinching" the resulting plasma to                       
              very small diameters with the field produced by the peak                       
              current.  These experiments will be performed at Imperial                      
              College because of the availability there of a unique set                      
              of advanced electro-optical diagnostic instruments for use                     
              with any of several pulsed power devices.  It will be                          
              possible to obtain time and space-resolved measurements of                     
              z-pinch and x-pinch plasma densities, ionization states,                       
              implosion speeds, and locations and durations of x-ray                         
              bright spots, using x-ray and visible light-sensitive                          
              intensified image converter "streak" and "framing" cameras                     
              with nanosecond resolution, nanosecond pulsed lasers, and a                    
              variety of visible and x-ray spectroscopic instruments. The                    
              ultimate goal of this project is to achieve an improved                        
              understanding of the dynamics of dense z- and x-pinch                          
              plasmas, so that applications to x-ray lithography, pumping                    
              short wavelength lasers and controlled fusion might be                         
              confidently evaluated.  This project will benefit from the                     
              complementary expertise of the two investigators in gas                        
              pinches and laser plasma research.
