Title       : Interception Loss from Rainforest Vegetation in the Cyclone-Prone Tropics Under
               Inclined Rainfall Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1990  
File        : a9013329

Award Number: 9013329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44872              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley R. Herwitz sherwitz@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Most representations of the hydrologic cycle assume that nearly           
              all precipitation over land surfaces reaches the ground, but depending         
              on the nature of vegetation growing from the surface, significant              
              amounts of moisture may be intercepted by plant surfaces.  Previous            
              research indicates that interception rates are highest in tropical             
              rainforests, where tree canopies are most dense.  As tropical forests          
              are cleared, the amount of moisture falling directly onto the ground           
              may therefore dramatically increase, further exacerbating the                  
              microclimatological changes that result from deforestation.  No                
              accurate measurements of the amounts of moisture intercepted by tree           
              canopies have been made, however, so estimates of the volume of water          
              flows from the atmosphere through vegetative surfaces to the ground            
              remain conjectural.  This project will test a new procedure to measure         
              the amount of precipitation that passes through successive levels of           
              tree canopies to the land surface.  Such measurements are complicated          
              by high winds that blow raindrops horizontally through the treetops.  A        
              geographic information system-based, three-dimensional model of air and        
              moisture flow through cyclone-prone tropical rainforests will be               
              developed and tested at a study site on the Atherton Tableland of              
              Queensland in northeastern Australia.  Wind sensors, tipping-bucket and        
              tilted rain gauges, and instruments to measure the angle of inclined           
              rainfall will be used to gather data for testing the model.                    
                   This research project will provide an effective test of a new             
              model and methods for measuring the amount of moisture intercepted by          
              tree canopies.  Although initially calibrated for tropical rainforests,        
              the model and methods will be adaptable for other types of biomes.  The        
              data gathered using these methods and the refined model will permit            
              testing of important hypotheses about the nature and volume of water           
              movements among the atmosphere, vegetative surfaces, and the ground.           
              It therefore will enhance our understandings of a critical part of the         
              hydrologic cycle and will improve models of atmospheric-terrestrial            
              interaction.  Because new insights will be gained on the dynamics of           
              tropical rainforests, this project also will increase our understanding        
              of these critical areas of especially great environmental change.
