Title       : U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research on Nitrate Uptake in Membrane Vesicles of
               Escherichia Coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1991     
File        : a9013948

Award Number: 9013948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14400              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Rowe rowe@udavxb.oca.udayton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Dayton
	      300 College Park
	      Dayton, OH  454690104    937/229-2919

NSF Program : 5914      WESTERN EUROPE, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0510302   Energetics & Thermodynamc               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1142,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for a long term sabbatical                 
              visit by Professor John J. Rowe, University of Dayton, to the                  
              Department of Microbiology, University of Groningen, the                       
              Netherlands, where he will collaborate with Professor Wil                      
              Konings.  They will apply new techniques to study the process                  
              of nitrate transport during anaerobic nitrate respiration.                     
              Their long term objectives are to define the mechanism(s) for                  
              nitrate uptake, and to develop a data-based model for the                      
              regulation of nitrate uptake by oxygen and nitrite.  Professor                 
              Rowe has experience in the area of procaryotic nitrate reduction,              
              and nitrate metabolism in general, and has recently become                     
              interested in nitrate transport and its regulation by oxygen.                  
              Professor Konings possesses expertise in the complementary areas               
              of bioenergetics and transport of solutes in procaryotes.  He                  
              has developed an energy transducing proteoliposome system that                 
              is applicable to the nitrate transport problem and that will                   
              allow definitive studies of this system for the first time.                    
              Dr. Rowe will initiate joint research in the Netherlands during                
              his sabbatical, and learn these new techniques to enable him to                
              continue such experimentation back in Dayton.                                  
                                                                                             
              Anaerobic nitrate respiration is common to a great number of                   
              bacterial genera including organisms of agricultural, environ-                 
              mental, and medical significance.  As the concluding step of                   
              one turn of the nitrogen cycle, it is of major significance to                 
              nitrogen cycling from a global to a microniche level.  Nitrate                 
              respiration is coupled to the expulsion of protons across the                  
              cytoplasmic membrane thus generating respiratory energy under                  
              anaerobic conditions.  Very little information is available about              
              the mechanism of nitrate transport across biological membranes                 
              during nitrate respiration.  In part this was due to the need to               
              use complex, whole cell experimental systems which yielded                     
              ambiguous results; there also has been a lack of suitable                      
              radioisotopes of nitrogen and oxygen for such studies.  These                  
              problems have recently been overcome by the development of                     
              sensitive nonradioactive methods for analyzing nitrate and                     
              nitrite and also the creation of more defined experimental                     
              systems comprised of proteoliposomes fused with biological                     
              membranes.  Thus the time is right for these investigators to                  
              join forces to tackle a very important problem in microbial                    
              physiology.
