Title       : Models of Decisionmaking Among Sentencing Jurors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1993  
File        : a9013252

Award Number: 9013252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1990  
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182968             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Bowers cjbill@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Twenty years ago, the Supreme Court adopted new statutes with                  
              explicit sentencing guidelines for jurors in capital cases in an               
              attempt to remedy arbitrariness in sentencing decisions.  Since                
              then the Supreme Court and lower courts have been basing decisions             
              on the assumption that jurors can and do base their penalty                    
              decisions on the guidelines provided.  Studies of the outcomes of              
              jury decisions in capital cases suggest that impermissible factors             
              (notably race) still influence jury decisions of life or death even            
              under sentencing guidelines approved by the Court.  To date, there             
              are very few studies of how death penalty jurors actually arrive               
              at these decisions.                                                            
                                                                                             
              This study will illuminate how jurors make decisions by seeking to             
              develop a clearer understanding of the exercise of discretion and              
              of the sources and extent of arbitrariness in capital sentencing               
              decisions.  Extensive interviews will be conducted with 120 jurors             
              from 30 capital trials in each of 8 states.  Judges, prosecutors,              
              and defense attorneys in these cases will also be interviewed.  The            
              study adopts an integrated theoretical approach which examines what            
              decision models jurors employ, what forms of arbitrariness and/or              
              discrimination occur, and how the two are linked.  Several                     
              alternative models will be tested.  Formal rational algebraic                  
              decision models of jury sentencing behavior will be used.  Also,               
              theoretical formulations labeled "story" and "matching" decision               
              models will be employed.  Finally, labeling and conflict theories              
              will consider the role of social agents as dominant groups in                  
              applying the law against subordinate groups.  Individual jurors                
              are the primary units of analysis.                                             
                                                                                             
              This study is unique in its interdisciplinary approach and in its              
              linkages between statutory/procedural aspects of the law and the               
              actual decision models jurors adopt.  Not only does the research               
              promise to enhance our understanding of the way in which                       
              decisionmakers exercise discretion and arrive at legal judgments,              
              but also it will provide information helpful in improving the                  
              administration of justice in criminal cases.
