Title       : Development of Tandem Mass Spectrometry for Analysis of Complex Biomolecules.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1995   
File        : a9013981

Award Number: 9013981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1329679            (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine C. Fenselau   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1103      TECHNIQUE DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9126,
Abstract    :
              This award continues support of Tandem Mass Spectrometry activities            
              at the Mid Atlantic Mass Spectrometry (MAMS) laboratory at the                 
              University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC).  One of several                
              approaches to mass spectrometry (MS), tandem MS provides high                  
              resolution measurements of compounds with the high molecular                   
              weights typical of proteins, nucleic acids and other biopolymers.              
              Efforts sponsored by this award will focus on improving techniques             
              for analysis of proteins, glycoproteins and carbohydrates using the            
              tandem instrument; a variety of collaborative research projects                
              will be initiated or continued, and training activities at the pre-            
              and post doctoral level will continue.                                         
              Mass spectrometry plays an increasingly important role in the                  
              structural analysis of biomolecules.  Information about protein                
              sequence and structure, including naturally occurring modifications            
              of proteins, and similar kinds of information about polysaccharides            
              and other branched chain polymers are obtained with great                      
              difficulty by other techniques.  The MAMS laboratory includes                  
              facilities at UMBC and at The Johns Hopkins University School of               
              Medicine.  Both were established as shared instrument resources for            
              collaborative and service projects.  Because of the considerable               
              expense of acquisition and operation of tandem MS instruments, this            
              type of analysis is not routinely available at most research                   
              institutions.  The UMBC facility provides the research community               
              at UMBC and at numerous other institutions with access to the kind             
              of skilled mass spectrometry needed in many areas of modern                    
              biological research.
