Title       : Heterogeneous Reaction Rate Studies of Cloud and Fog Droplets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1992      
File        : a9013073

Award Number: 9013073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Davidovits paul.davidovits@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Kolb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Zahniser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Worsnop  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Heterogeneous reaction pathways involving water droplets in               
              clouds and fogs are important conduits for chemical                            
              transformation of important atmospheric trace gases.  One of the               
              basic parameters which determines the transfer rate of trace                   
              gases into atmospheric droplets is the mass accommodation or                   
              "sticking" coefficient for trace gas molecules on aqueous                      
              surfaces.                                                                      
                   In this research project the study of atmospherically                     
              important heterogeneous process including measurement of the mass              
              accommodation coefficients and their temperature dependence for a              
              variety of species will be undertaken.  Additionally, studies of               
              the effect on sulfur dioxide uptake of ion chemistry and co-                   
              deposition of two gases such as sulfur dioxide and ammonia, the                
              chemistry of surface species, and the effect of electric charge                
              and surfactant coating on gas-liquid interaction are planned.                  
              This research is motivated by the importance of heterogeneous                  
              reaction pathways involving water droplets in clouds and fogs as               
              conduits for chemical transformation of atmospheric trace gases.               
              For example, one of the basic parameters which determines the                  
              transfer rate of trace gases into atmospheric droplets is the                  
              mass accommodation or "sticking" coefficient for trace gas                     
              molecules on aqueous surfaces.
