Title       : Some Thermodynamic Problems of Neutron Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1991   
File        : a9013290

Award Number: 9013290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sachiko Tsuruta uphst@gemini.oscs.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The idea that highly condensed stars too massive to become white               
              dwarfs could exist as solid "neutron stars" was first advanced by              
              J. Robert Oppenheimer in 1939.  Since that time the idea that                  
              supernovae nuclei collapse directly into neutron stars (sometimes              
              in a rotating, magnetized form called "pulsars") is now widely                 
              accepted.  Despite this progress, rather little is understood about            
              their radiation and internal structural properties.  Such phenomena            
              as "star quakes" in pulsars suggest that the there are at least two            
              of neutrons consisting of a liquid core and a solid "crust".  The              
              Principal Investigator (PI) will study a variety of topics dealing             
              with the interiors of neutron stars, including the transport of                
              radiation from their interior to the surface, and vice versa just              
              after a supernovae explosion, which can be used to make predictions            
              that can be matched with observations, either from the ground or               
              from X-ray detectors on spacecraft.  She will include modern                   
              "equation of state" microphysics into these calculations and will              
              determine what effects magnetic fields and exotic particles called             
              "WIMPS" have on these models.  This work coincides with the                    
              expected detection of the nucleus of the supernova in the                      
              Magellanic Cloud, SN1987a, which should become visible shortly as              
              emission from the exploding ejecta becomes faint.  It is                       
              anticipated that the detection (and even non-detection) of this                
              remnant will elucidate which of various competing physical                     
              processes are important in neutron stars.  The work supported by               
              this award should play a key part in this understanding.
