Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Cohomology and Actions of Finite Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1991     
File        : a9013423

Award Number: 9013423
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alejandro Adem adem@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project is an attempt to apply new cohomological and                 
              representation-theoretic ideas to problems in transformation                   
              groups and homotopy theory.  The particular aspects which it                   
              involves can be described as follows:  (1) Incorporate the study               
              of certain discrete groups, such as arithmetic groups and mapping              
              class groups, to an existing program based on applying methods                 
              from modular representation theory to group actions.  (2)                      
              Determine general properties of the cohomology of finite groups,               
              and how, using equivariant cohomology, this influences the role                
              they play as transformation groups.  (3) Obtain necessary and                  
              sufficient conditions for a finite group to act freely on a                    
              product of spheres, and analyze the restrictions this imposes on               
              the homology representations when they are of the same dimension.              
              This work is aimed at approaching a global conjecture on the free              
              rank of symmetry of a finite complex.  (4) Use theory of infinite              
              loop spaces and invariant theory to obtain precise cohomological               
              information on the symmetric groups, with several applications in              
              mind.  They include describing the cohomology of certain double                
              covers of the symmetric groups which serve as finite models for a              
              space which detects important characteristic classes.  Other                   
              applications to stable homotopy and group cohomology are also                  
              planned.  The invariant theory used is seen as an interesting and              
              important algebraic problem in its own right, encoding most of                 
              the cohomological structure of the symmetric groups.                           
                   In other words, the various parts of this project all                     
              concern the symmetry of geometric objects.  Algebraic tools for                
              making calculations about symmetry will be perfected, and these                
              tools will then be applied to answer natural questions.
