Title       : Facility Request - Center for Limnology - Trout Lake Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1990 
File        : a9013298

Award Number: 9013298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Edwards                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Frost tfrost@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Center for Limnology's Trout Lake Station provides access to               
              a region with one of the densest concentrations of lakes in the                
              world.  Aquatic systems there range from temporary ponds to large              
              lakes and represent a broad diversity of hydrologic, edaphic,                  
              and trophic conditions.  Most of these systems lie within                      
              protected watersheds with low population densities.  The                       
              diversity of these resources has led to an extensive history of                
              aquatic research at the station.  Early work began with the                    
              pioneering comparative investigation of Birge and Juday and was                
              expanded upon by the whole-system experiments conducted by                     
              Hasler.  Current programs at Trout Lake include several                        
              multi-investigator, ecosystem level investigations as well as                  
              numerous smaller-scale projects involving population and                       
              community ecology, hydrology, fisheries biology, and basic                     
              limnology.  Research activities at the station have undergone a                
              major expansion over the past decade.  This expansion has been                 
              coupled with a program to provide major improvements in both the               
              physical plant and the research capabilities of the station.                   
              This support will continue improvements in both of these areas.                
              Specifically, it will support the acquisition of major instrument              
              systems (an autoanalyzer and a particle analysis system) which                 
              will augment substantially the basic analytical capacities of the              
              station.  Additionally, a new four-season cabin will complete the              
              planned expansion of basic facilities.  These improvements will                
              further basic goals of fostering the use of the Trout Lake                     
              Station as a national and international center for aquatic                     
              research.
