Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Function Spaces, Homotopy Theory, and Group Cohomology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1995   
File        : a9013139

Award Number: 9013139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick R. Cohen cohf@math.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel Gitler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   There are two faculty investigators in the projects                       
              described below, F. R. Cohen and S. Gitler, as well as two of                  
              their graduate students involved in thesis research.  All of the               
              research concerns algebraic techniques in topology.                            
                   F. R. Cohen intends to consider problems in classical                     
              homotopy theory and some offshoots to the cohomology of certain                
              discrete groups.  Three of the main projects involve (1)                       
              improving his bounds on the exponent of a mod-2-to-the-r Moore                 
              space, r at least 2, and trying to extend some results to the                  
              case when r is 1, (2) a study of the Whitehead product involving               
              spaces of rational functions together with their interplay with                
              Cayley-Dickson algebras, and (3) the cohomology and stable                     
              structure for the classifying space of certain discrete groups                 
              called mapping class groups.  Some of these problems involve                   
              configuration spaces and are part of joint work with S. Gitler                 
              and L. Taylor (University of Notre Dame).                                      
                   S. Gitler intends to consider several problems centered on                
              mapping spaces, their cohomology, and their relationship to                    
              homotopy theory.  For example, he intends to study maps (X,Y) and              
              their cohomology for "good" spaces X and Y.  Setting Y equal to a              
              space in the omega-spectrum for Morava K-theory, K(n), one gets                
              useful examples of spaces with periodic homotopy groups.  Gitler               
              intends to study applications of these spaces.
