Title       : Ultrafine Magnetic Particles of Metals, Metal Borides, and Metal Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9013930

Award Number: 9013930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher M. Sorensen sor@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth J. Klabunde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9239,
Abstract    :
              This multidisciplinary project in the area of materials                        
              chemistry is jointly supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic                  
              and Organometallic Chemistry Program and the Solid State                       
              Physics Program. The collaborating investigators are Dr.                       
              Christopher M. Sorensen and Dr. Kenneth J. Klabunde of Kansas                  
              State University and Dr. George C. Hadjipanayis of the                         
              University of Delaware. Research will continue on the synthesis                
              and evaluation of ultrafine magnetic particles, with the goals                 
              of learning more about the fundamental properties of these                     
              particles compared to bulk samples, to develop convenient                      
              methods for synthesis, protection and control of particle sizes                
              and microstructure, and to gain a better understanding of the                  
              chemistry and physics of the processes by which they are formed.               
                                                                                             
              A broad range of synthetic approaches to the preparation of                    
              metallic, metal boride and metal oxide particles in the size                   
              range of 1-1000 nm will be investigated. Synthetic techniques                  
              will include metal atom clustering in cold matrices under inert                
              gases and sputtering. Also to be investigated are reduction of                 
              metal ions by borohydride, hydroxide precipitation and                         
              digestion, and pyrolysis of aerosols. Reversed micelle                         
              techniques will be explored for the control of particle sizes,                 
              and the trapping of small particles in structural media, such                  
              as polymers, zeolites or vycor glass, will be investigated                     
              also. Magnetic particles will be thoroughly characterized with                 
              respect to chemical composition, morphology, magnetic ordering,                
              magnetic moment, coercivity, and phase transformations.
