Title       : Small-to-Gigantic Transition Metal Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1992      
File        : a9013059

Award Number: 9013059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $514000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence F. Dahl dahl@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The focus of this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and                   
              Organometallic Chemistry Program is the the chemistry of                       
              transition metal cluster compounds. The project involves the                   
              synthesis of new cluster compounds, characterization of their                  
              structures and bonding, and studies of their electrochemical                   
              and chemical reactivity patterns. A major objective of the                     
              research is to provide a unified correlation, based on                         
              molecular orbital theory, between molecular geometries and                     
              electronic configurations for various kinds of metal clusters,                 
              many of which gain and/or lose electrons without rupture of                    
              their atomic frameworks. Transition metal cluster compounds                    
              comprise an important class of industrial catalysts, and some                  
              very large clusters are of intense current interest because                    
              they display anomalous magnetic behavior ("quantum size"                       
              effects) not seen in small clusters or bulk solids.                            
                                                                                             
              The main thrust of the project will be the synthesis, isolation                
              and characterization of platinum, nickel and mixed-metal                       
              cluster anions, with emphasis on the design of rational                        
              synthetic routes to high-nuclearity metal clusters and the                     
              development of appropriate separation techniques to enable the                 
              isolation and crystallization of pure species for structural                   
              and physical studies.  Another overall goal is to bridge the                   
              gap between discrete and extended solid-state clusters via                     
              appropriate oligomerization/condensation reactions. New metal                  
              clusters will be synthesized which contain main-group ligands                  
              with S, Se, Te, N, P, As or Sb atoms. New metal phosphorus                     
              clusters will be prepared by the photolysis of molecular                       
              tetraphosphorus. An attempt will be made to use the                            
              parameter-free Fenske-Hall model to provide a quantitative                     
              electronic basis for the results of crystallographic and                       
              spectrocopic analyses of small metal clusters.
