Title       : GLOBEC: Significance of Circulation to Egg and Larval Distributions on Georges
               Bank
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1990  
File        : a9013887

Award Number: 9013887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57045              (Estimated)
Investigator: Francisco E. Werner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2453

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   This is an interdisciplinary, site-specific modeling study                
              focused on the Georges Bank conducted within the GLOBEC -                      
              Global Ocean Ecocsystems Dyanamics framework of the U.S. Global                
              Change Research Program.  It involves a collaborative effort on                
              the part of U.S. and Canadian scientists at the Department of                  
              Fisheries and Oceans.  Biological and physical data will be                    
              examined with the aid of three-dimensional circulation models                  
              under development at Dartmouth College and Skidaway Institute of               
              Oceanography.                                                                  
                   The study will focus on sea scallops (Placopectin                         
              magellanicus), Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) and the copepod                     
              Calanus finmarchicus.  Larval drift models driven by the                       
              circulation models will be created and used to determine the                   
              extent to which egg and larval distributions on Georges Bank can               
              be explained by the monthly-mean circulation fields; and to                    
              evaluate the significance of simple behaviors (vertical                        
              migration) and more complex physics (time-dependence, spatial                  
              structures) to the egg and larval distributions.                               
                   The general approach will be to focus on the null hypothesis              
              that distributions are determined by passive advection and                     
              diffusion in the monthly-mean circulation fields, and the                      
              corollary that apparent "retention" is merely a reflection of the              
              Bank's natural residence time.  Hypotheses for significant                     
              influences from higher-frequency flow variability, small-scale                 
              flow structures and vertical migration will also be explored.
