Title       : Understanding Written and Pictured Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1994      
File        : a9013026

Award Number: 9013026
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary C. Potter potter@psyche.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              How does the context in which we see something (for example, a                 
              word or an object) influence what we see and how accurately and                
              rapidly we see it?  In daily experience and in the experimental                
              laboratory, it is clear that context, such as the sentence                     
              surrounding a word or the scene in which an object appears, can                
              help or hurt perception, but just how that happens cannot be                   
              understood without addressing some basic questions about visual                
              cognition.  Is a written word (for example) first identified                   
              solely on the basis of the visual information, with the context                
              having its effects as the word's meaning is integrated with the                
              sentence of which it is a part?  Or, does the context play a role              
              in determining how fast the word is seen, or even what word is                 
              seen?  This research will investigate the interaction of context               
              and stimulus information in seeing and remembering words (and                  
              sometimes pictures) at four sequential stages in processing a                  
              sentence or list.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The four stages or levels will be studied using four techniques,               
              each of which is expected, on theoretical grounds, to tap a                    
              different stage.  The first studies will make use of a phenomenon              
              called "repetition blindness," in which the second of a pair of                
              identical items on a list tends to "disappear" if it arrives very              
              soon after the first one.  This disappearance seems to happen at               
              a very early stage of perception of the second item (perhaps                   
              within the first 1/20 of a second); the question is whether                    
              surrounding context can affect this early stage.  The second set               
              of studies will tap a somewhat later stage (perhaps in the first               
              1/10 of a second) involving selection of one perceived word from               
              several possible words that the glimpsed word might actually be.               
              A frequent effect that happens at this stage involves mistaking a              
              "nonword" like DACK for a real word such as DECK; the studies                  
              will look at the influence of sentence context on that effect.  A              
              third stage will be studied by presenting two words                            
              simultaneously and briefly, in the middle of a sentence, causing               
              the reader to make an immediate choice of the one that fits the                
              context.  A successful choice will indicate that the words must                
              have been processed (perhaps unconsciously).  At a fourth stage,               
              after the word itself is recognized, its meaning is "tuned" to                 
              fit the sentence as a whole. This stage will be studied by                     
              investigating involuntary intrusions of substitute words that may              
              fit better in a given context.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The significance of the research lies in its role in helping us                
              understand in detail the process of reading and language                       
              comprehension, in order to place the teaching of reading and the               
              use of written communication on a rational scientific foundation.
