Title       : Dynamic Reassimilation of Atmospheric Observations for Global Climate Change
               Studies: A Feasibility Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1994     
File        : a9013212

Award Number: 9013212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $970594             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jagadish Shukla   (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Kinter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1577,5740,
Abstract    :
                   The PIs will produce a four-dimensional internally                        
              consistent gridded data set for the global atmosphere for the                  
              period May 1982 to November 1983.  They will do so by assembling               
              the most complete set of atmospheric and oceanic observations                  
              made during that period and by using a state-of-the-art                        
              multivariate optimal interpolation scheme for atmospheric data                 
              assimilation.                                                                  
                   The primary motivation for this work is to demonstrate the                
              feasibility of reanalyzing past atmospheric observations using a               
              state-of-the-art global model and a global data assimilation                   
              system.  Such a feasibility study is needed before making plans                
              for reanalysis of long term (more than 10 years) historical data               
              sets for climate research.                                                     
                   The data assimilation system to be used will include the                  
              COLA general circulation model, the forecast of which will                     
              provide the first guess, and the most accurate optimum                         
              interpolation algorithm available.  The observational data set                 
              will be a combination of level II-data archived in real time                   
              during the period and delayed mode data, including the                         
              comprehensive Ocean-Atmosphere Data Set (COADS), which have been               
              assembled at NCAR.  The critical evaluations of the analyses                   
              will include general circulation statistics; global and local                  
              energy spectra; global energetic diagnoses including generation                
              and dissipation of energy; a detailed examination of the global                
              hydrologic cycle including regional budgets for the tropical                   
              Pacific, North America, the Amazon basin, and sub-Saharan Africa;              
              and computations of surface wind stress and total heat flux to                 
              force a global ocean model.  The PIs will archive the various                  
              measures of analysis error obtained during the assimilation cycle              
              to study the quality of the analyses and to provide confidence                 
              estimates and error bars.                                                      
                   This study will be extremely useful to support the                        
              scientific objectives of national and international research                   
              programs such as the Tropical Oceans Global Atmospheric (TOGA),                
              World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE), Global Energy and                   
              Water Cycle Experiment (GEWEX) and International Geosphere                     
              Biosphere Program (IGBP).  The PIs have chosen the 1982-83 period              
              for this study because it witnessed the most outstanding example               
              of ocean-atmosphere interaction as manifested by the E1 Nino-                  
              Southern Oscillation phenomenon and its related world-wide                     
              effects.
