Title       : 8th Biennial Meeting of the International Society for Evolutionary Protistology;
               College Park, MD; July 1990
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1990      
File        : a9013232

Award Number: 9013232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Andersen randersen@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The protists are a diverse group of eucaryotic organisms,                 
              including the algae, fungi, and protozoa, united by their                      
              intermediate level of organization between the procaryotes                     
              (bacteria and blue-green algae) and the more highly organized                  
              groups of plants and animals.  Protists are commonly used as                   
              experimental organisms in laboratory studies of cell biology.                  
              Understanding the evolutionary relationships among protists                    
              groups has been impeded by the fact that algae, fungi, and                     
              protozoans are studied by separate communities of investigators.               
              During the past few years, however, several Task Forces have been              
              organized to study the similarities and differences across the                 
              three groups, and to establish standard nomenclature for                       
              structures that are shared by them.  This careful study should                 
              allow investigators to separate similarities that are due to                   
              common ancestry (homologies) from similarities due to common                   
              function (analogies).  The first such effort to be completed is                
              the Task Force on the Flagellar Apparatus and the Cytoskeleton.                
              The results will be presented at the 8th meeting of the                        
              International Society of Evolutionary Protistology, in College                 
              Park, Maryland.                                                                
                   The proposed Task Force meeting and its associated                        
              proceedings volume will have wide impact.  This synthesis will                 
              open new discussions between cell biologists, evolutionary                     
              biologists, and systematists working of algae, fungi, and                      
              protozoans.  These findings will help to clear the path leading                
              to a better understanding of the ancient diversification of                    
              higher organisms.
