Title       : Enhancement of Rensselaer Fresh Water Institute Laboratory Capabilities on Lake
               George, New York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1993  
File        : a9013282

Award Number: 9013282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Edwards                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Boylen boylec@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This project will provide partial funding for improvement of              
              the laboratory capabilities of the Lake George biological field                
              station of the Fresh Water Institute (FWI) of the Rensselaer                   
              Polytechnical Institution.  NSF funds will provide approximately               
              15% of the total estimated cost of construction of the laboratory              
              facilities.  With its present facilities, FWI has developed a                  
              core of research programs focusing on water resources and aimed                
              at understanding ecosystems undergoing change through                          
              anthropogenic perturbations.  The northeastern US contains many                
              different stressed aquatic ecosystems, including those suffering               
              from acid precipitation, toxic contamination, nutrient                         
              enrichment, and the introduction of exotic vegetation.  The Lake               
              George field station is a major regional environmental research                
              facility serving the limnological needs of researchers lacking                 
              such facilities at their home institutions.  The current use of                
              the field station by FWI staff and investigators affiliated with               
              numerous academic institutions and government agencies within                  
              the eastern New York and western New England region has placed a               
              heavy demand on the field station's physical resources, requiring              
              the use of a variety of temporary laboratories.  Consolidating                 
              these into one properly equipped facility will provide improved                
              year-round lakeside use, allowing enhanced laboratory                          
              experimentation and fully-seasonal sampling capabilities.
