Title       : U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Approximation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1991     
File        : a9013977

Award Number: 9013977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9550               (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Baker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Los Alamos National Lab
	      
	      Los Alamos, NM  87545    /   -

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1266,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research in applied                      
              mathematics between Dr. George Baker, Los Alamos National                      
              Laboratory and Professor P.R. Graves-Morris, Bradford                          
              University, West Yorkshire, England.  The objective of this                    
              investigation is to develop the theory and practice of                         
              approximation methods, based on Taylor series expansions                       
              which go beyond the first Riemann sheet.                                       
                                                                                             
              The proposed work will be based on approximations by the                       
              solution of differential equations.  The investigators will                    
              apply recently developed theoretical techniques, develop new                   
              ones and supplement them by numerical investigations.  The                     
              results of this research are expected to have wide applica-                    
              tions.  One case in point is the theory of critical phenomena,                 
              which has suffered from lack of methods to interpret adequately                
              the complex singular structure at some of the harder critical                  
              points.  Both Dr. Baker and Dr. Graves Morris are established                  
              mathematical physicists, who have made important contributions                 
              to the theory of applications of Pade approximants.
