Title       : U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Stellar Opacities and Atomic Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1993 
File        : a9013946

Award Number: 9013946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anil K. Pradhan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dimitri M. Mihalas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1215,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Drs.                    
              A.K. Pradhan and D. Mihalas, Ohio State University, and two                    
              groups of British astronomers under the direction of Dr.                       
              P.G. Burke, Queens University, Belfast and Dr. M. Seaton,                      
              University College, London. The objective of the proposed                      
              research is to carry out accurate large scale calculations                     
              of atomic data and stellar opacities.                                          
                                                                                             
              For the last seven years a major international project has                     
              been underway to carry out large scale atomic calculations                     
              with the final aim of calculating stellar opacities of                         
              unprecedented precision.  The opacity of stellar material                      
              plays a fundamental role in the structure and evolution of                     
              stars, as it controls the transport of radioactive energy in                   
              some regions of virtually all stars.  The stellar opacity is                   
              also intrinsically involved in the instabilities that give                     
              rise to stellar pulsation, which are important in a number                     
              of respects in current astronomical research.  The aim of                      
              the proposed research project, which is a joint collaboration                  
              between atomic physicists and astronomers in the United-                       
              Kingdom, the U.S., the Federal Republic of Germany, France                     
              and Venezuela, is to employ state-of-the-art atomic physics                    
              methods that are capable of yielding the basic atomic                          
              parameters, such as oscillator strengths and photoionization                   
              cross sections, to a high degree of accuracy in the range of                   
              5-10%.  The project is being led by Drs. M. Seaton and P.G.                    
              Burke.  This award will permit the participation of members                    
              of the U.S. team. The collaboration will benefit from the                      
              extensive expertise of Dr. Mihalas in stellar atmosphere                       
              theory and Dr. Pradhan in atomic physics.
