Title       : SBIR Phase I: Novel Catalyst Substrate for the High and Low Temperature Water
               Gas Shift Reactor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a0060771

Award Number: 0060771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marco J. Castaldi mcastaldi@precision-combustion.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul V. Menacherry  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Precision Combustion, Inc.
	      410 Sackett Point Road
	      North Haven, CT  064733106    203/287-3700

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1401,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop 
              compact Water Gas Shift Reactors (WGSR) with rapid startup and load following
              through the use of a novel catalyst substrate design consisting of multiple
              Ultra Short Channel Length (USCL), high cell density metal monoliths in series.
              These USCL monoliths have very high heat and mass transfer coefficients due to
              the absence of fully developed boundary layers; this increases bulk mass
              transfer on the order of 20 fold over conventional honeycomb monolith supports.
              The high cell density, up to 2500 cells per square inch, results in a
              considerably higher Geometric Surface area (GSA) per unit volume compared to
              honeycomb monoliths. The improved transport properties and increased GSA
              translates into much smaller reactor size and weight compared to pellet bed or
              conventional honeycomb substrates and more efficient catalyst utilization under
              mass transfer controlled operation, which can lead to significant cost
              reductions, especially when using precious metal catalyst. The very low thermal
              mass of the individual USCL catalyst substrate elements combined with the high
              heat transfer coefficient gives improved transient response and fast
              startup.

The proposed WGSR catalyst technology is primarily intended as part
              of an integrated fuel processor system to produce hydrogen for Proton exchange
              Membrane fuel cells in automotive applications. The proposed technology
              provides a very high potential benefit to cost opportunity, offering
              significant improvements in the WGSR component of volume, weight and
              potentially cost, as well as provides spin-off applications to other catalytic
              reactors (including other fuel processor components).



