Title       : SBIR Phase I: An Intelligent Qualitative Coding Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a0060377

Award Number: 0060377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent A. Myer bmyer@ideaworks.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              George A. Thompson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Idea Works Inc
	      100 West Briarwood
	      Columbia, MO  652031678    314/875-5827

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0510604   Analytic Tools                          
              0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project from Idea Works,
              Inc. tests the feasibility of using intelligent programming strategies to
              improve the quality, timeliness, and cost effectiveness of qualitative
              research.  A prototype computer program for qualitative data analysis,
              currently in initial stages of development, will be further developed and
              assessed.  This program uses artificial intelligence strategies of natural
              language understanding, machine learning, rule-based expert systems, semantic
              networks, and case-based reasoning to actively assist researchers in coding
              data.  Two related experiments will compare experienced and inexperienced
              coders performing with and performing without the aid of the program in order
              to assess the program's ability to help in coding, to enhance reliability and
              validity, and to increase the speed of coding.  Ease of use and user acceptance
              of the program will also be examined.  The program is expected to improve the
              quality of research while dramatically reducing cost, time, and training
              requirements.  This will make it feasible to apply rigorous qualitative
              research techniques to a vast range of problems, from coding transcripts or
              field notes, to examining the content of Internet sites, to conducting
              literature reviews.

The program proffered by Idea Works, which marks a
              significant improvement over existing qualitative analysis programs by offering
              suggestions for code assignments to the users, has commercial potential in both
              research and business applications.  Not only can the computer program be used
              to assist trained social scientists in coding a wide range of data from field
              notes to interviews to documents, but, because the program is not limited to
              any specific coding scheme, it can also be applied in areas as divergent as
              doctor-patient interaction, studies of man/machine interfaces, content analysis
              of Internet documents, and literature reviews.  The project has the potential
              to dramatically improve the quality and cost-effectiveness of qualitative
              coding of a broad range of data.  It has the potential for achieving cost
              effectiveness; not only by reducing the time required to code, but also by
              making it possible for less experienced coders to code with higher levels of
              reliability and validity.





