Title       : SBIR PHASE I: A New Approach to Particle Characterization - The Probability
               Density Function Propagation (PDFP) Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a0060298

Award Number: 0060298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99984              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Black dlb@cfdrc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CFD Research Corporation
	      215 Wynn Drive, 5th Floor
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    205/536-6576

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1443,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
              innovative particle transport and dispersion model called the Probability
              Density Function Propagation (PDFP) models, and implements the model into a
              commercial code. The PDFP model tracks the Probability Density Function (PDF)
              of particle position as a function of space and time. Only one trajectory for
              each class of particle size or type needs to be calculated, as compared to the
              2000 to 6000 trajectories needed in current state-of-the-art particulate
              models. This makes the PDFP model very computationally efficient, which is
              important for simulations with large numbers of particles where the particle
              calculations take a significant percentage of the CPU time. From the particle
              PDF's calculated in the model, the properties of the dispersed phase (solid or
              liquid) can be calculated anywhere in the model, providing a complete
              statistical representation of the particle behavior. The combination of
              computational speed and capability to completely describe the particles (solid
              or liquid) will make the PDFP model a valuable tool for engineers analyzing
              two-phase flows. In Phase I, the feasibility of the model will be demonstrated
              by comparing predictions with published data.

The Probability Density
              Function Propagation (PDFP) model will be developed and implemented in a
              commercial code. The capability will be implemented in an existing commercial
              code and will provide the capability to easily simulate two-phase flows that
              are difficult or very time consuming using current state-of-the-art particle
              models. Examples of applications where the PDFP model can be used include
              characterizing nonreacting sprays for ignition calculations, atmospheric
              dispersion, pneumatic transport, spray cooling, and any other application where
              large number of particles must be modeled.

