Title       : SBIR Phase I: Video-based Head and Face Gesture Recognition System for
               Hands-Free Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2000   
File        : a0060372

Award Number: 0060372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey B. Bishop research@futh.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : FUTH
	      PO Box 1233
	      Iowa City, IA  522441233    319/644-3787

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1545,9102,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project from Future of
              Technology and Health, (FUTH), LC, will develop video-based gesture recognition
              technology to provide an effective new type of computer access for people who
              have difficulty using a standard keyboard or mouse due to disabilities
              including cerebral palsy, Lou Gerhig's disease (ALS), stroke, spinal cord
              injury, or repetitive stress injury.  This technology is also expected to
              provide the capability for 'hands-free' control of computers and other
              electronic equipment for all users who may be using their hands for other tasks
              (such as typing, driving a motor vehicle, operating test equipment, etc.). 
              This project focuses on recognition of multiple head and face gestures using
              standard low cost digital video cameras (under $100) and standard personal
              computers.  The system may also be implemented on pocket computers for mobile
              and in-vehicle applications.  Face and head gestures are used to generate mouse
              or keyboard actions to control a computer or to control signals that in turn
              control other types of electronic devices.  For example, one application is the
              capability to 'surf the web' hands-free using head gestures to navigate web
              pages, including selecting and activating desired links.  Gesture recognition
              can be used to replace or augment existing switch interfaces or expensive
              eye/head tracking systems for people with disabilities, and  it has a number of
              advantages over voice recognition in many applications.

Early customers for
              this technology include computer users with mobility impairments who cannot
              effectively use a standard keyboard or mouse.  Other commercial applications
              include hands-free control of desktop computer software such as web browsers or
              text-to-speech, and hands-free control of in-vehicle information systems and
              personal digital assistants (PDA's).  The technology may also be applied for
              highly reliable hands-free control of industrial, scientific, or military
              equipment.


