Title       : SBIR Phase I: Improved Electrodes for Capacitive Deionization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2000   
File        : a0060611

Award Number: 0060611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Dietz sdietz@tda.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TDA Research, Inc
	      12345 West 52nd Avenue
	      Wheat Ridge, CO  800331917    303/940-2301

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1403,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project will develop
              improved monolithic carbon electrodes for capacitive deionization.  Capacitive
              deionization is a new technology being developed for the purification of ocean
              and brackish well water.  A constant voltage is applied and soluble salts are
              collected on the surface of porous carbon electrodes, thus purifying the water
              for human consumption or industrial processes.  Unfortunately, the current
              carbon aerogel electrodes are very expensive and their ion
storage capacity is
              relatively low.  The problem is that the carbon aerogel electrodes only have
              small pores, which prevents complete and rapid ion transport through the
              material.

A route to monolithic carbon electrodes with a combination of
              large (mesopores) and small pores (micropores) that is much easier and less
              expensive than the carbon aerogel electrode production process  has been
              developed.  The benefit of the mesopores is that they allow the liquid to
              penetrate the carbon for easy access to the high surface area micropores.  This
              greatly increases the rate of salt uptake and the useful capacity of the
              electrodes.  In Phase I TDA will develop monolithic porous carbon electrodes
              with the correct pore size distribution for use in capacitive deionization.  In
              Phase II the production will be scaled up and the carbon electrodes will be
              tested in commercial capacitive deionization systems.

Commercial
              Applications:
Inexpensive mesoporous carbon electrodes could be used in
              capacitive deionization to
purify water for human consumption and for
              industrial processes such as boiler feed.
These carbon electrodes may also be
              useful in electrical energy storage, such as in
capacitive energy storage.

