Title       : SBIR Phase I: Thermal Forming Combustion Synthesis (TFCS) - A New Process for
               Coating Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2000  
File        : a0060252

Award Number: 0060252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99933              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emil Shtessel exotherm@hotmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Exotherm Corporation
	      1035 Line Street
	      Camden, NJ  081031609    609/541-1949

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1630,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I investigates the
              feasibility of Thermal Forming Combustion Synthesis (TFCS) of coatings.  TFCS
              will combine two established materials processing techniques - thermal spray
              forming and Self-propagating High-temperature Synthesis (SHS) -as a novel
              method for synthesizing advanced coating materials in-situ to produce
              structural, wear and/or corrosion resistant coatings on the surfaces of
              substrates using simple, low-cost, starting materials. The technique is also
              applicable for the production of thin-walled freestanding structures. Layered
              deposits of Ni-Al and MoO3-AlxSi materials will be thermally sprayed onto
              'model' steel and graphite substrates in both flat coupon and cylindrical
              configurations.  The microstructures of the 'as-sprayed' layers will be
              characterized to determine porosity, contact area etc., prior to initiation of
              an SHS combustion synthesis within the layers and studies of the reaction
              mechanisms during combustion. The composition, microstructure, porosity level,
              and basic mechanical properties of the resulting deposits will be characterized
              using metallography, X-ray diffraction, SEM and microhardness testing.  The
              critical sprayed layer thicknesses required for both the Ni-Al and MoO3-AlxSi
              material systems will be determined and compared to theoretical predictions.
              Economic (thermal spray forming + SHS reaction) production of coatings would
              have significant commercial applications, particularly for the in-situ coating
              of parts where cost is the primary concern, such that conventional approaches,
              including the thermal spraying of more costly 'engineered' composite powders is
              not an option.  In addition, the SHS component of the investigation will enable
              compositional and microstructural variations to be achieved within reacted
              coatings, which could not be readily obtained by other methods. 

The
              approach may enable thin-walled tubes of novel structures and compositions to
              be produced, for use as catalyst supports, filters and in fuel cells etc.  Once
              proven, the thermal spray forming + in-situ SHS synthesis of coatings promises
              to be a new, economical, coating process.
