Title       : SBIR Phase I: Estimating Software Costs for Web-Enabled Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  2000  
File        : a0060006

Award Number: 0060006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96803              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Reifer dreifer@earthlink.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : RCI
	      22850 Crenshaw Blvd.
	      Torrance, CA  905050000    310/530-4493

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project from Reifer
              Consultants, Inc. develops mathematical models to be used to size multi-media
              applications and estimate costs and schedules for web-enabled software
              development projects.  As the business world moves to electronic commerce, more
              and more organizations are being powered by a web-enabled economy.  Success in
              such an economy relies on the ability to accurately estimate and control costs
              and schedules.  Accurate estimates enable returns on investment to be
              quantified and economic benefits to be computed.  Unfortunately, existing
              software estimating tools do not provide the needed capability.  The reason for
              this is simple; they fail to address the unique characteristics of web-based
              development projects.  The research of Reifer Consultants, Inc, would fill the
              gap by collecting the data needed to calibrate and validate proposed size and
              estimating models that can be used to address the need for innovation in this
              area.  The products of this research will be a validated mathematical model,
              prototype software estimating tool, and user test results that could serve as
              the basis of future product development and commercialization.  This project
              will also investigate the market for aligned products and services and prepare
              a business plan for future developments.

The commercial applications of this
              research are software tools that managers and estimators can employ to
              accurately estimate the costs and schedules for web-enabled applications. 


