Title       : SBIR Phase I: Pultrusion-Based Production Automation for Revolutionary Low Cost
               Carbon/Carbon Structural Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2000  
File        : a0060472

Award Number: 0060472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Carroll tcarroll@kazakcomposites.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : KaZaK
	      32 Cummings Park
	      Woburn, MA  018012122    781/932-5667

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop and
              demonstrate a pultrusion-based continuous, automated, near net shape
              manufacturing technology. The technology may be able to reduce the finished
              cost of constant cross section carbon/carbon composite structures by an order
              of magnitude or more.  The resulting change to accepted cost/performance
              paradigms arising from this revolutionary reduction in carbon/carbon price will
              open a wide range of new commercial markets that until now have been
              constrained by cost to using much lower-performance pyrolytic graphite.  The
              research includes design and fabrication of a lab-scale, automated production
              line, plus process optimization runs and analytical characterization of the
              resulting carbon/carbon test samples.  Key technologies to be demonstrated
              include the continuous matrix impregnation of moving dry carbon fiber preforms
              as they pass through the wet-out portion of the processing equipment, plus
              continuous in-line rigidization of a high char yield matrix. The resulting
              "green" composite is expected to be developable into a commercially viable
              high-density carbon/carbon part after a single carbonization cycle.  Mechanical
              and thermal properties of the low cost carbon/carbon will be many times better
              than the current commercial materials this product will replace. 
              

Carbon/carbon has unique high temperature thermal and mechanical
              properties.  A few large dollar-value markets that will eagerly accept and
              apply commercially-priced carbon/carbon components include heat treating
              furnace structures, steel-making electric arc furnace electrodes, fuel cell
              components, heat exchangers, thermal radiators and crucibles. 

