Title       : SBIR Phase I: High-Speed, High-Density Optical Disk Data Storage Based On A New
               Coding Concept
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a0060278

Award Number: 0060278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph DeMasi newspan@nsotech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Span Opto-Tech Inc
	      9380 SW 72nd Street, B-180
	      Miami, FL  331733243    305/275-6998

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project studies a new
              coding technique for high-speed, high-density optical disk data storage.  It is
              well known that conventional optical disk storage is based on recording and
              readout binary data pits in an optical disk such as compact disk and DVD.  The
              size of these pits that can be recorded and readout optically due to
              diffraction limitation thus limit the data storage density.  The proposed
              research explores a new coding concept that can facilitate recording and
              readout many bits of data in a single pit.  The data storage density can thus
              be significantly increased using the same diffraction limited focusing spot
              size as DVD.  The proposed concept is supported by commercially available data
              recording material to result in a read-only super high-density optical disk. 
              The concept is also supported by a new ion-exchanged photochromic glass to
              result in an erasable and rewritable disk with excellent room environmental
              stability and non-processing after data recording. Fast data code recognition
              using table lookup can improve the data access rate as well.  Phase I research
              will demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed disk storage concept. Phase II
              will realize a complete disk data storage system.

This project will
              demonstrate the feasibility of a new coding concept for high-speed,
              high-density optical disk data storage.  Using such a coding concept can
              significantly increase the disk storage density for commercial and military,
              e.g. on-line storage, library archival applications, image storage and
              processing for medical applications and military target identification, and
              fast access to large intelligent databases.

