Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of High Efficiency NanoFilter Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2000  
File        : a0060307

Award Number: 0060307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jayesh Doshi nanofiber@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : eSPin Technologies, Inc.
	      100 Cherokee Blvd., Suite 325
	      Chattanooga, TN  374053860    423/870-9994

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1417,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposal focuses
              on providing a feasibility
demonstration of producing electrospun nanowebs of
              nanofibers, and combining them with conventional
filter media to form novel
              NanoFilter media for specific filtration applications.  These applications are
              well
suited to address the problems of removal of particles smaller than 3
              microns from effluent streams -where
superior efficiency of nanowebs in
              capturing sub-micron particles is very attractive for cost considerations
as
              well.  Initially, the nanofibers will be electrospun from a solution of Nylon 6
              in formic acid and laid directly on to a conventional support filter media as a
              nanoweb.  The web architecture will be easily tailored to achieve the desired
              composite filter performance by varying fiber diameter, fiber orientation,
              fiber packing fraction within the nanoweb, and the nanoweb thickness.  This
              project will be carried out collaboratively by eSpin Technologies, a small,
              high-technology start-up company based in Chattanooga, TN, and specializing in
              providing custom-made electrospun nanofibers, with academic centers and major
              corporations as its partners. Together they possess the skills and facilities
              needed to successfully carry out the work under this grant.

Nanotechnologies
              developed in the coming years will form the foundation of significant
              commercial
platforms. This business will be a key supplier of nanofiber
              technology which have the potential for
commercial applications in a variety
              of fields including, filtration: industrial filters, biological
              separations,
ultra pure air and water systems, next generation clean rooms,
              agriculture and food industries, and
microelectronic industries.

