Title       : SBIR Phase I: Magnetohydrodynamic Formation of Metal Monospheres
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2000  
File        : a0060213

Award Number: 0060213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99968              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Dean RCD@Synnovations.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Synergy Innovations, Inc.
	      PO Box 798
	      Lebanon, NH  03766    603/448-5454

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project tests feasibility
              of a novel cost-efficient process for manufacture of monodispersed spherical
              micron-sized metal powders. Whereas there exist today various methods for
              making uniform sized particles, they are either unsuited to high -melting point
              materials, unperfected at sizes below 100 gm, slow or very expensive. 
              Commercial spherical gas-atomized powders are available, but have wide size
              distributions.  We propose to demonstrate liquid metal pressurization and
              perturbation of flow through a plate containing multiple high-speed
              drop-forming nozzles by means of magnetohydrodynamics (MHD).  The objective is
              a system suitable for use at high temperatures (<=2000C) permitting continuous
              feed (vs. batch processing), no moving parts, no high-pressure reservoir of
              liquid metal and high productivity.  The research includes analysis, design,
              construction, and testing of MHD pressurization and perturbation equipment and
              the nozzle plate.  The Phase I goal is production of uniform drops of low
              melting point metals using MHD and a multiple nozzle array.  In Phase II, the
              process will be extended to accommodate high temperature and increased
              throughput in a complete bench-top system producing "monospheres" of cobalt and
              iron.  This technology offers a means of producing significant quantities of
              desirable monospheres at commodity prices.

The primary customers for powders
              manufactured by the process innovated herein are Powder Metal parts producers,
              initially by Metal Injection Molding and Hot Isostatic Pressing. By serving as
              uniform substrates for coating, the uniform particles will improve the ability
              to produce consistently alloyed and dense parts cost-competitively.  Among many
              other markets are filters, catalysts, new magnetorheological fluids and
              biomedical uses. Initial markets exceed $15 million and the potential market in
              ten years exceeds $100 million.


