Title       : SBIR Phase I: Cofacial Metal Complexes as Oxygen Reduction Catalysts for Proton
               Exchange Membrane (PEM) Fuel Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a0060513

Award Number: 0060513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendell E. Rhine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aspen Systems Inc
	      184 Cedar Hill Street
	      Marlborough, MA  017523017    508/481-5058

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1401,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves
              developing highly active oxygen reduction catalysts for Proton Exchange
              Membrane (PEM) fuel cells.  Most of the technologies and subsystems for PEM
              fuel cells are currently well established via vigorous efforts by both the
              government and private industries.  However, the electrochemical reduction of
              O2 to H2O in acid at potentials close to the thermodynamically permitted value
              remains a daunting challenge.  The primary technical barrier to achieving
              higher operating voltages is the large cathode overvoltage due to the low
              activity of the oxygen reduction catalyst.  Therefore, improvements are
              necessary in oxygen reduction catalysts to meet PNGV performance and cost
              targets.  In this SBIR Phase I program, highly active oxygen reduction catalyst
              will be synthesized by supporting cofacial metal complexes on nanostructured
              carbon aerogels. Electrode structures will be designed for fuel cell catalysts.
              The aerogel support will be designed to stabilize the cofacial structure of the
              metal complexes and optimized for both reactivity and facile molecular access. 
              The catalysts will have significantly higher activities and utilization
              efficiencies than current state-of-the-art
Pt catalysts and lead to reduced
              catalyst loadings. 
 
The catalyst activity in PEM fuel cells is too low to
              make these cells attractive power plants for transportation applications. If
              the proposed research is successful the resulting catalysts that are more
              active than the Pt/C catalyst would make PEM fuel cells commercially viable
              power sources.

