Title       : SBIR Phase I: Boron Nitride Nanotubes Manufacture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2000  
File        : a0060326

Award Number: 0060326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Diener mikee@tda.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TDA Research, Inc
	      12345 West 52nd Avenue
	      Wheat Ridge, CO  800331917    303/940-2301

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1415,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will synthesize
              boron nitride nanotubes by a continuous pyrolysis method that can be readily
              scaled to produce industrial quantities at reasonable costs.  Intensive
              research is being conducted on single-walled carbon nanotubes (C-SWNTs) to take
              advantage of their incredibly high specific strength in composite material
              reinforcements, and their unusual electron
transport properties in nanoscale
              electronic devices.  Their properties and applications stem from the
              defect-free arrangement of carbon atoms into a filament with extremely high
              aspect ratio (length/diameter), currently around 10,000.  However, the high
              aspect ratio, tubular geometry, and atomic perfection are not unique to carbon;
              nanotubes (NTs) can be formed from many other layered materials, including
              boron nitride.  BN-NTs, while also exhibiting high strength, have commercially
              attractive properties that are complementary to the C-SWNTs, based on the
              chemical differences between BN and graphite.  The most
prominent
              characteristics unique to BN-NTs are oxidation resistance, optical
              transparency, and uniformity. BN-NTs are currently made in benchtop reactors by
              arc evaporation of boron rods, a low-throughput, uneconomical batch process. 
              By developing an improved synthetic method, BN-NTs will become available for
              materials research and applications.

Boron nitride nanotubes will have
              applications as reinforcements in high-end composite materials.  The best uses
              of BN nanotubes are complementary to those of C-SWNTs.  For example, the BN-NTs
              have the potential to form high strength, high temperature, form metal
              carbides.  As another example, BN-NT reinforcement of a polymer matrix will
              maintain the electrically insulating and optical transmission properties of the
              matrix,
whereas C-SWNTs impart electrical conductivity and opacity to the
              polymer matrix.   Also, the improved chemical resistance, particularly to
              oxygen attack, will improve the BN-NT stability at elevated temperatures and
              other severe service conditions.

