Title       : SBIR Phase I: Collaborative Field Tools for Project-Based Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a0060635

Award Number: 0060635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99637              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Cruz mcruz@livingtext.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LivingText
	      312 South Ashley Street
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481041351    734/622-8130

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0522400   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 7256,7355,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to produce
              high-quality and creative educational activities that are based on
              project-based contextual inquiry.  Student inquiry is an essential part of the
              learning process and is front and center in the American Association for the
              Advancement of Science Benchmarks (AAAS, 1993).  The project entails the
              development of Palm-based applications that support inquiry-based learning
              activities as part of an integrated system of personal digital assistant (PDA),
              plug-in sensor(s), Internet-enabled desktop analysis tools, and (optionally)
              wireless networking.  This combination will support a new generation of
              learning activities centered either on changes-in-space (e.g., varying
              temperatures across a playground or school, varying observations by different
              observers) or changes-in-time (e.g., changes in tree-girth between years,
              variations in stream pH over time, etc.).  Coupling PDA-made observations with
              database systems in the classroom and globally will allow the construction of
              new student inquiry activities.  A part of the data interpretation can occur
              immediately as students collect their observations, some can occur upon return
              to the classroom, and another set of tasks can center around collaborative
              explorations with students elsewhere.  Hence the system to be developed
              supports both inquiry-based learning and collaborative investigations.  The
              evaluation of this project will be based on feedback from teachers in a testbed
               and on feedback from potential publishers interested in participating in Phase
              II and beyond.

Given the growth of investment in instructional technology
              and the concurrent growth in availability of ubiquitous computing, as
              illustrated by the growing popularity of PDA's, it is anticipated that the
              market for the integrated system  will grow dramatically.

