Title       : SBIR Phase I: Maximum Entropy Data De-duplication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a0060675

Award Number: 0060675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Borthwick Andrew.Borthwick@choicemaker.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ChoiceMaker Technologies
	      10 Plaza Street E. #5H
	      Brooklyn, NY  112384937    718/638-8813

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
              the feasibility of high-risk, high-return research toward creating
              general-purpose de-duplication software.  De-duplication software identifies
              multiple database records that refer to one entity (such as a person), thereby
              enabling the merger of fragmented data. ChoiceMaker markets a research-derived
              de-duplication system called MEDD.  Many fundamental social services, including
              child immunization, require accurate de-duplication. New York City currently
              uses MEDD to de-duplicate its immunization records, thereby successfully
              improving children's public health. However, smaller public health
              organizations cannot benefit from MEDD because they cannot afford the 6 weeks
              of computer consulting that are required to customize MEDD for their data.
              ChoiceMaker's proposed research would decrease the adaptation time by an
              order-of-magnitude-making de-duplication affordable for most public health
              organizations and nearly every business with mission-critical databases.  MEDD
              employs an important emerging information-theoretic statistical technique
              (called maximum entropy) to mimic the decisions made by people evaluating
              whether to merge similar records. Maximum entropy technology supports software
              that can 'understand' each individual database's idiosyncratic information
              semantics and structure.  In the proposed research, ChoiceMaker will
              investigate significant, innovative extensions to maximum entropy technology
              that will dramatically increase MEDD's convenience and flexibility.

This
              research has applications to enhancing the data quality of any database which
              might contain multiple entries for the same entity due to the lack of a
              reliable identifying key.  Specifically, there are applications to the
              management of master patient indices by health care providers and lists of
              clients and vendors at large institutions.  The system is equally useful for
              matching and linking records in two different databases, such as for merging
              mailing lists for direct marketing, linking medical records for epidemiological
              research, and matching buy and sell orders for securities transa

