Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Fast Parallel Grid-Free Method for Simulating Turbulent
               Incompressible Flow In/Around Time-Varying Geometries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2000  
File        : a0060554

Award Number: 0060554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84338              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adrin Gharakhani adrin@Applied-Scientific.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ASR
	      1800 E. Garry Ave., Suite 214
	      Santa Ana, CA  927055803    949/752-7545

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project prepares the
              ground-work for the development of the first commercially available
              Computational Fluid Dynamics package for a truly grid-free Large Eddy
              Simulation (LES) of turbulent incompressible vortex dominated flow in complex
              time-varying geometries.  The computational engine is based on the parallel,
              fast multi-pole implementation of a Lagrangian vortex-boundary element method.
              Turbulence is accounted for via LES, using a Lagrangian dynamic Smagorinsky
              sub-grid scale model.  The method is:   (1) fully grid-free in the fluid
              domain, (2) free of numerical diffusion, (3) inherently solution-adaptive, and
              (4) capable of modeling inhomogeneous unsteady wall-bounded turbulent flow.  To
              this end, two new ideas will be developed during Phase I:  A grid-free method
              for predicting diffusion with variable-viscosity, which is a pre-requisite for
              LES modeling; and a non-diffusive vortex merging strategy to curb the
              proliferation of particles and maintain long-time accuracy.  These will then be
              incorporated into the Lagrangian vortex element method to demonstrate the
              salient features of grid-free vortex-based LES modeling of turbulent flows,
              using the prototypical example of the evolution of an initially perturbed
              infinite-Reynolds-number vortex ring in free space.

The software is ideal
              for simulation and analysis of complex turbulent flow phenomena.  This includes
              vortex breakdown, (massive) flow separation, vortex shedding, transient jets in
              cross-stream, wake-body interaction, high-swirl flow, etc.  All are associated
              with the design of advanced flow control mechanisms used, for example, to
              reduce flow-induced noise and vibration, and to improve lift/drag performance
              at reduced energy consumption rates.  Examples are flow over bluff bodies such
              as ground or under-water vehicles; in engines; in/around rotating machinery
              such as pumps and fans; helicopters; or in data storage units with rotating and
              moving parts.

