Title       : SBIR Phase I: In-Situ Spectral Ellipsometry Feedback Control Instrument for
               Metal Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition (MOCVD) of Complex Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2000  
File        : a0060589

Award Number: 0060589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Tompa gstompa@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SMI
	      120 Centennial Ave.
	      Piscataway, NJ  08854    732/885-5909

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1630,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project lays the
              foundation for developing and implementing an in-situ feedback control
              instrument for Metal Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition (MOCVD) of complex
              oxides.  If successful, the project will result in real time in-situ feedback
              monitors addressing the quality of the actual film being deposited by a complex
              oxide MOCVD tool for process development and for production. The program is
              specifically focused on lead zirconium titanate (PZT) for non-volatile
              ferroelectric random access memory (FRAM) fabrication, but the resulting
              technology will be applicable to other oxides.  This project will develop a
              real-time in-situ Spectral Ellipsometry film analysis tool that can feedback
              into process control. Specifically, the developed technology will monitor the
              optical constants, thickness, composition and surface/interface morphology. 
              Phase I will focus on development of  ex-situ sample-data libraries (calibrated
              to physical measurements) and refine the tool design.  In Phase II, a film
              analysis unit will be mated to an existing pilot production reactor.  The unit
              will be implemented, data libraries refined, and feedback control software and
              hardware developed. 
 
Phase III commercialization will consist of marketing
              complete oxide MOCVD systems with Spectral Ellipsometer based in-situ process
              monitors that enable real time feedback for quality control of deposited films.
               This will enable high yield economical manufacture of complex material based
              devices such as 
non-volatile memories and  infrared detectors, among others,
              at levels far above those now possible.


