Title       : SBIR Phase I: Pulsed High Acceleration Spray Technique for Wear and Corrosion
               Resistant Coatings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a0060761

Award Number: 0060761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99902              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn C. Whichard whichardgc@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UTRON, Inc.
	      8506 Wellington Road, Suite 200
	      Manassas, VA  201093915    703/369-5552

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1630,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project investigates the
              use of a new and unique hypervelocity acceleration technique to deposit powder
              particles for the creation of superior wear and corrosion resistant coatings.
              The research objective is to determine if metallic powders, at temperatures
              below their melting point, can be accelerated to high velocities, impact a
              substrate and adhere, to produce a high quality coating. The coating device
              that will be used is an experimental Pulsed High Acceleration Spray Technique
              (PHAST) Gun. The PHAST coating technique can be described as a high velocity
              cold spray type process that utilizes a pulsed capillary discharge. Screening
              experiments will be performed in Phase I to determine if various alloys can be
              deposited by the PHAST Gun. The PHAST process is expected to result in plastic
              deformation of the feed particles upon impact with the substrate, thus forming
              coatings characterized by good adhesion, high density, and low oxide content.
              Measured properties will be compared with existing thermal spray coating
              properties to determine the improvement attributed to the PHAST Gun.

There
              are numerous commercial applications for dense corrosion and wear resistant
              coatings in the chemical process industry, industrial machinery, and aircraft
              industries. Some of these applications are for the replacement of hard chrome
              plate and others will be new applications for previously unprotected parts.
              PHAST coatings are expected to protect and extend the life of components such
              as, pump shafts, die gates, linings for process vessels, housings, nozzles,
              ball and roller bearing surfaces, and hydraulic cylinder
shafts.
