Title       : SBIR Phase I: Advanced Software for Interactive Chemistry Tutoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a0060379

Award Number: 0060379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benny G. Johnson johnson@quantumsim.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Quantum Simulations Inc
	      5275 Sardis Road
	      Murrysville, PA  15668    724/733-8603

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project  is aimed at
              advancing the state-of-the-art in chemistry education software in a critically
              important respect demanded by students and teachers.  The primary research
              objective is the development of meaningful interactive tutoring capabilities
              for problem solving.  This area has been repeatedly identified as that where
              existing offerings are weakest.  This project offers a new and different
              approach, adapting and incorporating certain concepts from artificial
              intelligence that have not previously been applied in chemistry education.  A
              program will be constructed that not only solves problems, but also can explain
              its work to the student coherently and respond to various questions.  The
              program will dynamically create detailed explanations of worked-out solutions
              for problems entered by the student or teacher, and provide the connections to
              the underlying fundamental chemical concepts.  This technology will be
              implemented as a sophisticated tutoring "engine" that can be easily interfaced
              to add interactive tutoring capabilities to any existing educational program or
              curriculum, such as those dealing with practical real-world applications of
              chemistry.

The chemistry education software has broad commercial
              implications, creating opportunities for tremendous synergy in use with other
              packages and curricula.  In addition, the improvement to be developed is of a
              fundamental nature, is portable and scalable, and can be deployed equally well
              on CD-ROM, on the desktop, or on the Internet.



