Title       : STTR Phase I: IntelliStitch AI: Intelligent Computerized Embroidery Design
               Automation for the Textile Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a0060306

Award Number: 0060306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Goldman dgoldman@softsightinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soft Sight, Inc.
	      3105 Knapp Road
	      Vestal, NY  138503038    607/797-4073

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 5514,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project builds
              upon the technology and success of the company's software product, one of the
              industry's first embroidery design automation systems. It provides the textile
              industry with simplified mechanisms for converting scanned artwork into high
              quality embroidery design data. This data is then utilized by commercial sewing
              equipment to produce the embroidered artwork that has become quite common on
              all types of garments and woven goods. Unfortunately, embroidered artwork is
              often quite expensive to produce. In many cases, it may substantially exceed
              the costs of the actual garments being imprinted.  These costs arise from a
              variety of factors including an embroidered design's size, layout, and
              complexity. Well-designed embroidered artwork permits efficient production with
              high yields (i.e. causing very few defective items to be produced).  Automating
              this design creation process provides additional benefits by eliminating the
              time consuming manual process that must otherwise be undertaken by a human
              expert.  With these factors as the primary motivation, this research will
              investigate advanced artificial intelligence and machine vision mechanisms,
              such as neural nets and structural indexes, to substantially improve
              capabilities and performance.  

The advantages of a robust automation system
              to the textile industry are quite substantial.  Creating sophisticated
              embroidery designs is a tedious, time-consuming activity requiring the skills
              of a human expert (called a digitizer).  Even after this process has been
              completed, any miscalculations by the digitizer could substantially impede
              production on machinery.  A well-designed expert system could inevitably
              eliminate these costs and perhaps even provide a level of quality that is not
              achievable by its human counterparts.  Additionally, this research may also
              have broad application within other fields such as document processing or other
              areas where image understanding and interpretation is important. 

