Title       : SBIR Phase I: Parallel Processing of Time-Lapse Seismic Data via the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a0060546

Award Number: 0060546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99852              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Cole steve.cole@4thwaveimaging.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fourth Wave Imaging
	      16A Journey, Suite 200
	      Aliso Viejo, CA  92656    949/916-9787

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,9139,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project from Fourth Wave
              Imaging Corporation concerns the processing and analysis of time-lapse seismic
              data on parallel computers, using the internet to control the processing flow
              and visualize the results.  In recent years, there has been exponential growth
              in time-lapse seismic project activity.  Time-lapse seismic analysis
              facilitates the management of oil and gas reservoirs by imaging fluid movement
              in the reservoir over time.  The results are used to guide reservoir management
              decisions--such as where to place a new well or where to inject water, gas, or
              steam to stimulate hydrocarbon movement--and help maximize the life of both new
              and existing fields while minimizing recovery costs.  The computer algorithms
              needed to process time-lapse seismic data are complex and require advanced
              computational hardware--typically multiprocessor Unix workstations or clusters
              of personal computers--that can execute instructions in parallel.  There is
              little standardization in parallel hardware.  Customers typically have no
              parallel machines at all or machines whose architecture is fundamentally
              different from that of the software vendor--hindering the marketing and
              deployment of this software.  The proposed innovation will allow customers to
              process their data on a centralized PC cluster, using the internet to control
              the processing and visualize the results.  It will also improve the links
              between the components of the time-lapse seismic workflow, leading to greater
              understanding and more widespread commercial acceptance of the
              technology.

Potential applications of the proposed research include
              petroleum industry mapping of bypassed oil, monitoring of costly injected
              fluids, and imaging flow compartmentalization and the hydraulic properties of
              faults and fractures.  Non-petroleum applicatons include monitoring groundwater
              reserves, subsurface monitoring of contaminant plumes and environmental
              clean-up projects.  The internet-based parallel software system developed for
              this project could be applied to other compute-intensive fields suchas medical
              and satellite imaging, weather forecasting, and finance.



