Title       : SBIR Phase I: Innovative System for Bioinformatics and Computer Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a0060244

Award Number: 0060244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76683              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob R. Glaser jglaser@microbrightfield.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MBF, Inc.
	      74 Hegeman Avenue
	      Colchester, VT  05446    802/655-9360

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0522400   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 7256,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I from MicoBrightField, Inc
              provides a plan for creating a bioinformatics system that will allow users to
              acquire images of complete microscopic specimens at the highest magnification
              of a light microscope, to store these very large images in a web-enabled
              database, and to share them with students and researchers over the Internet. 
              For conceptual purposes, these very large images will be "virtual slides" that
              can be viewed at any magnification.  An innovative viewer technology will, in
              effect, provide the capabilities of a "virtual microscope", one which will also
              provide additional capabilities, including dynamic zooming and panning for
              viewing the virtual slides. A demonstration web site will be set up to test the
              feasibility of the bioinformatics system.  Although the general definition of
              informatics may vary, this system is comprised of three main functions:  image
              acquisition, database storage, and visualization.  The system will help bridge
              the current gap between computer technology and biology by providing an
              architecture that will decentralize data distribution so that virtual slides
              can be routinely shared throughout the educational and scientific
              communities.

This bioinformatics system, consisting of software and
              hardware, will be marketed to educational and research institutions, providing
              them with the means to produce and view virtual slides on their own web sites. 
              The software for creating the virtual slides will be sold with all components
              needed to set up a computer microscopy system.  Among the longer-term
              opportunities for consideration are as follows: an Internet system for
              archiving and comparing images for clinical pathology, a service to create and
              maintain the virtual slides and database for a customer's web site, and
              creation of large-scale images for on-line text books and stereotaxic atlases
              in conjunction with an author and/or publisher.

