Title       : SBIR Phase I: Enhanced Product Sound Design Choices via Perceptual Attributes
               Mapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2000  
File        : a0060114

Award Number: 0060114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99765              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Lyon rhlyon@lyoncorp.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : RH Lyon Corp.
	      691 Concord Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021381002    /   -

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 5514,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is concerned with
              consumer preference for product sound, with the goal of establishing a
              "mapping" or set of tools that product designers can use to achieve a preferred
              sound. The P. I. completed a NSF-supported SGER study that related product
              design choices and user reactions to the sound of the product. This study has
              used a panel of expert listeners to develop "sensory profiles" (SPs) for a
              limited range of product sounds, and a consumer jury to judge the same sounds
              in terms of product acceptability. Preliminary relationships have been
              established between the product SPs and physical metrics for these sounds, and
              between the product SPs and consumer judgements. This project seeks to
              determine the feasibility of extending the methodology developed to an expanded
              range of product sounds. Three major issues are addressed that will affect the
              utility of the concept as far as industry is concerned. One issue is the
              ability of metrics to anticipate user reactions to product sound because of
              their correlation with the product SPs. The second issue relates to the breadth
              of a product class that can be represented by a SPs. Variations on the sounds
              of particular vacuum cleaners and washing machines have been used as a way to
              develop the ideas, but this set needs to be expanded further. The third issue
              is concerned with products with different function but which are used in the
              same physical environment. 

While there is widespread commercial interest in
              product sound quality, there is at present no structured way for manufacturers
              to relate the preference for sound to design goals. By developing methods that
              are broadly applicable and as easy to use as possible, the research can provide
              sound quality measurement procedures that can be applied to any product for
              which sound is an issue. 

