Title       : SBIR Phase I: Pulsed Plasma Atomization of Rapidly Solidified Hard Magnetic
               Nanophase Nd-Fe-B Powders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a0060764

Award Number: 0060764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99724              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell W. Kincaid rwkincaid@compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UTRON, Inc.
	      8506 Wellington Road, Suite 200
	      Manassas, VA  201093915    703/369-5552

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1407,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
              a new technique to economically synthesize rapidly solidified magnetic
              (Nd-Fe-B) powders with diameters in the 1-10 m range. In preliminary
              experiments using pulsed plasma jets to atomize metal melt streams, the company
              has produced spherical copper powders down to several hundred nanometers. These
              pulsed plasma jets produce momentum fluxes 2 to 3 orders of magnitude higher
              than conventional gas atomization, thus allowing production of fine powders.
              The objective of this project is to use a fundamentally different
              configuration, which is more amenable to the production of rapidly solidified
              hard magnetic nanophase powders. This will be accomplished by coupling the
              pulsed plasma jet to a pulsed wire arc metal source instead of the more
              conventional melt stream source. This has the anticipated advantage of
              eliminating material incompatibilities during processing and avoids the need
              for large induction melt systems. It can also provide controllable coupling to
              a repetitively pulsed plasma jet, allow production of refractory metal powders,
              and provide easier access to the atomization zone for enhancing the cooling
              rate of the atomized powders. The project will be carried out in cooperation
              with the University of Utah, which will provide expertise in
              processing-microstructure-property relationships in hard magnetic materials. 
              

Commercial applications of permanent magnets reach virtually every corner
              of technology, including automobiles, computers, medical technology, power
              generation equipment, aerospace, and telecommunication industries. These
              magnets are used in compact powerful electric motors for computer disk drives
              and fly-by-wire aircraft. They are also find applications as high precision
              actuators used to focus the laser in a compact disk player and in miniature
              loudspeakers of personal stereos. Automotive applications include starters,
              small motors, alternators, sensors, meters, and electric and hybrid vehicle
              propulsion systems.

