Title       : SBIR Phase I: Electro-Mechanical Micro-Vibratory Transducers for Convective Heat
               Transfer Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a0060786

Award Number: 0060786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sumon K. Sinha SumonKSinha@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SINHA
	      3607 Lyles Drive
	      Oxford, MS  386555708    662/234-6248

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1406,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on
              developing a method to adapt the use of a novel electro-mechanical
              micro-vibratory transducer to enhance convective heat transfer rates in heat
              exchangers while minimizing any added flow pressure drop.  The transducer is
              composed of a very thin, light weight composite sheet that contains the
              combination sensors and vibratory actuators that are used to detect boundary
              layer flow conditions and to excite the viscous wall layer to control boundary
              layer transition and separation.  The innovative approach uses localized
              sub-micron level wall vibrations to increase the wall skin friction while
              attenuating the overall turbulence level in the flow.  This is expected to
              lower the flow pressure drop increase compared to traditional forms of heat
              transfer enhancement through turbulence enhancement.  The power consumption of
              the transducer is also about three orders of magnitude smaller than the best
              competing active flow control devices and is expected to be insignificant in
              comparison to the heat transfer rates.  The transducer can be easily integrated
              to plates, fins or tubes on the airside of a heat exchanger.

The commercial
              viability is that it can improve waste heat recovery and utilization for
              manufacturing and processes industries involving gaseous phase drying. It can
              also make stationary and vehicle mounted heating ventilating and
              air-conditioning (HVAC) and power generation systems more compact and
              efficient.  It can allow denser packaging of electronic components by
              facilitating heat dissipation in a smaller space.

