Title       : SBIR Phase I: Universal Home Network Based on Ultrawide Band Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2000  
File        : a0060295

Award Number: 0060295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chujen Lin chujen@i-a-i.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intelligent Automation Inc
	      7519 Standish Place, Suite 200
	      Rockville, MD  208552743    301/222-0444

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9102,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop an
              innovative wireless network infrastructure for residential homes that can
              integrate Internet, data communication, telephony, home automation, audio, and
              video. This infrastructure is called "Universal Home Network"(UHN). The
              backbone of UHN is the emerging Time-Modulated Ultrawide Band (TM-UWB) radio
              technology. TM-UWB is a radio communication method that sends pulses of RF
              energy instead of sine waves. These pulses that enable precise ranging, operate
              in multi-path environments, and more easily penetrate indoor obstructions. The
              average RF transmit power of these pulses is below the noise floor, allowing
              UHN to perform tracking and data communication while coexisting with existing
              RF systems. TM-UWB radios only transmit pulses with 0.1% duty cycle, so they
              consume very little power. Pulses in the time domain have a bandwidth of more
              than 2 GHz, so TM-UWB signal is very difficult to intercept and jam. UHN may
              achieve a bandwidth of more than 100Mbps using multiple channels. The brain of
              HUN is the HUN Home Server, which is a dedicated real-time computer managing,
              sharing, routing, storage, and processing voice, video, data, and control
              commands coming in and out of the house.

The Home Networking market is
              growing rapidly, because of the declining price of computers, increasing number
              of homes with multiple PCs, and Internet access. There are also an increasing
              number of digital devices used in the home, with a prevalence of multimedia
              content. Park Associates anticipates that computer-and entertainment-based
              networks alone will exceed $4 billions in five years. Existing home network
              technologies can only meet parts of the interconnection needs of homeowners.
              The proposed UHN is designed to carry data, voice, audio/video, and home
              automation messages in a unified infrastructure. Intelligent Automation Inc.'s
              near term commercialization plan is to provide interfaces between UHN and other
              existing protocols to speed up the acceptance of UHN by consumers and
              industries. The long term plan is to partner with consumer electronics,
              appliance, and home automation manufactures to design and sell products with
              native UHN interface.

