Title       : SBIR Phase I: An Instrument for Swelling Measurements of Crosslinked Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2000  
File        : a0060427

Award Number: 0060427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95605              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen H. Spiegelberg steve@campoly.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cambridge Polymer Group
	      11 Ward  Street, Suite 100
	      Somerville, MA  021434215    617/864-5566

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1630,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project describes the
              development of an instrument that will quantitatively measure the dimensional
              change, i.e. swelling behavior, of crosslinked polymer samples as they are
              exposed to changing environments, such as solvent conditions, pH, and
              temperature. The wide prevalence of radiation and chemically-crosslinked
              polymers in industries including biomedical, wire and cable, and packaging has
              led to the need for a reliable measurement technique to quantify the degree
of
              crosslinking, obtainable from swelling measurements, for process development
              and quality control. Additionally, end-users would like to know the
              environmental response of these materials a priori. Currently, researchers rely
              on weighing techniques to monitor the swell ratio as a sample is placed in a
              solvent. Solvent evaporation and technician procedure make this technique prone
              to error and transient measurements difficult to obtain. In the instrument
              proposed here, a micrometer system will monitor the change in one dimension of
              a sample as it swells or de-swells in controlled environment with a
resolution
              far better than gravimetric means. These transient measurements will provide
              the steady state swell ratio, degree of crosslinking anisotropy, and the
              kinetics of swelling, the latter information valuable for drug release systems,
              hydrogels, and smart materials.

There are currently no commercial
              instruments designed specifically to measure the swell ratio of crosslinked
              polymers. The orthopedic industry, in conjunction with the ASTM, is developing
              a new guideline for these measurements that requires dimensional measurements
              made while the sample is in the swelling solvent. In addition to providing
              material parameter information, this instrument will allow quantitative
              prediction of material behavior when exposed to changing environments. This
              technology has applications to
hydrogels, smart materials, films, granular
              material, and the wire and cable industry.

