Title       : SBIR PHASE I: High Throughput, Ion Selective Metal Separation Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a0060702

Award Number: 0060702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Hammen chelatec@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ChelaTech, Inc.
	      4200 Fox Farm Road
	      Missoula, MT  59802    406/728-5897

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1417,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop high
              throughput metal ion-selective separation composites for the extraction and
              purification of critical metals in production, and water and metal recycling
              environments. The problem this research addresses is the high cost and
              inefficiency of existing metal separation resins.  Ion exchange processes
              operate by passing the metal-containing solution through a bed of porous
              particles with functional chemistry inside the pores. Since the solution
              prefers to flow around the particle, the diffusion of metal ions into the pores
              is slow and rate limiting.  This research literally turns the pore diffusion
              problem inside out by synthesizing composite column matrices composed of solid
              nonporous particles.  The composite materials are assembled by formation of
              thinly crosslinked, functional polymers that are covalently tethered in the
              interstitial volumes between solid particles.  The polymer networks can be
              visualized as an array of 'spider webs' suspended in the micron-scale
              interparticle volumes of the composite columns. The strands of the nano spider
              webs are functionalized with metal-selective chelating reagents.  The research
              objectives are to synthesize and test transition metal-selective extraction
              composites.  The project is expected to produce prototype high throughput
              columns that are manufacturable at an extremely low cost.
 
The commercial
              applications of the research involve most fields of water and metal
              separations.  The uses include extraction of toxic metals from water, water
              deionization and recycling, semiconductor wastewater recycling, and the mining
              of copper, gold, platinum, nickel, and cobalt.

