Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Programming Environment to Enable Engineers Program Distributed
               Smart Sensor Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2000  
File        : a0060615

Award Number: 0060615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99967              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Sharp tsharp@sdltd.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sheet Dynamics, Ltd.
	      1776 Mentor Avenue, Suite 240
	      Cincinnati, OH  452123597    513/631-0579

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to
              demonstrate the feasibility of a high level graphical programming environment
              for Smart Sensor arrays. Ideally, application developers should be able to
              describe the desired behavior of their system at a high level of abstraction
              (e.g., 'control motor speed', 'monitor bearing', 'monitor pump').  In addition
              they must be provided with tools that take a system description at this high
              level and map it onto a specific set of hardware.  The development of a
              'mapping' tool is critical to the success of this, as the typical application
              developer (e.g., an industrial engineer or process control engineer) will not
              have all of the specific expertise needed to perform this manually. They will
              not be able to answer questions like:  How many processors should I have? 
              Which sensors should be connected to which processors?  Mapping algorithms onto
              sensor networks involves expertise in programming and software, knowledge of
              the algorithms needed to analyze the, and an understanding of the distributed
              nature of the sensor network.  The goal of this research is to develop a set of
              tools to allow application experts to customize the behavior of smart sensor
              arrays to solve their real world problems.

Sensors that are being used in
              industry are transitioning from analog to digital interfaces.  While the
              digital interface can be exceptionally powerful, the lack of a standard
              communication protocol has allowed for 60 proprietary busses to appear in this
              market.  To remedy this, the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers
              (IEEE) has created a standard for these sensors, the IEEE 1451 smart sensor
              standard. By defining a standard interface, the IEEE 1451 will allow easier
              networking of industrial sensors from a variety of manufacturers.  The reasons
              are compelling for industry to adopt this standard, however,  a high-level
              software interface, like the one proposed here, is critical.

