Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Novel Instrument for the Determination of Extensional Rheology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2000  
File        : a0060438

Award Number: 0060438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99625              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gavin J. Braithwaite gavin@campoly.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cambridge Polymer Group
	      11 Ward  Street, Suite 100
	      Somerville, MA  021434215    617/864-5566

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1443,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project describes a
              unique instrument capable of quantifying the extensional rheological behavior
              of solutions, pastes and melts. In this instrument a small quantity of fluid is
              rapidly stretched between two plates to form a liquid bridge, and the diameter
              decrease is subsequently monitored as the fluid drains under gravity and
              surface tension. Comparison of rheological models with the data allows one to
              extract viscosity, surface tension, elasticity and other parameters relating to
              extensional flows. Currently, researchers rely purely on simple shear
              characterization or capillary rheometry, neither of which can provide
              unambiguous quantitative information about extensional flow behavior.

The
              integration of hardware and analysis software will make the instrument both
              versatile and unique. The instrument will be invaluable to industry where all
              processing flows (such as extrusion, filling, pumping, blow molding, spraying
              etc.) involve extensional flow fields. It will find utility in industry as both
              a quality control tool and a research grade device. Additionally it will be of
              use to academia, where no simple quantitative analytical device exists for
              examining the draining (and filament forming) behavior of fluids. In addition
              the instrument described has a number of intrinsic advantages that make it
              ideal for a shop floor installation. It is compact (our envisioned design will
              have a footprint smaller than 0.1 m 2 ) and robust (with few moving parts it
              will be tolerant of dust and vibration). It should also be easy to use,
              especially in an indexing mode for intra-lab comparisons (or floor level
              quality control). The removable plates will allow easy cleaning and the ability
              to change plate surface chemistry. Finally the sample volumes will be small.

