Title       : STTR Phase I: Copper Seed Layers and Interconnects Derived from Nanocrystal
               Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a0060156

Award Number: 0060156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Avery N. Goldstein agoldstein@patlaw.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Starfire Electronic Dev.
	      2825 Ayrshire Rd.
	      Bloomfield Hills, MI  48302    248/338-3739

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1771,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project involves the
              synthesis of soluble, monodisperse copper nanocrystals as precursors in the
              formation of microelectronic copper seed layers and interconnects.  The
              proposed synthetic component builds on existing nanoparticles syntheses to
              obtain soluble, monodisperse copper nanocrystals.  Copper nanocrystals are to
              be applied by spin coating, thereby eliminating the current need for vacuum
              deposition.  A passivating agent will be used to control average particle size
              and impart particle solubility in conventional spin coating solvents such as
              amyl acetate, cyclohexanone and ethyl lactate.  Unlike conventional
              electrochemical and vapor deposition techniques, seed layer and interconnect
              formation occurs preferentially in wafer trenches and vias by taking advantage
              of the slower rates of nanocrystal solvent volatilization in these regions, as
              compared to substrate plateaus.  Chemical mechanical polishing, associated with
              existing deposition techniques should be eliminated along with the undesired
              scouring of copper to form a nonlinear interface. Nanocrystals not adhering to
              a trenched substrate are readily redissolved, purified and reapplied to further
              lessen waste.  The nanocrystals stranded in trenches are melted at a reduced,
              size-dependent melting temperature; to form bulk copper seed layer or
              interconnect structures.  Nanocrystal melting temperatures will be tailored to
              remain below 350 degrees Celsius.    

This project has immediate commercial
              application in the production of microelectronic seed layers and interconnects
              through the elimination of vacuum vapor deposition, chemical mechanical
              polishing and reduction of waste streams. Longer-term value is created through
              the formation of narrower and higher aspect ratio interconnects which are
              necessary for the continuing increases in computational speed demanded by the
              microelectronics industry.    

