Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Superior Corrosion Resistant Undercoating for Vapor Deposited
               Hard Coatings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a0060288

Award Number: 0060288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99891              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hamlin M. Jennings   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : EMCC
	      710 Central Ave
	      Wilmette, IL  600911950    847/452-3839

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1630,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
              new type of corrosion
resistant undercoating for application to metal
              substrates prior to the deposition of a hard decorative top coat applied by
              physical vapor deposition (PVD). PVD metal nitride coatings such as TiN and ZrN
              are extremely hard, and thus provide excellent scratch and wear resistance. 
              However, they do not provide adequate corrosion resistance because of
              micron-scale flaws that act as corrosion sites, and thus a corrosion-resistant
              underlayer is needed. This undercoat must be smooth, sufficiently hard to
              support the hard PVD coating, and provide good adhesion to both the substrate
              and to the PVD coating. Ideally, the undercoat would provide a leveling effect
              to minimize polishing of the metal substrate. Recently, a new method for
              coating metal with a thin layer of glass has been developed.  This coating,
              which is being optimized as a protective outer
coating for polished aluminum,
              has many of the attributes of a successful PVD undercoating including corrosion
              resistance, hardness, and leveling.  The key technological step will be to
              develop good adhesion between this glass coating and a PVD coating, and that
              will be the main focus of the proposed research.

PVD coatings are widely
              used for applications that require both durability and an attractive
              appearance; for example, metal-nitride coatings can be made to closely resemble
              polished metals including brass, gold, and chrome. Current applications include
              personal items (pens, glasses, watches, jewelry, etc.), door hardware, plumbing
              fixtures, decorative trim on automobiles, and architectural detailing.  All
              these PVD applications require an undercoating to improve corrosion resistance,
              but current undercoating options are inadequate for a number of reasons such as
              cost and environmental impact. Electroplating, the most widely used
              undercoating, uses significant amounts of toxic chemicals. A new type of
              undercoating which could meet performance and cost requirements while being
              environmentally friendly would thus have significant and immediate market
              potential.
