Title       : STTR Phase I: Light Transparent, Electrically Conductive Coatings by Filtered
               Cathodic Arc Plasma Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a0060284

Award Number: 0060284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jochen Schein schein@aasc.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AASC
	      2235 Polvorosa Avenue, Suite 230
	      San Leandro, CA  945772249    510/483-4156

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1630,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
              develop a new class of UV-transmitting, electrically conductive coatings by
              using filtered cathodic arc plasma deposition (FCAPD).
Cathodic arc plasmas
              are characterized by relatively high ion energy (20-150 eV) that lead to denser
              films.
Macroparticles which typically contaminate such plasmas can be filtered
              using curved magnetic filters that
have been developed by Berkeley's Plasma
              Application Group.  Filtered cathodic arc coatings are not only
dense but may
              be grown in a vacuum or reactive environments.  The window of partial pressure
              for
stochiometric compound films is wider than for evaporation or sputtering
              methods. Moreover, sputtered
coatings (and more so beam-evaporated films) are
              characterized by porosity, which increases the thickness
for the required
              electrical conductivity, with reduced optical transmission. The primary
              objective of Phase I
is to demonstrate that a thin coating can be produced
              which is highly conductive and transmits between 80-
90% of the incident UV
              radiation.  Once the feasibility of using FCAPD for producing high density
              coatings
that show high electrical conductivity and high light transparency
              have been answered, Phase II will
optimize the process for larger areas.
              Engineering development, marketing and sales of coating units is the
province
              of Phase III.

Commercial applications for FCAPD films include:
              electrochromic automotive and aircraft windows; heat
mirrors; optoelectronic
              devices such as UV triggered diamond high voltage switches; solar cell surfaces
              for
space applications Cathodic arc deposition of TiN coatings is a well
              established technology which supports
tens of millions of dollars of business
              annually worldwide in coating equipment sales and hundreds of
millions of
              dollars annually for the coatings generated by that equipment.
