Title       : SBIR Phase I: Latent-Reactive Surface Modification Reagents for Biofilm Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a0060593

Award Number: 0060593
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99468              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick E. Guire pguire@surmodics.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SurModics, Inc.
	      9924 West Seventy Fourth Street
	      Eden Prairie, MN  55344    612/829-2707

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1630,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
              new reagents subject to thermal activation for bonding water-soluble
              microbicidal polymers and surfactants to the lumen surface of a variety of
              opaque tubing materials at temperatures compatible with the plastics. 
              Materials have been developed with bulk physical properties needed for
              transport of water and aqueous mixtures; however, the development of biofilm on
              the wet surfaces is a continuing serious problem in the dental, pharmaceutical,
              food processing, and marine transport industries.  Surface modification of
              water lines could decrease the formation of biofilm while retaining the desired
              bulk properties of the tubing.  Photochemistry has been proven commercially
              successful in enhancing the surface properties of medical devices with
              radical-based surface modification initiated by RF plasma or ultraviolet light.
               However, these energy sources are not effective for modification the inner
              surfaces of 'opaque' tubes such as water lines used with dental units and
              plastic plumbing in pharmaceutical plants.  This project is designed to develop
              latent-reactive radical generators activatible with external source energy that
              penetrates these 'opaque' devices.  This innovative approach to scheduled
              activation of radical generators is expected to facilitate the coupling to many
              'inert' surfaces that cannot be activated with external light or plasma
              sources.

Microbial colonization and biofilm formation remain a major cost
              and threat to human health and product quality for dental and pharmaceutical
              industries, health care and public lodging, and marine vessel utilization. 
              Successful development of microbicidal and antifouling coating technology for
              the luminal surface of opaque transport and storage vessels for aqueous liquid
              ingestible products, constitute a significant market.

