Title       : SBIR Phase I: Low-Cost Glass Fiber Composites Tailored Towards Concrete
               Reinforcement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a0060205

Award Number: 0060205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99718              (Estimated)
Investigator: Habibur Chowdhury dpdinc@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DPD Inc
	      2000 Turner Street
	      Lansing, MI  489064053    517/347-5648

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1635,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
              a new class of low-cost glass fiber composites that are compatible with the
              highly alkaline environment of concrete.  The polymer matrix in these
              composites incorporates a fine dispersion of ion-exchange polymers for reducing
              the alkalinity of diffusing concrete pore water.  Ion-exchange polymers are
              prepared by attaching polar groups to polymeric matrices; they are now produced
              at relatively low cost for use in filters and conditioners.  The matrix
              incorporating ion-exchange polymers can feasibly act as a molecular sieve that
              removes alkali metal ions from the pore solution, and thus protects glass
              fibers against alkali attack.  Preliminary analyses suggest that ion-exchange
              polymers possess the capacity, in the context of composite reinforcement in
              concrete, to lower the alkalinity of concrete pore water to levels that are not
              aggressive against glass fibers. Blending of conventional thermoset matrices of
              glass fiber composites with ion-exchange polymers promises to alter the
              favorable economics of glass fiber composites.  This would facilitate
              large-scale introduction of composites as corrosion-proof and truly durable
              replacement for steel in concrete, noting that the relatively high cost of
              carbon and aramid fiber composites limit their potential for use as reinforcing
              bars in concrete. 

The resulting composites should meet the demands on
              concrete reinforcement in terms of mechanical performance, bond strength to
              concrete and cost, and should also be chemically and dimensionally stable in
              the alkaline environment of concrete under diverse exposure conditions. 
              Potential commercial applications of the technology cover reinforced concrete
              systems subjected to corrosive environments, including bridge structures,
              parking ramps and offshore structures.

