Title       : SBIR Phase I: Management Tool for Software Development Risk and Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a0060018

Award Number: 0060018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob W. Ulvila julvila@post.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Decision Science Assoc
	      P.O. Box 969
	      Vienna, VA  221830969    703/242-7121

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1108,1321,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Decision Science
              Associates (DSA) has the goal of developing a decision support tool that
              combines methods from software measurement, Bayesian statistics, and
              multiattribute utility theory (MAU). This tool will support a software
              manager's assessment and evaluation of risks and assist in making tradeoffs and
              decisions under uncertainty. Descision Scienct Associates' innovation addresses
              the following needs: software risk assessment methods; measures of the
              effectiveness of software development techniques and processes; and automated
              tools to support managing and developing software systems.  The three technical
              objectives of Phase I are to:  (1) develop methodologies to support a software
              manager's assessment and evaluation of risks and to assist him in making
              tradeoffs and decisions under uncertainty; (2) obtain preliminary evaluations
              of the methodologies from prospective customers; and (3) encode the
              methodologies in a Phase I prototype tool.  These objectives will be pursued by
              conducting four tasks: (1) develop prototype user interfaces for the tool,
              MAUS-R (MultiAttribute Utility for Software, Risk); (2) seek feedback from
              prospective customers; (3) revise methods in response to the feedback from
              prospective customers; and (4) develop a revised Phase I prototype. The
              full-scale development and demonstration of the tool will occur in the next
              phase of the research.

Decison Science Associates proffered technology,
              MAUS-R, is directed at any industry with an information technology (IT).  It is
              particularly suited for industries with larger percentages of IT to total
              workers including: financial businesses like banks, investment companies,
              insurance companies; telecommunications businesses; transportation businesses,
              food and consumer goods companies; Point-of-Sale equipment manufacturers;
              pharmaceuticals; and the power and energy industry.  Government agencies are
              also prospective customers; approximately 50% of the top US spenders on IT are
              state governments.  The target market consists of software professionals at the
              group leader, supervisor, manager, or CIO level; software process standards
              professionals-those performing metrics collection, benchmarking, and the like;
              and software systems buyers.  DSA has established a strategic alliance with
              PRICE Systems, the world-wide leader in Computer-Aided Parametric Estimating
              (CAPE) tools, to facilitate the commercialization of this proposed R&D)


