Title       : STTR PHASE I: Integration of Electromagnetic Actuation Using VOST Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a0060765

Award Number: 0060765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99828              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Burgess vost@fiberpipe.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Big Horn Valve
	      110 S. Gould, Suite A
	      Sheridan, WY  82801    307/672-0968

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1505,1632,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will investigate
              the feasibility of using electromagnetic force to actuate a Venturi Off-Set
              Technology VOST(TM) valve. Traditional valve actuator stems and packing are
              significant sources of harmful emissions and provide opportunities for fluid
              contamination. The actuator innovation to be developed in this project would
              eliminate stems and packing, thereby eliminating this source of emissions. The
              VOST(TM) axial design provides the platform to accomplish this task, but only
              if actuated electromagnetically. This investigation will utilize design
              modeling (numerical models) and actuator testing to determine torque, speed and
              displacement properties needed to configure an electromagnetic actuator. First
              the work plan will evaluate the VOST(TM) design for torque, speed and
              rotational displacement specifications. Information obtained will be used to
              rank three potential actuator configurations. The most promising configuration
              will be prototyped and tested for performance. In addition, commercial
              feasibility of this configuration will be assessed using component cost,
              complexity, and serviceability. It is anticipated that the selected
              electromagnetic configuration will meet desired operational parameters.
              VOST(TM) designed valves incorporating this actuation concept will eliminate
              sources of emissions. 

If successful, the research will result in an
              electromagnetic actuator configuration that can facilitate a hermetically
              sealed valve. The actuator concepts developed can be extended to any
              application requiring an axial rotation of 180 degrees or less. This will apply
              to control systems beyond valves.



