Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of Novel Steganography Detection Capabilities for
               Digital Images
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a0060476

Award Number: 0060476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99957              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiri Fridrich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mission Research Corp
	      735 State Street
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93101    805/963-8761

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project, Mission
              Research Corporation proposes to develop algorithms and implementation
              techniques for detecting steganography (i.e., hidden information) in digital
              imagery files. Although considerable research has been performed on developing
              novel steganographic methods, very little work has been performed on the
              important topic of detecting the presence of steganography in digital images.
              The fundamental goal of this SBIR research is to develop and refine techniques
              for detecting steganography and implement these techniques into user friendly
              software products. The proposed Phase 1 research will consist of identifying
              the most commonly used steganography techniques, determining image
              characteristics/statistical measures that can be calculated and used to
              identify the presence of steganography in various image formats (including
              lossless, lossy, and palette formats), developing an artificial neural network
              decision model, and implementation/testing of the results using a prototype
              Matlab algorithm. This research will provide valuable tools and methodologies
              that would enable system administrators to monitor files that may be leaving
              (or entering) a site on the Internet or from a secure facility, with the
              objective of determining the probability that such files contain hidden
              information.

There are a wide variety of potential users of steganography
              detection techniques. Computer systems administrators at US government
              installations would likely be among the first to benefit from development of
              these steganography detection techniques. Due to the sensitivity of tremendous
              amounts of data handled by the US government, tools that would ensure security
              of electronic traffic through their many worldwide sites would be a valuable
              asset. In addition, are many other establishments including private businesses,
              law enforcement agencies, and health care facilities that are also very
              concerned with ensuring that unauthorized transfer of information does not
              occur to or from their facilities.

