Title       : SBIR Phase I: Advanced Nongray Radiation Model Coupled with a Computational
               Fluid Dynamics (CFD) Code for Large-Scale Fire and Combustion Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a0060286

Award Number: 0060286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99944              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandip Mazumder sm@cfdrc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CFD Research Corporation
	      215 Wynn Drive, 5th Floor
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    205/536-6576

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1406,9150,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I study is aimed toward
              demonstrating the feasibility of using the correlated k-distribution approach,
              in conjunction with the control-angle discrete ordinates method (CA-DOM), for
              accurate and fast simulation of non-gray radiative transport in large-scale
              fires and combustion systems.  Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) has been used
              in the combustion industry with considerable success during the past decade.  
              Currently, however, there exist no CFD package, which treats non-gray radiation
              in combustion gases with the desired level of accuracy and computational
              efficiency.   With a trend towards cleaner combustion, radiation from molecular
              gases is assuming a major role in the determination of combustor performance,
              and NOx emissions in particular.  Under this Phase I study, a novel approach to
              predict radiative transport in combustion gases, based on the correlated
              k-distribution approach, will be developed.  The correlated k-distribution
              approach has recently been used with great success, and has the potential of
              improving computational efficiency by orders of magnitude.  This is as opposed
              to other models, which promise only marginal improvements.  The proposed
              development will be conducted within the framework of the commercial CFD code, 
              CFD-ACE+.  The model will be evaluated by comparing its predictions against
              experimental and analytical data.  Special attention will be paid towards
              computational efficiency.   

The proposed radiation model will be the first
              commercial tool of its kind. Its uniqueness lies in its ability to predict
              radiative transport both accurately and fast.  It is expected to have
              significant impact on the gas turbine, furnace building, and automotive
              industry, where CFD design and optimization is already standard practice.  In
              addition, the tool could be used effectively for the simulation of large-scale
              fires and for atmospheric radiation calculations.   

