Title       : SBIR Phase I: Electrochemical Brush Patination for Outdoor Copper and Bronze
               Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2000  
File        : a0060166

Award Number: 0060166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lorrie A. Krebs krebs@daccosci.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DACCO SCI, Inc
	      10260 Old Columbia Road
	      Columbia, MD  21046    410/381-9475

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1630,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
              a new means of caring for patina-covered copper and bronze outdoor statues,
              sculptures, and other structures, by developing Electrochemical Brush
              Patination (EBP).  If successful, this technique will allow conservators and
              others responsible for the care of patinized objects to repair small localized
              areas of damage to the patina layer without damaging the surrounding intact
              layer.  Stripping away large sections of patina, as is commonly done
now when
              repairs to damaged areas are effected, followed by repatination through
              non-electrochemical means, can be time-consuming, expensive, and potentially
              damaging to the object to be restored.  The proposed technique will use
              controlled electrochemistry to grow a new patina layer only in the damaged
              area.  The new patina shall share the visual appearance (e.g., color, texture,
              thickness) of the original patina layer, and shall provide equivalent
              protection against corrosion of the substrate metal.

The proposed EBP
              technique will provide a new and improved means of repairing localized areas of
              damage to patina layers on copper and bronze. While the initial inspiration for
              this work was the desire to repair outdoor art objects, the commercial
              applications may extend to any patinized commercial or private structures,
              including but not limited to statuary, sculptures, building details, bridge
              details, etc.  Repair of damaged patina on such structures is important not
              only for visual appearance, but also for protection of
the underlying
              substrate metal from ongoing corrosive attack.
