Title       : SBIR Phase I: Self-Reinforced Materials for Rapid-Prototyping of High-Integrity
               Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a0060707

Award Number: 0060707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99937              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Gagne rgagne@MSPolymers.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MPT
	      Port Bienville Industrial Park
	      Bay St. Louis, MS  395209306    228/533-0825

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1052,1468,5371,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on rapid
              prototyping processes involving organic materials that are among the most
              advanced of such techniques due to the ready processability of resins and
              polymers. Unfortunately, organic polymers typically do not offer mechanical
              performance competitive with materials such as metals or ceramics and,
              therefore, cannot be utilized to directly fabricate high-integrity components.
              The company has developed unique thermoplastic, self-reinforced polymers (SRPs)
              with exceptional mechanical strength and stiffness rivaling that of metals and
              composites. Development of suitable SRP formulations will enable fabrication of
              low-density, high-integrity components by rapid-prototyping techniques for a
              variety of relatively low-volume applications including launch vehicles,
              spacecraft, aircraft, custom commercial products, etc. The focus will be on the
              development of SRP powders that can be processed by laser sintering techniques
              into such components. The research will entail preliminary optimization of
              resin composition (e.g., molecular weight and distribution, melt rheology,
              additives, etc.) and powder characteristics (e.g., particle size and
              distribution, bulk density, etc.) to enable effective sintering with high
              retention of mechanical properties. Initial test coupons will be fabricated at
              the University of Texas at Austin for evaluation and verification of the
              proposed innovation.

High-performance polymeric powder materials will enable
              fabrication of low-density, high-integrity components by cost-effective
              rapid-prototyping techniques for a variety of relatively low-volume
              applications including launch vehicles, spacecraft, aircraft, custom commercial
              products, etc. The same resin materials, albeit in pellet rather than powder
              form, can also be utilized to fabricate similar parts in higher volumes by more
              conventional extrusion or injection molding techniques. 

