Title       : SBIR Phase I: Zeolite Membrane Module For High-Temperature Hydrogen Separation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2000  
File        : a0060414

Award Number: 0060414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhijiang Li zli@ceramem.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CeraMem Corporation
	      12 Clematis Avenue
	      Waltham, MA  02453    617/899-4495

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1417,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks the
              development of highly selective, energy efficient H2 separation technologies. 
              The research addresses the development of low cost, high-performance zeolite
              membrane modules for high-temperature H2 separation from CO and/or light
              hydrocarbons such as CH4.  The availability of such membrane modules for
              high-temperature hydrogen separation in industrial processes would: (1) improve
              the cost efficiency and/or energy efficiency of hydrogen separation processes
              currently performed; and (2) provide an enabling technology to make hydrogen
              separation economically viable in a number of processes.  Such processes
              include many with very large potential volumes and are predominant in the
              petroleum refining and petrochemicals industrials, such as synthesis gas H2/CO
              ratio adjustment, H2 recovery from hydroprocessing purge streams, fuel cell H2
              purification, membrane reactors for dehydrogenation etc.  However, to date,
              such membrane-based high-temperature H2 separation methods do not exist on a
              commercial scale due to lack of low-cost, high-performance membranes. 
              Large-scale commercial use of membranes for gas separations currently is
              limited to organic polymeric membrane modules in low-temperature service.
              

This program is aimed to develop low cost, high-performance zeolite
              membrane modules for high-temperature H2 separation from CO and/or light
              hydrocarbons such as CH4.  The membrane modules which will be developed will
              consist of a highly selective zeolite top layer, in situ synthesized on
              high-surface-area honeycomb ceramic monoliths with appropriate underlying
              membrane structures.  Because of the unique structural properties of the
              zeolite material used, the membrane modules fabricated are expected to have
              high selectivity and permeance for high temperature H2 separation. 

