Title       : An Experimental Analysis of Cooperation in Finitely RepeatedGames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1990       
File        : a9012691

Award Number: 9012691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33464              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas D. Davis ddavis@busnet.bus.vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project involves the design and execution of laboratory                   
              experiments on cooperation in finitely repeated games.  Particular             
              conditions to be examined include nonbinding communication ("cheap             
              talk").  Other experiments are designed to investigate the                     
              relationship between cooperation levels and the payoff properties              
              of outcomes that serve as possible punishments or rewards.                     
                                                                                             
              Game theorists have devoted considerable attention to models of                
              equilibrium cooperation in dynamic, multi-stage games.  The                    
              conditions thought to be necessary for such cooperation to occur               
              are affected by market and individual characteristics that alter               
              the structure of the game.  This project examines the behavioral               
              significance of these characteristics.  Such an assessment is                  
              important for future theoretical work.  In addition, insights                  
              gained from laboratory data may aid in predicting when cooperative             
              outcomes will arise in naturally occurring markets.  Many policy               
              debates turn on assumptions about the extent to which economic                 
              agents behave cooperatively.  The desirability of challenging a                
              horizontal merger, for example, depends largely on the likelihood              
              of a post-merger conspiracy.  Similarly, when product quality is               
              unobserved prior to purchase, consumer-protection policies may be              
              unnecessary if consumers and producers cooperate.
