Title       : Planning Grant on Preserving Scientific Integrity in the the Behavioral Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1992  
File        : a9012479

Award Number: 9012479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25449              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia H. Null   (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Psychological Assoc
	      750 First Street NE
	      Washington, DC  20002    202/336-5500

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award supports a planning committee effort to consider                    
              strategies by which behavioral and social science journal editors              
              might help to reduce misconduct in their sciences.  The planning               
              effort will examine prior research and related efforts, consider               
              how to broaden involvement to include a wide range of behavioral               
              and social science disciplines, and define the problems and                    
              activities that would respond to them appropriately.  Two committee            
              meetings are planned.  The first will develop an understanding of              
              the current status of ethical, legal, methodological, editorial and            
              public policy issues with respect to scientific misconduct in the              
              behavioral and social sciences.  It will plan the work activities              
              for the second meeting and make assignments for work to be done                
              preceding that meeting.  At the second meeting, the committee will             
              develop a needs assessment and a set of recommendations for action             
              and activities that should follow.  Afterwards, staff and committee            
              members will work together to prepare a report that will summarize             
              the current status of efforts to minimize misconduct in the target             
              sciences, identify gaps in the current effort, and recommend                   
              further actions to address the problems.  The report will be                   
              disseminated to relevant governmental agencies and officials and               
              to behavioral and social scientists and journal editors.                       
                                                                                             
              This project focuses on an important issue.  The principal                     
              investigators and planning committee members are very well                     
              qualified; planning activities are appropriate and feasible; the               
              sponsoring organization is very appropriate; results will provide              
              an important basis for actions that can help to reduce misconduct              
              in the behavioral and social sciences.  Support is highly                      
              recommended.
