Title       : Chemistry of Heterocumulene Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1990     
File        : a9012739

Award Number: 9012739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Bruno jbruno@wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic                  
              Program will enable Dr. Joseph W. Bruno of the Chemistry                       
              Department of Wesleyan University to study the mechanism of                    
              reactions of ketene complexes, using complexes in which an                     
              unsymmetrically substituted heteroallene is bound to the metal.                
              Four reactions will be investigated: (1) cleavage of the C-O                   
              bond in coordinated ketenes; (2) intramolecular isomerization                  
              of ketenimines and ketenimidates; (3) reversible C-C cleavage                  
              of coordinated ketones; and (4) stereoselective addition to                    
              coordinated ketenes.  These studies have relevance to                          
              Fischer-Tropsch chemistry, industrial processes which utilize                  
              syn-gas (carbon monoxide and hydrogen) to produce a variety of                 
              hydrocarbons, alcohols, aldehydes, esters, and ketones.                        
                                                                                             
              Dr. Bruno has previously prepared vanadocene and niobocene                     
              ketene-hydride or ketene-alkyl compounds which are anticipated                 
              to undergo bimolecular eliminations with early transition metal                
              alkyls, hydrides or amides.  The resulting species are expected                
              to exhibit ketene C-O cleavage reactions to produce                            
              oxo-vinylidene species.  In the ketenimine project, emphasis                   
              will be placed on determining the bonding mode of the                          
              intermediate in isomerization reactions.  During the C-C                       
              cleavage reactions of coordinated ketones, formation of                        
              metallaenolate has been suspected.  Spectroelectrochemistry                    
              techniques will be used to confirm the presence of this                        
              species.  In the last project, cyclopentadienylmanganese                       
              complexes will be studied.
