Title       : Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Potassium Transporters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1994      
File        : a9012213

Award Number: 9012213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Gaber r-gaber@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The long term goal of this research is to take advantage of the                
              powerful genetic capabilities available in the yeast, Saccharomyces            
              cerevisiae to understand 1) The kinds of potassium transporters                
              present in this eukaryote and 2) the structure and function of the             
              transporters.  The questions to be addressed in the near term are              
              the following:  What are the structural and functional                         
              similarities, if any, between the high and low affinity potassium              
              transporters already identified?  What is the topological                      
              organization of these potassium transporters in the plasma                     
              membrane?  Which amino acids in the transporter polypeptides are               
              involved in the mechanism of potassium transport?  A gene, TRK1,               
              likely to encode the high-affinity potassium transporter, has been             
              cloned, as has a gene, TRK2, required for low-affinity potassium               
              uptake.  Goals for the next three years are:  1) to define                     
              topological features of the high-affinity transporter (TRK1); 2)               
              to determine the relationship between TRK1 structure and function              
              by combining site-directed mutagenesis with in vivo functional                 
              assays; 3) to determine the molecular basis of potassium affinity              
              and identify amino acids likely to interact directly with potassium            
              ions by isolation and analysis of mutations in TRK1 that increase              
              discrimination between potassium and rubidium; 4) to pursue a                  
              molecular analysis of the TRK2 gene; 5) to determine the molecular             
              basis of mutations in the TRK2 gene and determine their                        
              physiological effects, 6) to determine the molecular changes in                
              TRK2D mutants (alleles of TRK2 that enhance low-affinity potassium             
              uptake); and 7) to assess the functional roles of the high and low-            
              affinity potassium transporters.  Future goals include genetically             
              identifying potassium channel genes in yeast.                                  
                                                                                             
              The proposed research is a continuation of the molecular and                   
              genetic analysis of potassium transport in the yeast, Saccharomyces            
              cerevisiae.  This small eukaryote is useful as a model system in               
              which to examine the molecular basis of potassium transport which              
              is a highly conserved and fundamental physiological function of all            
              cells.  Through the isolation of mutants that exhibit altered                  
              potassium transport, proteins involved in the movement of this                 
              essential ion across cell membranes can be identified genetically,             
              and the relationship between the structure and function of                     
              potassium transporter molecules can be investigated.
