Title       : Support for Computerization and Expansion of Ichthyology Collection of the Field
               Museum of Natural History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1991   
File        : a9012652

Award Number: 9012652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Schindel                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $352846             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Chernoff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1129      LONG-TERM PROJCTS IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Ichthyological Collection of the Field Museum of Natural              
              History is one of the five most important fish collections in the              
              western hemisphere.  These reference collections are invaluable                
              resources for systematists, ecologists, biogeographers, and a                  
              variety of researchers interested in fishes.  Dr. Barry Chernoff,              
              Curator of the collection, plans an aggressive program of                      
              expansion and improvement for the collections.  New storage areas              
              will be added and equipped with shelving systems.  The collection              
              will be reorganized during transfer to the new storage areas,                  
              making them more accessible to visiting researchers.  Data entry               
              of specimen information into a computerized database will also                 
              increase the collection's research impact.                                     
                   Natural history collections such as this provide the                      
              foundation on which generations of biological research can be                  
              built.  Well curated collections allow direct study of the                     
              effects of changing climate and land use, and provide the only                 
              record left by extinct species.  Continued growth and improvement              
              of these collections serves the current research community, and                
              provides critical resources for future researchers.
