Title       : Neurochemical Monitoring of Motor Regulatory Circuits in theRat Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1990      
File        : a9012745

Award Number: 9012745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Comer                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31880              (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg A. Gerhardt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   The basal ganglia are a group of nuclei in the brain with                 
              major responsibility for causing movement of body parts.  To                   
              date, neuroscientists have been able to collect anecdotal data                 
              from these motor nuclei by recording either electrical or                      
              chemical events from single cells within the basal ganglia.                    
              However, this approach does not tell us what ensembles of cells                
              within the nuclei are doing at one instance to effect a movement.              
              Thus, it is necessary to create and develop recording devices                  
              which will allow scientists to measure electrical and chemical                 
              events from multiple sites within a nucleus of cells if we are to              
              fully understand how neural circuits operate to cause an arm to                
              move for example.  Dr. Greg Gerhardt is taking the initial steps               
              in the development of solid-state microsensors that can be used                
              to monitor the neurochemical substratum of motor regulation.  He               
              plans to develop and test biosensors to monitor chemical and                   
              electrical events in "real time" in the extracellular environment              
              of striatal neurons.  He proposes to develop multichannel                      
              silicon-based biosensors for the rapid determination of dopamine,              
              glutamate, and acetylcholine activity in the basal ganglia of                  
              laboratory animals.  This work is extremely important, being at                
              the cutting edge of research which will allow us to understand                 
              the neurochemical mechanisms that underlie execution and control               
              of brain motor circuits.
