Title       : Intellectual Capital and Its Commercialization: Institutional Context and
               Information Dilemmas in Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1990    
File        : a9012925

Award Number: 9012925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80305              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne G. Zucker zucker@nicco.sscnet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marilynn B. Brewer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In the early development of the biotechnology industry, new                    
              contexts of biotechnology firms were created, joining the                      
              university lab, while at the same time old contexts of                         
              pharmaceutical and chemical firms were largely pushed aside.                   
              Understanding these changes is important to explaining where the               
              industry may go in the future, as well as in understanding growth              
              of other science-based industrial developments.  Zucker and                    
              Brewer propose to study and explain the rate of founding and the               
              geographic location of new biotechnology firms as a function of                
              available intellectual capital and the dual membership of                      
              founders in firms and universities, as well as the phenomenon of               
              new biotechnology firms spinoffs and the extent to which                       
              scientific knowledge remains public or becomes proprietary.  They              
              also propose to model the productivity of scientists as a                      
              function of a variety of individual and contextual factors.  They              
              will combine a number of different data bases to obtain                        
              information and make use of innovative modeling techniques that                
              combine partial likelihood and multi-level analytical methods.                 
              To estimate these models, detailed micro-level data must be                    
              collected, as well as data on the organizations and cities and                 
              regions within which the individual-level scientific discovery                 
              and application takes place.  Implications of this research                    
              include improved understanding of the discovery/application                    
              process, the effects of institutional context on that process,                 
              and the changing character of knowledge flow that follows from                 
              commercialization and the increase in proprietary pressures.
