Title       : Four Blades of Grass: An Investigation of Plant Breeding, 1900-1970
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1990    
File        : a9012722

Award Number: 9012722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Perkins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Evergreen State College
	      
	      Olympia, WA  98505    206/867-6000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The science of plant breeding, 1900 - 1975, has produced new crop              
              varieties capable of remarkably higher yields than were older                  
              cultivars.  By 1975, it was possible to say that the new varieties,            
              plus other changes in agricultural technology, had been a key                  
              ingredient in a massive change in human social life:  globally, we             
              became a species that lives primarily in urban areas with only a               
              minority of people left in production agriculture in rural areas.              
              This project involves the preparation of a book-length treatment               
              of the history of plant breeding from a comparative, cross-cultural            
              perspective.  The treatment will include the building of the                   
              conceptual foundations of the science plus the interactions of the             
              science with its political and economic context.  A central thesis             
              of this book is that issues of war and national security shaped the            
              context in which plant breeders worked.  Events in World War I set             
              the stage for the growth of plant breeding as a national asset.                
              World War II, the demise of colonial empires, and the cold war                 
              provided an enormous boost to plant breeding as nations sought                 
              increased security through enhanced food production.  In the                   
              contemporary world, it is impossible to understand the treatment               
              of plant breeding by political institutions without discussing the             
              strategic implications of the science.  Complexities of the                    
              agricultural industry make it essential to focus the research and              
              resulting manuscript on a sub-set of plant breeding issues:  wheat             
              breeding in Britain, India, Mexico, and the United States provides             
              a case study to advance this thesis.  Evidence comes from archival             
              sources supplemented by secondary literature and oral interviews.              
                                                                                             
              This research has a unique and timely focus; its results will be               
              useful and accessible to a wide audience.  The qualifications and              
              track record of the investigator are excellent; institutional                  
              support is adequate; the budget request is modest.  This award is              
              highly recommended.
