Title       : Student Pugwash USA International Conference (June 1992) andChapter Activities
               on Science, Technology and Ethical Responsibility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9012308

Award Number: 9012308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123508             (Estimated)
Investigator: Betsy Fader   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Student Pugwash USA
	      505-B 2nd Street NE
	      Washington, DC  200024916    202/544-1784

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              Student Pugwash USA is an organization that is devoted to                      
              increasing awareness among graduate and undergraduate students on              
              ethical issues posed by science and advancing technology.  Programs            
              are international, intergenerational, and interdisciplinary, and               
              include the organization of biennial conferences and the                       
              development and integration of a campus-based chapter network, to              
              build a growing community of individuals who bring to their work               
              a lasting commitment to responsible decision making.  This award               
              will provide support for student participants to attend the Seventh            
              Biennial Conference and for chapter and regional development                   
              activities.  The conference allows approximately 90 U.S. and                   
              foreign students to spend a week with about 40 experts and leaders             
              in science, government, academia and business in small group and               
              plenary sessions exploring the social and ethical implications of              
              environmental, scientific and technological change.  Conference                
              research papers and plenary speeches are often published in                    
              professional journals.  This year's conference theme is "New Ways              
              of Thinking:  Ethical Issues in Science and World Affairs."                    
              Chapter development activities include local and regional                      
              conferences, a national Chapter Organizing Workshop and Chapter                
              Meeting and Conference, the revision of chapter relevant                       
              publications, and the development of an electronic campus-based                
              student network.  NSF support provides approximately 15% of the                
              costs of these activities.  This support assists Student Pugwash               
              USA to raise additional funds from private sector donors.                      
                                                                                             
              This proposal comes from an organization with a track record of                
              successful and innovative activities to increase students'                     
              awareness of the links between science, technology and society.                
              The project director is very competent; the project plan,                      
              appropriate.  NSF support will allow the conference and chapter                
              programs to continue as the organization develops its plans for                
              long term financial stability.  An award is highly recommended.
