Title       : Chaos, Quantization and the Correspondence Principle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1990      
File        : a9012010

Award Number: 9012010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10352              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Batterman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Batterman is investigating the connections between                         
              classical and quantum mechanics,in light of the fact that                      
              classical systems appear to allow generic chaotic behavior                     
              while quantum systems do not.  One question he is asking is                    
              that of a definition of chaos for quantum systems.  While                      
              there is at least some consensus on how to define chaos in                     
              classical physics,the question of a definition for chaos in                    
              quantum mechanics is completely open.                                          
                                                                                             
              One approach to a quantum definition for chaos is to adopt an                  
              algorithmic complexity definition.  The virtue of this view                    
              is that it seems to be "theory neutral."  On this definition,                  
              quantum mechanics is completely inhospitable to chaos.  Dr.                    
              Batterman argues that this definition is to be resisted, since                 
              to a certain degree it divorces the issue of chaos from the                    
              dynamics.  Instead, Dr. Batterman argues that a proper                         
              understanding of the correspondence principle resolves the                     
              problem of defining quantum chaos.  The correspondence                         
              principle, when properly interpreted already supplies a                        
              unified account of chaos--for both classical and quantum                       
              mechanics.  Dr. Batterman argues that the interpretation of                    
              the correspondence principle which he advocates has historical                 
              support which can be found in Niels Bohr's early writing on                    
              the quantum theory.
