Title       : Transboundary Flows of Capital-Related Income
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1991      
File        : a9012908

Award Number: 9012908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam Rose azr1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maureen Kilkenny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Income flows across regions are at the core of important                  
              theories in Geography and Regional Science relating to regional capital        
              accumulation and corporate dominance.  Major problems with research            
              relating to interregional income flows are the lack of a consistent            
              theory about the nature of flows and the lack of an adequate data base         
              to test hypotheses.  The purpose of this project is to investigate             
              income flows across boundaries Transboundary flows of personal income          
              and consumption expenditures include the proceeds from the absentee            
              ownership of capital, commuter salaries, and tourist spending.  The            
              investigators will develop a data base on flows of capital-related             
              income across state boundaries by refining and reconciling previously          
              unavailable data from the Internal Revenue Service, the Bureau of              
              Economic Analysis, and the Bureau of the Census.  The data will be used        
              to discern patterns of capital-related income flows across regions.            
              These patterns will be based on the regression of these "transboundary"        
              flows on several important variables thought to explain capital flows.         
              The data will also be used to test a key hypothesis regarding the              
              extent to which economic characteristics of business operations and            
              regional economic structure affect capital accumulation.                       
                                                                                             
                   The study will build a data base on interregional capital flows.          
              It will contribute to regional capital theory, which has long been             
              constrained by lack of capital flow data, and to other research that           
              involves the development of nonsurvey methods for the construction of          
              social accounting matrices at the sub-state level.  The study will             
              assess the explanatory value of regional differences in firm size,             
              character of financial institutions, and credit policies in the                
              explanation of these flows.  By increasing our understanding of the            
              ways that economic activities expand and contract, local and regional          
              officials will be better able to anticipate and plan for these marked          
              multiplier effects.
