Title       : Particle Transformation in the 'generation Zone': Biology and Chemistry of
               Mesopelagic Aggregates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1992     
File        : a9012340

Award Number: 9012340
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244798             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary W. Silver msilver@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1650,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Most organic matter synthesized in surface waters of the sea is                
              returned to inorganic constituents within the upper 500 m, or                  
              "regeneration zone."  Oceanographers attribute these chemical                  
              transformations mostly to living organisms. Yet surprisingly                   
              little is known about the biology of remineralization below the                
              euphotic zone:  whether the responsible organisms are                          
              dominantly metazoan or microbial and whether or not they occur                 
              on the larger particles that deliver material to depth.  Dr.                   
              Silver will conduct a 2-year study in Monterey Bay, and                        
              accessible, Comparatively deep water site, to study the role of                
              both microbes and deep water site, to study the role of both                   
              microbes and zooplankton in the remineralization of particles                  
              >1mm. Using a combination of in situ observations and                          
              laboratory measurements, she will study both the abundant                      
              marine snow particles and very large aggregates (m size) that                  
              can serve as model systems for such studies.  She plans to (1)                 
              measure the size and abundance of the aggregates, (2) determine                
              their chemical properties and associated living communities.                   
              (3) measure regeneration-related activities of the communities                 
              on the particles, and (4) compare and particle-related                         
              remineralization rates to those measured by sediment traps in                  
              the area.  For these measurements, she will use field surveys                  
              with a Romotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) and a Marine Snow                       
              Camera, a variety of sampling devices operated from the ROV,                   
              and a series of experiments on natural samples incubated on                    
              shipboard and in the laboratory.  In year 2, Dr. Silver                        
              transects the California Current to learn whether the very                     
              large aggregates, which are hypothesized to be regeneration                    
              centers to Monterey Bay, occur in significant numbers further                  
              offshore.  These results will increase the understanding of the                
              biology of midwater remineralization and the role that                         
              particles can play in the process.
