Title       : Flowing Solids Reactor A New Concept for NH3 Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1991      
File        : a9012966

Award Number: 9012966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 1,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Aleksandar Dudukovic   (Principal Investigator current)
              Octave Levenspiel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst Petroche Gas Oil Che
	      
	      Novi Sad, YO  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5954      YUGOSLAVIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this three-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research            
              project in chemical engineering between Aleksandar Dudukovic of the            
              University of Novi Sad's Institute for Petrochemistry, Gas, Oil and            
              Chemical Engineering and Octave Levenspiel of Oregon State                     
              University is to investigate applications of three phase flowing               
              solid contactors and engineering reactors applied to ammonia (NH3)             
              synthesis.  Particular attention will be given to the feasibility of           
              employing flowing solid adsorbents in removing ammonia and improving           
              its synthesis.  Ammonia is a key material (fertilizer) in world                
              agriculture, yet the original 1912 method of synthesizing ammonia,             
              which consumes much energy and is somewhat expensive, is still being           
              used today.  Through their research on the gas-solid contactors,               
              Dudukovic and Levenspiel will explore energy-saving methods of                 
              ammonia synthesis.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on                  
              Cooperation in Science and Technology and is supported through a               
              Joint fund consisting of matching contributions from the U.S. and              
              Yugoslav governments.  The U.S. contribution is provided annually by           
              the Department of State.  No NSF funds are involved.  The award,               
              except for funds for U.S. scientist travel, is made to the Yugoslav            
              institution.  NSF's goal to advance scientific knowledge will be               
              promoted through the joint efforts and complementary expertise of              
              the Yugoslav and U.S. investigators.
