Title       : Soil Degradation, Migration, and International Security
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1993     
File        : a9012759

Award Number: 9012759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl S. Zimmerer zimmerer@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                   Humans instigate and respond to rapid changes in natural                  
              environmental conditions in a complex set of ways.  The process of soil        
              degradation, for example, traditionally has been studied largely in            
              natural and physical terms, with emphasis placed on the loss of soil           
              material, declining fertility, and changing vegetative sustainability.         
              Complete understanding of the process of soil degradation also involves        
              the study of human activity, however, because much of the loss and             
              deterioration of soils results directly from human activity.                   
              Furthermore, as soils degrade, agriculture and other human endeavors           
              must change.  This project examines not only those direct links among          
              human, natural, and physical systems; it also looks interactions one           
              step removed on order to determine how human and environmental forces          
              relate to each other.  The project will consist of a comparative study         
              of soil degradation in three districts of eastern Bolivia.  Soil               
              erosion will be estimated using direct measurements in sample plots and        
              through analysis of aerial photographs.  These photographs and field           
              observations also will be used to measure changes in land use, which           
              will be analyzed in conjunction with the soils data in order to                
              evaluate associations between land-use change and soil erosion.                
              Complementary analyses will integrate socio-economic data for the last         
              few decades and information gathered from interviews and oral histories        
              to assess social causes of practices that have promoted soil                   
              degradation and the degree to which soil degradation has become an             
              important political issue within Bolivia and in terms of its dealings          
              with other nations.                                                            
                   The results of this project will be valuable at a number of               
              levels.  Specific information gathered in the study area will increase         
              understandings of human-environmental interaction in this politically          
              volatile region.  The broader conceptual base within which this study          
              is set is global in nature, however, and the Bolivian conclusions will         
              complement results from related studies conducted elsewhere, thereby           
              enhance our broader knowledge of the human dimensions of global                
              environmental change.
