Title       : Light-Dependent Oxygen Cycling in Marine Systems Measured by 18o Tracer
               Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1991    
File        : a9012669

Award Number: 9012669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304536             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd M. Kana kana@hpl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Kana will address the general question of "light respiration"              
              in marine waters.  Considerable direct and indirect evidence                   
              indicates that light can significantly affect oxygen consumption:              
              in some cases elevating the rate up to 10 times the rate of dark               
              respiration.  What this stimulation of oxygen consumption means                
              in terms of organic cycling is very poorly understood due to the               
              historical difficulty in measuring the fluxes and the                          
              simultaneous occurance of at least 5 distinguishable oxygen                    
              uptake processes.  Recent development in Dr. Kana's laboratory of              
              two isotope (180) methods capable of measuring oxygen cycling in               
              the light provide the basis for tackling this problem.                         
                                                                                             
              The research coordinates field measurements of light-dependent                 
              oxygen uptake and evolution in an estuarine habitat with                       
              controlled laboratory studies of oxygen cycling in phytoplankton               
              species isolated from the study site.  The major variables of                  
              interest are phytoplankton composition, defined by seasonal                    
              cycles, and light intensity.  Field experiments center around                  
              characterizing the effects of seasonal and event scale phenomena               
              on oxygen cycling, especially as mediated by the phytoplankton.                
              Laboratory experiments center around the identification of the                 
              physiological processes responsible for light-dependent oxygen                 
              uptake.  In a related study, Dr. Kana will continue collaboration              
              with Drs. Carpenter and Capone in the study of oxygen cycling in               
              Trichodesmium.
