Title       : Protein Separations with Microporous Immunoaffinity Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1992  
File        : a9012574

Award Number: 9012574
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261359             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark K. Colton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Despite the utility of immunoaffinity adsorption on the                        
              laboratory scale, it has had little application in large-                      
              scale downstream processing of therapeutic proteins                            
              because available support matrices have poor mechanical                        
              properties and immunoaffinity ligands are costly and                           
              often deactivate upon exposure to elution conditions.                          
              Recently available microporous hollow fiber membranes                          
              suitable for bioprocessing promise advantages of high                          
              throughput rates and short residence times that may                            
              preserve the useful lifetime of labile ligands.  The                           
              potential of these materials in immunoaffinity                                 
              separations is untested and principles for design and                          
              scaleup undeveloped.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The goal of this research is to develop a fundamental                          
              understanding of the phenomena that determine the                              
              performance of microporous immunoaffinity membranes in                         
              protein separations.  Membranes will be activated and                          
              used to bind three ligands for further study:  Protein A,                      
              which binds to most immunoglobulins, and two monoclonal                        
              antibodies - anti-bovine serum albumin and anti-Factor                         
              VIII.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The immunoaffinity membranes will be fully characterized                       
              in terms of physiochemical properties.  Measurements will                      
              be made of (1) ligate adsorption and elution breakthrough                      
              curves, (2) equilibrium and reaction rate parameters, (3)                      
              axial dispersion coefficients, and (4) ligand and ligate                       
              localization within the membrane.  A theoretical model                         
              will be developed, validated by comparison with                                
              experimental data, and used in simulations to explore                          
              design and optimization.  The ability of bound ligand to                       
              retain functional activity will be explored with                               
              successive adsorption-elution cycles using automated                           
              equipment.
