Title       : Global Models of Chemical Fluxes in the Oceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1993    
File        : a9012333

Award Number: 9012333
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger W. Baier                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $579039             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge L. Sarmiento jls@splash.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh W. Ducklow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1577,1670,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Chemical fluxes from the ocean's surface into the deep sea vary                
              over the ocean in response to the supply of nutrients, the                     
              availability of light, and the dispersion of newly-produced                    
              material by local turbulence and sinking.  Funding is requested                
              to continue the development of global scale models which                       
              integrate biological and chemical components into three-                       
              dimensional ocean general circulation models (GCM's) that                      
              simulate the major features on the ocean's physical forcing.                   
              Towards this end we have already developed a series of                         
              component models describing the upper ocean ecology and water                  
              column transformations, and carried out a first series of                      
              three-dimensional simulations in which these components have                   
              been included separately in ocean GCM's.  Our Atlantic Ocean                   
              GCM model of upper ocean ecology, while reproducing the gross                  
              features of ocean biology, such as the spring bloom, low                       
              productivity in the subtropical gyre, and high productivity in                 
              the equatorial region, has numerous problems, some of which can                
              be traced to the GCM, and others of which are due to the                       
              ecology model.  We propose to carry out a series of new                        
              experiments with higher resolution, more realistic GCM's; and                  
              to work on the continued development of our ecosystem model,                   
              with the inclusion of 2 size classes of phytoplankton and                      
              zooplankton being our first priority.  We also propose to enter                
              a new phase in our work of working closely with JGOFS                          
              investigators in analyzing the results of the North Atlantic                   
              Bloom Experiment, and planning future studies such as the                      
              Pacific Equatorial Experiment.  Our world ocean GCM model of                   
              water column transformations shows an improved fit to                          
              observations when the formation and regeneration of dissolved                  
              organic matter is included in addition to particulate organic                  
              matter.  In addition to continuing our effort to improve our                   
              understanding of the production and regeneration of dissolved                  
              organic matter in the water column (a process which will be                    
              greatly helped by additional measurements), we propose to                      
              proceed on development of a more detailed model of particle                    
              dynamics which makes use of the ecosystem approach we have                     
              employed in the upper ocean and the observational constraints                  
              obtained by reactive trace metals radioisotopes.  We also                      
              propose to complete an ongoing reanalysis of Redfield ratios                   
              which thus far suggests that as much as 1/4 of the organic                     
              nitrogen sinking below 1000 m may be getting denitrified.
