Title       : Pathogenesis in a Widespread, Estuarine Copepod: Etiology and Demographic
               Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1990 
File        : a9012540

Award Number: 9012540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45699              (Estimated)
Investigator: Darcy J. Lonsdale dlonsdale@ccmail.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred C. Dobbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Factors influencing the dynamics of aquatic populations have been              
              studied for decades.  Understandably, physical and biological                  
              factors that are best quantified are those that have received the              
              most attention.  A factor that has been severely neglected by                  
              investigators is disease.  It is inarguable that disease may                   
              affect organismic performance and reduce ecological potential.                 
              In this research, Dr. Lonsdale will examine an affliction at the               
              level of its effects on individual organisms and the demography                
              of populations.  Her research will focus on Scottolana                         
              canadensis, a widespread, estuarine copepod. An affliction in S.               
              canadensis that can render females unable to reproduce. Dr.                    
              Lonsdale's experience with the ecology and culture of this                     
              copepod will permit a variety of experiments designed to                       
              determine the cause of the affliction and its potential for                    
              affecting the abundance of this species.  The methodology                      
              includes histological examinations of healthy and afflicted                    
              copepods with light and electron microscopy and life-table                     
              experiments using anti-biotics to help characterize the agent                  
              responsible for pathogenesis.  To test the hypothesis that the                 
              affliction negatively impact copepod growth, Dr. Lonsdale will                 
              conduct bi-weekly sampling of S. canadensis from environmentally               
              "stressed" and "pristine" estuaries on Long Island.
