Title       : Introducing Ethics Case Studies into Required Undergraduate Engineering Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1991      
File        : a9012252

Award Number: 9012252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Rabins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles H. Samson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond W. Flumerfelt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              To exercise leadership, engineering educators need to provide                  
              their students with the tools to identify and respond                          
              appropriately to engineering problems with ethical dimensions.                 
              This pilot study will test an approach for introducing ethical                 
              decision problems into required undergraduate engineering courses.             
              The study has a dual purpose:  to develop and test a case study                
              approach to sensitizing engineering students to the ethical                    
              issues involved in their engineering decision making, and to                   
              provide them with conceptual tools for thinking about these                    
              problems in a clear and responsible manner.  These goals will be               
              achieved by collecting and cataloging relevant case studies                    
              which include both technical and ethical issues.  These cases will             
              provide the basis for the development of aproximately 10 modules               
              that will be integrated into the syllabi of selected required                  
              engineering courses.  The case will transcend traditional                      
              departmental disciplinary lines and will cover such topics as                  
              environmental impact, product quality, safety and structural                   
              design.  They will be tested om selected classes in the Civil,                 
              Chemical, and Mechanical Engineering departments.  The study will              
              also develop a resources book of annotated and catalogued case                 
              studies complete with classroom use guidance material.  The use                
              of the material in classroom sessions, some of which will be                   
              recorded on videotape, will be evaluated by students and faculty,              
              and by a carefully selected national advisory committee.  Results              
              will be widely reported at professional society meetings,                      
              particularly the annual meeting of the American Society of                     
              Engineering Education.                                                         
                                                                                             
              This proposal focuses on an important area in Ethic and Values                 
              Studies.  The team of investigators is very well qualified;                    
              the plan is thoughtful and feasible; university support is                     
              extremely good.  Results are likely to improve the teaching of                 
              engineering ethics on this campus and in undergraduate curricula               
              nationwide.  Based on the merits of the proposal and the                       
              generally positive review, support is highly recommended.
