Title       : The Greenhouse Effect: A Case Study to Examine the Interaction of Science and
               the Mass Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9012393

Award Number: 9012393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee Wilkins lee_wilkins@jmail.jour.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              The gases that make up the earth's atmosphere are essential for                
              life.  As certain of them increase, they contribute to raising the             
              mean temperature of the earth.  These changes are called "the                  
              greenhouse effect."  Current debate centers on whether the amount              
              of warming is increasing, and what role humans play in the process.            
              This research focuses on the interaction between the scientific                
              community engaged in research on the greenhouse effect and mediated            
              reports of those events in newspapers, news magazines and network              
              television. Specifically, the research will attempt to delineate               
              the major areas of scientific findings on greenhouse research                  
              through an analysis of published scientific literature.  This                  
              analysis will focus on scholarly journals and examine both the                 
              content of specific scientific findings and the scholarly citations            
              used by researchers.  A content analysis of mass media coverage of             
              the issue will then attempt to trace when and how significant                  
              scientific findings do or do not appear in the mass media.  The                
              mass media content analysis also will attempt to delineate how                 
              those scientific findings are portrayed in news accounts--in short,            
              to descirbe and analyze how scientific findings are popularized                
              through media accounts.  It is anticipated that this process of                
              "mediating"  greenhouse research will be governed by norms and                 
              values of journalistic and scientific behavior, norms and values               
              reflective not only of both professions but also of other groups               
              in the society who have a variety of interests in the greenhouse               
              debate.  The hypothesis for this study is that certain journalistic            
              norms and values will influence the coverage of the greenhouse                 
              effect regardless of the particular source of the information and              
              in some ways largely independent of specific events.  The goal is              
              to articulate what those values are and to show how they influence             
              and are influenced by the values and norms of other groups,                    
              resulting in a mediated public agenda on important issues involving            
              science and public policy.                                                     
                                                                                             
              This research has an important and timely focus; its results will              
              be useful and accessible to a wide audience.  The qualifications               
              and track record of the investigator are excellent; institutional              
              support is good; the research plan is sensible.  Support is highly             
              recommended.
