Title       : Elemental Analyses of Marine Phytoplankton Purified by Cell Sorting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1992    
File        : a9012147

Award Number: 9012147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Olson rolson@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Much can be learned of the nutritional status, relative growth                 
              rates, physiology and food web position of particular organisms                
              from biochemical and stable isotope measurements.  However, these              
              measurements are almost always complicated in natural field                    
              samples by the presence of contaminating detritus and other                    
              organisms.  Since direct biochemical measurements of the bulk                  
              phytoplankton (collected on filters) are often equivocal,                      
              researchers have employed statistical methods and incubation                   
              experiments for determining phytoplankton biomass and                          
              assimilation patterns.  A powerful alternative to these indirect               
              solutions to the problem is flow cytometric cell sorting.                      
                                                                                             
              Flow cytometry, which allows us to recognize several classes of                
              phytoplankton based on their autofluorescence and light scatter                
              properties and to physically separate these particles form all                 
              others, will be used to obtain samples from a variety of oceanic               
              regimes for measurements of C and N (and secondarily, of the                   
              natural abundances of C and N stable isotopes).                                
                                                                                             
              Specifically,Dr. Olson will answer the following questions about               
              the nature and extent of N limitation in the oceans:                           
                                                                                             
              *    Is there a difference between the C:N ratios of                           
                   phytoplankton cells (and of specific groups within the                    
                   phytoplankton) in coastal waters and those in the                         
                   oligotrophic ocean?                                                       
              *    Are there seasonal differences in C:N ratio of                            
                   phytoplankton?                                                            
              *    Are there changes in C:N of the phytoplankton with depth?                 
              *    Are there diel changes in C:N ratios in the phytoplankton?                
              *    What are the characteristics of the "non-phytoplankton"                   
                   under these sets of conditions?                                           
                                                                                             
              The results will shed light on the extent of N-limitation int he               
              oceans and on the ecological roles of different groups of                      
              phytoplankton, and will help interpret observed patterns of                    
              isotope abundance in water column particle samples.  It should                 
              also act as a springboard for a variety of other biochemical                   
              measurements of specific components of the plankton.
