Title       : Efferent Control of Visual Sensitivity: Circadian Modulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1993       
File        : a9012069

Award Number: 9012069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Barlow   (Principal Investigator current)
              Denis G. Pelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In many animals the brain has some control over its own sensory                
              input.  The horseshoe crab, Limulus, provides a rather simple                  
              visual system demonstrating that what the brain tells the eye                  
              can influence what the eye tells the brain.  The incoming                      
              visual information is called the afferent signal, and the                      
              central regulatory signal to the eye is called the efferent                    
              signal.  There is a day-night, or circadian, rhythm in the                     
              brain that transmits efferent nerve impulses to the eyes during                
              the night, inducing multiple changes in the retina of the eye                  
              that produce a million-fold increase in sensitivity of the eye,                
              for working in the dark.  This project will use anatomy,                       
              physiology, behavior, and computational neuroscience approaches                
              to study how the retinal rhythms of sensitivity relate to                      
              changes in the visual system and the animal's behavior.  Long-                 
              term physiological recordings will be made with precise control                
              of efferent signal to the retina.  The retina of this compound                 
              eye contains about 1000 nerve cells, and is the largest network                
              of neurons for which a quantitative description exists.  Its                   
              properties will be modeled computationally on the massively                    
              parallel Connection Machine, and the resulting properties will                 
              be related to the animal's visual behavior, particularly the                   
              ability to see and respond to the presence of other animals at                 
              night underwater.  Results from this unique study, from                        
              molecules to behavior, will have an impact on work in visual                   
              neuroscience, biological rhythms, efferent control of sensory                  
              systems, feedback regulation of engineering systems, and on                    
              understanding more about the neural basis of behavior.
