Title       : Interface `90: An Interdisciplinary Conference on Science, Technology and
               Humanities, October, 1990
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1990    
File        : a9012359

Award Number: 9012359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6152               (Estimated)
Investigator: Herb Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom Wiseman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Weeks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : INTERFACE Conf Inc
	      
	      Marietta, GA  30060    /   -

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              INTERFACE is an annual, national interdisciplinary conference                  
              devoted to the study and discussion of the interrelationship                   
              between the sciences, technologies, and humanities.  Created in                
              1976, INTERFACE is co-sponsored by the Humanities and Technology               
              Association and the Humanities and Social Sciences Department of               
              Southern College of Technology.  The conference provides a forum               
              for the examination of new and ongoing problems and issues that cut            
              across the natural and physical sciences, technology, the social               
              sciences, and the humanities.  This examination includes the                   
              ethical considerations that must be addressed when such issues and             
              problems are raised.  The conference attracts experts in such                  
              fields as physics, chemistry, ethics, literature, history,                     
              engineering, computer science, sociology, and the fine arts.  This             
              modest award will help INTERFACE to support some administrative and            
              special publication costs associated with the conference, while its            
              directors developing plans to make it self-sustaining in future                
              years.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              There are very few professional settings where discussion of                   
              interdisciplinary research interests is possible.  This conference             
              is one of them.  The organizers and host organizations have a track            
              record of success.  This modest request will enable the project                
              organizers to develop plans and activities that will give the                  
              conference more visibility and a better base of long-term support.             
              Results will improve interdisciplinary communication.  A one year              
              award is recommended.
