Title       : New Approaches to Seismological Problems at Nevado del Ruiz Volcano, Colombia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1990    
File        : a9012972

Award Number: 9012972
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12120              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vindell Hsu   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley N. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 5926      LATIN AMERICA, SDC
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1557,
Abstract    :
              This Science in Developing Countries Program Award will support                
              Professors Vindell Hsu and Stanley N. Williams of Louisiana State              
              University in a research collaboration with several Colombian                  
              seismologists from the Colombian Volcano Observatory (OVC).  The               
              researchers intend to study the Nevado del Ruiz volcano by                     
              deploying 5 portable digital seismographs to supplement existing               
              analog stations.  The digital instruments will enhance the location            
              capability of an existing network so that seismic sources can be               
              better assessed for both their level of activity and their                     
              relations to magma chambers.  Another important phase of the                   
              cooperation is to deploy digital instruments directly above                    
              several seismically active areas that have been detected by the                
              existing network.  By doing so, the researchers expect to record               
              digital data for analysis of source and/or path effects that may               
              be responsible for the various types of seismic signals recorded               
              at Nevado del Ruiz.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The researchers will work closely with Colombian seismologists who             
              will supply manpower as well as local logistical support.  The                 
              recorded data should help in the effort of modeling the various                
              types of volcanic seismic events observed before and after the                 
              1985 eruption of Nevado del Ruiz and also surrounding the September            
              1, 1989 eruption.  Most important of all, the researchers will                 
              accumulate data about Ruiz which is quite unique and not yet                   
              thoroughly studied.  The effort should help in characterizing the              
              seismicity associated with the volcano and, therefore, be useful               
              in the future in terms of predicting eruptions at Ruiz and other               
              andesitic volcanoes.
