Title       : NCSA Institute on Scientific Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1991     
File        : a9012534

Award Number: 9012534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard S. Hirsh                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74943              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Brady   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4066      PART FOR ADVANCED COMP INFRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This award supports a two week Summer Training Institute in                    
              scientific visualization at the National Center for Supercomputing             
              Applications (NCSA).  NCSA is an NSF supported supercomputing                  
              center providing access time, education, training and consulting               
              services to scientific researchers.  The summer workshop will have             
              two basic components: an awareness component, and applications                 
              component.  Students will be provided with a historic profile of               
              the evolution of computer graphics into scientific visualization.              
              Perspective will be given to systems and methodology in this                   
              evolution.  After learning the nature of the field, participants               
              will look at the current sate of the art by taking an abstract                 
              approach to current visualization methodology.  This methodology               
              will be placed in the context of actual visualization tools and                
              highlighted by case studies and practical examples.  The                       
              applications component will focus on visualization tools that are              
              available to the researcher.  This will be a "hands-on" approach               
              experienced in various NCSA laboratories.  Participants will work              
              with some of the applications available through NCSA, as well as               
              with some resources NCSA does not have, through vendor                         
              participation.  Courses will also include a survey of graphics                 
              system (hardware and software), introduction to 3D graphics and the            
              use of color in visualization.  Discipline specific experiences                
              will include chemistry fluid dynamics, and engineering.  Media                 
              output options (videotape/film) will be available.  An evaluation              
              of the institute will be done following completion of the two week             
              session.
