Title       : U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on the Hydrodynamic Stability of a Resuspended
               Layer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1991     
File        : a9012193

Award Number: 9012193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11062              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas Acrivos acrivos@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 5955      AUSTRIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1443,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Andreas Acrivos of the City                      
              College of New York to collaborate with Professor Uwe                          
              Schaflinger of the Institute of Fluid Dynamics and Heat                        
              Transfer, Technical University of Vienna, in a study of the                    
              hydrodynamic stability of a resuspended layer.  Several                        
              graduate students and postdoctoral associates of Dr. Acrivos                   
              will participate in the project.  It has recently been                         
              established that under laminar conditions an initially                         
              settled bed of solid particles is resuspended due to action                    
              of shear.  Further experiments have shown that the interface                   
              between the resuspended layer and the clear fluid becomes                      
              unstable due to interfacial waves.  The aim of the proposed                    
              cooperative research is to combine numerical calculations                      
              with carefully directed experiments in order to verify the                     
              theoretical prediction of a transition from a spatially to an                  
              absolutely unstable flow and to gain insight into the                          
              mechanisms responsible for the creation and the breakup of                     
              the waves.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The research will use an experimental setup designed and                       
              built by Dr. Schaflinger to study the basic resuspension flow                  
              in a two dimensional channel.  He and his group in Vienna are                  
              very experienced with experimental techniques, analytical and                  
              numerical methods in fluid dynamics and specifically in two                    
              phase flows.  Complementing this is the internationally                        
              recognized expertise of the group at CCNY in the fields of                     
              shear induced migration of particles, hydrodynamic stability                   
              and rheology.  Their ongoing theoretical investigation of                      
              viscous resuspension will be greatly enhanced by this                          
              experimental collaboration.                                                    
                                                                                             
              Resuspension plays an important role in most sediment                          
              transport phenomena, including industrial problems such as                     
              cross flow microfiltration.  The conditions under which a                      
              settled layer of negatively buoyant particles will resuspend                   
              are not well understood and are usually associated with                        
              turbulence at high Reynolds numbers.  Resuspension can also                    
              occur at low Reynolds numbers for which inertial effects are                   
              insignificant and the flow is laminar.  This project will                      
              produce a systematic study of the instabilities at the                         
              interface of two superposed stratified fluids by adjusting                     
              the parameters of the flow in accordance with the ongoing                      
              analytical and numerical investigations at CCNY.  It should                    
              result in fundamental insights into viscous resuspension and                   
              the stability of multiphase flows.
