Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in the History of Science and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1990      
File        : a9012160

Award Number: 9012160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : March 31,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Heilbron   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alice Walters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Alice Walters, doctoral student: Dissertation, "Tools of                       
              Enlightenment:  Scientific Texts and Instruments and the                       
              Dissemination of Ideas in Eighteenth-Century Britain."                         
              During the 18th century, scientific books and instruments--                    
              tangible objects designed to communicate knowledge about the                   
              natural world--acted both as media and merchandise, and did                    
              so in remarkably similar ways.  Ms. Walters, working under the                 
              direction of Professor John Heilbron, is exploiting this fact                  
              in her dissertation research which seeks to elucidate the role                 
              of both in the dissemination of ideas in 18th century Britain.                 
              Ms. Walters distinguishes four functions of books and                          
              instruments as media, defined as measuring, modeling,                          
              magnifying, and manufacturing, which correspond to four                        
              different conceptions of mankind's ability to act on nature.                   
              Special emphasis is placed on the active functions,                            
              magnification and manufacture.  As commodities, books and                      
              instruments were produced, advertised, sold, and consumed,                     
              frequently by the same individuals for the same reasons.                       
              These market activities are examined, with particular                          
              attention focused on the many individuals with professional                    
              or commercial interests in both books and instruments.                         
              Finally, the conceptual and commercial functions of books and                  
              instruments are tied together through consideration of the                     
              impact of the various commercial activities on the ideas                       
              communicated by these objects and their presentation.
