Title       : Nitrogen-Production Dynamics in Marine Microbial Mat and Stromatolite Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9012496

Award Number: 9012496
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142418             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans W. Paerl hpaerl@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Paerl proposes an intensive examination of nitrogen cycling                
              in diverse marine benthic microbial mat systems.  Microbial                    
              mats are extant relatives of stromatolites, the ancient life                   
              form on Earth, and are important not only from a                               
              paleobiological/evolutionary standpoint, but are ecologically                  
              as well, often making substantial contributions to the overall                 
              productivity of the ambient environment.  Nitrogen fluxes                      
              attributable to nitrogen fixation, denitrification, and                        
              nitrification will be quantified.  The spatial and temporal                    
              distribution of each process will be determined.  Three field                  
              sites will be used on the basis of the dual criteria of                        
              representing areas of potentially great importance to shallow                  
              water nutrient fluxes and close resemblance to fossil                          
              stromatolites.  This investigation represents the first                        
              comprehensive examination of nitrogen transformations in                       
              microbial mats, within which the spatial distribution of oxygen                
              (and thus the distributions of many important geochemical                      
              transformations), changes dramatically on a diel basis.                        
              Changes of this type are characteristic not only of microbial                  
              mats but a large number of benthic photosynthetic communities                  
              occurring in areas of fundamental ecological importance, such                  
              as salt marshes, tidal flats, mangrove swamps, and barrier                     
              islands.
