Title       : Agricultural Production and Climatic Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1992    
File        : a9012423

Award Number: 9012423
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106949             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana M. Liverman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                   Agricultural practices throughout the world have been                     
              revolutionized within the last half-century.  New crop hybrids,                
              chemical fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides, and irrigation and           
              drainage systems have substantially increased production.  In many             
              areas, land reform and changing land-use patterns also have boosted            
              yields.  The degree to which new technologies and socioeconomic changes        
              have affected agricultural responses to climatic extremes has not been         
              studied in detail, however.  This project will examine this                    
              relationship by focusing on the degree to which climatic fluctuations,         
              especially drought, have affected agricultural production in Mexico            
              during the 20th Century.  Meteorological records, data from                    
              agricultural censuses and reports, and accounts in popular publications        
              will be used to reconstruct and map dynamic patterns of production and         
              to relate those patterns to changing technological and socioeconomic           
              conditions.  Statistical analyses will assess the correlation between          
              climate and crop yields, the degree to which new technologies have             
              buffered the agricultural system against climatic variability, and the         
              differences in drought impacts among different land-use regimes.  These        
              general analyses will be complemented by four case studies of                  
              vulnerability to drought that will rely on local records and interviews        
              with local residents.  These case studies will try to show how                 
              environmental, technological, and socioeconomic changes have altered           
              the impacts of climate on local agricultural systems.                          
                   This project will contribute to our general understandings of the         
              ways that altered forms of social and economic activity affect human           
              responses to changing natural conditions.  It will also enhance our            
              insights about the degree to which technological change makes societies        
              more or less resistant to environmental fluctuations, and it will              
              provide valuable information about the dynamics of agriculture in              
              Mexico, a nation that is representative of others that have been               
              strongly impacted by the "Green Revolution."
