Title       : Cycling of Silicon and the Significance of Silicon Limitation to Cell
               Flocculation in Coastal Diatom Blooms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9012032

Award Number: 9012032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172793             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Brzezinski brzezins@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Brzezinski proposes to study the cycling of silicon and                    
              silicic acid as a limiting nutrient during the development and                 
              demise of diatom blooms of Southern California.  These and                     
              other diatom blooms frequently flocculate and sink en masse                    
              without the intervention of grazers, unknown.  Flocculation                    
              often occurs coincident with the depletion of silicic acid from                
              the euphotic zone suggesting that silicon limitation can                       
              trigger these events.  They will combine the fine scale                        
              sampling capabilities of divers using SCUBA with sophisticated                 
              tracer methods to test the hypothesis that silicon limitation                  
              is a prerequisite for the mass flocculation of diatom blooms.                  
                                                                                             
              Recent evidence from a Gulf Stream warm-core ring suggests that                
              the depletion of silicic acid from the euphotic zone is also                   
              accompanied by a shift in the source of silicic acid supporting                
              silica production.  Before depletion, silica production is                     
              supported mainly by "new" silicic acid entrained from deeper                   
              waters.  Upon nutrient depletion, there is a shift to a heavy                  
              reliance on "regenerated" silicic acid derived from the local                  
              dissolution of siliceous particles. They propose to examine                    
              whether this transition occurs in more productive waters and to                
              establish its relationship to the vertical flux of silicon and                 
              carbon.
