Title       : A Life of Discovery: The Story of Charlotte Friend
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1990     
File        : a9012990

Award Number: 9012990
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leila Diamond   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wistar Institute
	      3601 Spruce Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/898-3700

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Diamond is writing a biography of Charlotte Friend, a                      
              distinguished pioneer in the study of viral oncology and cell                  
              differentiation.  Friend made two seminal discoveries that had                 
              a major impact on our understanding of the cancer process.                     
              At a time when the concept that viruses could cause cancer was                 
              still viewed with skepticism, she isolated a virus that                        
              produced a fatal leukemia in mice.  She later showed that                      
              tumor cells such as those induced by her virus could be                        
              stimulated to differentiate into normal cells and lose their                   
              potential to divide.  This study is being made within the                      
              scientific, intellectual and social contexts of Dr. Friend's                   
              time.  Among the themes being examined by Dr. Diamond are the                  
              influence of Friend's discoveries on modern cancer research,                   
              the challenge and joy of discovery, the struggle to have one's                 
              unorthodox observations accepted, and the importance in this                   
              struggle for acceptance of having strong personal and                          
              institutional support.  Another theme of significance for this                 
              story is that of women's conflict between family life and a                    
              life in science.  All of these developments are framed by                      
              the "molecular revolution" and the cognitive/technical                         
              development of Friend's research within the changing                           
              intellectual landscape of biomedicine in the DNA era.  This                    
              biography should be of interest to scientists, historians and                  
              laymen and an inspiration to young men and women who aspire                    
              to an exciting life in science.
