Title       : Progress in Pteridology, a Conference at University of Michigan 23-27 June 1990
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1990      
File        : a9012272

Award Number: 9012272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : May 31,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Florence S. Wagner fwagn@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher H. Haufler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Ferns and their spore-producing allies the lycopods and                   
              horsetails are unique among land plants in having two free-living              
              generations, both usually photosynthetic, one with half and one                
              with a full complement of chromosomes.  The complete life cycle                
              of a fern requires an alternation between the small haploid                    
              stage, at which sexual reproduction is effected, and the larger                
              sporophyte or "frond" stage at which spores are produced, for                  
              dispersal by wind. Recent technical advances in the laboratory                 
              culturing of the small haploid generation, the gametophyte stage,              
              have opened the way to molecular studies of fern growth and                    
              development and made possible the manipulation of environmental                
              cues affecting the timing of egg and sperm maturation,                         
              fertilization, and crossing within and among populations of fern               
              gametophytes.  Molecular analyses of enzymatic proteins and of                 
              nuclear and chloroplast DNA have also opened the way to direct                 
              measurement of gene differences within and among fern species. A               
              new set of technical tools is now available for the estimation of              
              phylogenetic or genealogical relationships among ferns, for the                
              tracking of geographical migrations, and for measuring genetic                 
              impoverishment in declining populations of endangered fern                     
              species.                                                                       
                   Drs. Florence Wagner and Chris Haufler have organized an                  
              international conference to focus on these new technical advances              
              in fern biology, to be hosted by the University of Michigan and                
              involving scientists from 20 countries.  This will be the second               
              such international gathering, since the first in 1983 in                       
              Edinburgh.  NSF support will help bring collaborators from                     
              Europe, Australia, and Japan to attend the five days of meetings.              
              Direct discussions among researchers working in otherwise                      
              separate laboratories around the world will be an additional                   
              benefit of the conference, and will facilitate a clearer focus on              
              major problems in fern biology now amenable to solution.
