Title       : Bioethics, Feminism, and the "Perfect Child": An Ethics and Value Critique
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1990     
File        : a9012898

Award Number: 9012898
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan Rothschild   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Lowell Res Fdn
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  01854    978/934-4750

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              This award will enable the investigator to complete the final                  
              chapters of a book in progress, "Engineering Birth:  Science,                  
              Technology and the 'Perfect Child'".  The central thesis is that               
              the new reproductive technologies interact with values and beliefs             
              about human perfectibility, to set norms for the "perfect child."              
              Thus these developments recall, transformed, an old ideology.                  
              Parts I and II of the book set the historic and conceptual                     
              framework and explore the interaction of the ideology of human                 
              perfectibility and the new reproductive technologies today.  Part              
              III is the current project and poses the following question:  Why,             
              even while invoking the possibility of creating new or improved                
              human beings, does much of the bioethics and feminist literature               
              fail to discuss how standards are being set, the criteria                      
              themselves, and what the meaning might be for the future direction             
              and use of such reproductive research?  The current research                   
              examines the bioethics and feminist critiques, situating them in               
              their milieus outside the medical arena, and compares them with                
              values, norms and standards being set in medical contexts.  The                
              chapters in Part III will show how the different cultures in which             
              the critiques are embedded inhibit analysis of the ways technology             
              and values interact to shape standards of human perfectibility and             
              the "perfect child."  These differences inhibit dialogue as well               
              as attempts to influence or change the direction of research.  Some            
              of the feminist literature, however, provides ways to bridge these             
              divides.  Drawing on an experiential methodology that links theory             
              and practice, this work suggests integrative models for evaluating             
              procreative norms, and thus a means to link ethics, research and               
              practice.  The project calls attention to the positive role                    
              feminist perspectives can play in integrating ethical perspectives             
              and in setting frameworks for meaningful dialogue between persons              
              making ethical judgments and those involved in scientific and                  
              technological research.  The book manuscript that will result is               
              scheduled for publication in a new series on the philosophy of                 
              technology at a university press.                                              
                                                                                             
              This research has an important and timely focus; its results will              
              be useful and accessible to a wide audience.  The qualifications               
              and track record of the investigator are excellent; institutional              
              support is very good; the research plan is sensible; the budget is             
              very modest.  Support is highly recommended.
