Title       : Mental Models of STS Issues: A Comparison of Engineering and Humanities Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1992     
File        : a9012421

Award Number: 9012421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia J. Atman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              In addressing the need for a technologically literate public and               
              for technically trained people sensitive to the social context,                
              it would be useful to have information about the values and                    
              knowledge already had by people who are to be further educated.                
              There is scarcely any empirical data about the values and                      
              relevant knowledge with which undergraduates enter courses, such               
              as STS courses, intended to foster these kinds of literacy.  The               
              courses, therefore, derive from a synthesis formed by specialists              
              and instructors and, at best, superficial generalizations about                
              the starting points at which students find themselves.  This                   
              research project addresses the need for empirical data about the               
              understanding of STS issues with which both humanities and                     
              engineering undergraduates come into these courses.  By                        
              interviewing undergraduates from engineering and the humanities                
              and also specialists in STS studies, the researchers will gather               
              data to begin to shed light on the needs of students in STS                    
              courses.  The findings will also be valuable for gaining a                     
              clearer understanding of how to go about studying these issues in              
              a more comprehensive way, less burdened by untested assumptions.               
              The findings will be disseminated to those who can make use of                 
              them in STS and engineering courses, and to wider audiences as                 
              well.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The investigators are very well qualified; the institutional                   
              resources are very good; the issues are important; results will                
              be appropriately disseminated.  The project is meritorious and                 
              recommended for award.
