Title       : Molecular Analysis of the Teopod Mutations in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1991     
File        : a9012315

Award Number: 9012315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Poethig spoethig@mail.sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              During shoot growth all plants progress through morphologically                
              and physiologically distinct juvenile and adult developmental                  
              phases. The mechanism regulating the expression of these phases                
              and the transition from one phase to another is poorly                         
              understood, particularly in herbaceous plants where the juvenile               
              phase is often brief. The Teopod (Tp) mutations of maize prolong               
              the expression of juvenile traits, and thereby provide an                      
              opportunity to study the genetic basis of phase change in a                    
              herbaceous species. To determine the function of these genes it                
              is necessary to identify their products and study how they are                 
              expressed during shoot growth. Ac-induced mutations of Tp2 will                
              be identified and used to clone this gene. The structure and the               
              sequence of this gene will be determined and transcribed regions               
              of the locus will be used as probes to study its expression in                 
              both normal and mutant plants. These experiments will initially                
              be performed by Northern analysis and later by in situ                         
              hybridization. To facilitate the cloning and genetic analysis of               
              both this and the other Tp genes, an RFLP map of the region                    
              surrounding each gene will be constructed. The function of the Tp              
              loci will also be studied by determining their effect on the                   
              expression of genes whose expression is normally limited to                    
              either the juvenile or adult phase of shoot growth. These latter               
              studies will reveal whether the character of the shoot is                      
              determined by a series of sequential programs, or in a                         
              combinatorial fashion by parallel developmental programs.
