Title       : Sharing Data with Social Scientists at Teaching Universities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1990 
File        : a9012185

Award Number: 9012185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99179              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan E. Sieber   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Hayward Fdn
	      25976 Carlos Bee Blvd
	      Hayward, CA  945421602    /   -

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              Research funding agencies are now insisting that investigators make            
              research data developed with their support accessible to others.               
              The goals are to encourage openness and integrity in science, to               
              ensure efficient use of research funds, and to provide training                
              resources.  This project examines data sharing behavior by creating            
              a field experiment in which shared data are requested, used, and               
              archived in a large and divrse teaching university.  The project               
              investigates how social scientists respond when asked for their                
              data, what problems (e.g., ethical, attitudinal, financial) inhibit            
              data sharing and how these may be mitigated; and what impact data              
              sharing has on the interests, openness, and research activity of               
              students and faculty who request and use data, and attend the                  
              workshops that are part of the project.  The project will produce              
              findings on data sharing and non-sharing behavior, findings on the             
              uses, benefits, problems and teaching of data-sharing, particularly            
              in primarily teaching universities, and models for university                  
              support for data sharing.  Project results will be useful to                   
              science policy makers who seek to improve the effectiveness of data            
              sharing, to faculty who want to use shared data in teaching                    
              research values and skills, and to university service and                      
              administrative staff who want to improve faculty and student skills            
              in data use.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This study grows out of the successful completion of a planning                
              phase, which resulted in a session on data sharing at the AAAS                 
              annual meeting in 1989, in several articles published in IRB and               
              elsewhere, and in a collection of papers under review for                      
              publication.  Co-principal investigators are very well-qualified;              
              institutional support is very good; the field research plans are               
              good and should provide rich information about opportunities for               
              and constraints on data sharing.  Results will be widely                       
              disseminated and relevant to both researchers and educational                  
              policymakers.  Support is recommended.
