Title       : ESR Dating of Pleistocene Hominid Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1990      
File        : a9012819

Award Number: 9012819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60975              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Clark Howell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In collaboration with Drs. Schwartz and Grun at McMaster                       
              University, Dr. Clark Howell will work to improve the ESR dating               
              technique, apply it to tooth enamel, and determine the ages of a               
              series of significant archaeological sites.  The ESR dating                    
              technique is based on the measurement of energy stored in crystal              
              lattices which result from the bombardment by environmental                    
              radioactivity.  The amount of stored energy can be determined by               
              electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy.  The age of the                    
              crystal is then determined from the ratio of the accumulated                   
              energy dose to the dose rate, which is a function of the                       
              concentration of radioactive elements in the environment.  This                
              method can be applied to the tooth enamel of large mammals and is              
              thus applicable to most Pleistocene prehistoric sites for ages up              
              to a few million years.  The project includes two stages.  The                 
              first will consist of a series of experiments to increase the                  
              accuracy and reliability of the technique.  In the second, the                 
              investigators will continue to date samples from                               
              anthropologically significant sites.                                           
                                                                                             
              This research is important for two reasons.  Reliable and widely               
              applicable dating techniques are lacking for most archaeological               
              sites over 40,000 years in age (this is the effective time limit               
              for radiocarbon dating).  If ESR can be established as a workable              
              technique, many archaeological sites could then be dated and the               
              information derived from them would be greatly increased.  The                 
              technique would also be useful to geologists, paleontologists,                 
              and other scientists concerned with the past.  Secondly, the                   
              specific sites which Drs. Howell, Schwartz, and Grun plan to                   
              examine are important in their own right.
