Title       : Tale of a Nuclear Winter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1991       
File        : a9012305

Award Number: 9012305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49608              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Badash   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              Studies in Science, Technology and Society (SSTS) supports research            
              about the intellectual and value contexts that govern the                      
              development and use of science and technology.  Ethics and Values              
              Studies, in SSTS, supports research on ethical and value aspects               
              of the interaction between science, technology and society.  This              
              research project uses the techniques of historical research to                 
              study a particular episode of this interaction--the nuclear winter             
              phenomenon.  Controversy existed from the moment of its                        
              announcement in the fall of 1983.  Some scientists and policymakers            
              criticized the initial study as being inexact and its publication              
              premature.  Others reacted against the way it was "marketed" to the            
              public and was the vehicle for a call for changes in national                  
              defense policy.  Subsequent research modified the original                     
              conclusions of cold and darkness, but it is widely believed that               
              the climatic effect would still bring disaster on a global scale.              
              Nuclear winter is an excellent example of the way in which many                
              branches of science contribute to a discovery; of the way in which             
              science advances by building on earlier work; of the interaction               
              between science, institutions supporting science, the media, and               
              the public; and of the impact of science upon public policy.  In               
              this project, the investigator will examine the published                      
              literature and use interviews to craft the story of nuclear                    
              winter's discovery, evolution, popularization, and scientific and              
              public controversies.  It will highlight different normative views             
              of the way science and scientists should appear before the public,             
              and when it is appropirate to urge action by the government based              
              on scientific knowledge.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This research has an important and timely focus; its results will              
              be useful and accessible to a wide audience.  The qualifications               
              and track record of the investigator are excellent; institutional              
              support is good; the research plan is sensible.  Support is highly             
              recommended.
