Title       : The Thermal Output of a Sea-Floor Hydrothermal System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9012240

Award Number: 9012240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bilal U. Haq                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : May 1,  1992         (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64947              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Lupton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will use the DSRV ALVIN to directly study                         
              the dynamics of turbulent buoyant plumes emanating from                        
              active hydrothermal vents. The aim of the project is to provide                
              a sound basis for relating water-comumn measurements of                        
              the effluent plumes to the thermal output of the underlying                    
              oceanic crust. The PI's propose to mount an instrument package on              
              ALVIN that will measure temperature, conductivity                              
              (salinity), vertical and horizontal velocity, light attenuation                
              (particledensity), and concentrations of manganese, silica, and                
              sulfide in real time via in situ flow injection analysis.                      
              The instrument will also collect discrete water samples                        
              for laboratory analyses. Data and water samples will be                        
              collected in real time shile driving ALVIN through buoyant                     
              hydrothermal plumes at several heights in the water column.                    
              Undiluted hydrothermal source fluids and the surrounding water                 
              column will also be studied. Specific objectives incluse:                      
              (1) characterization of vertical and lateral variation in                      
              physical properties, velocities, chemical concentrations, and                  
              suspended particles within the buoyant plume, (2) quantification               
              of entrainment and dilution rates as function of plume height,                 
              (3) determine turbulent variability in the buoyant plume and                   
              relate to property variations, and (5) testing numerical plume                 
              models against field measurements.
