Title       : Market Uncertainty and Government Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9012780

Award Number: 9012780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160270             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl Shell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project continues research on market uncertainty, the                     
              uncertainty generated by the economy itself.  In particular, the               
              project analyzes the stability of sunspot equilibria from various              
              models (1) in the face of more general lottery devices and (2) in              
              the face of the possibility of the formation of coalitions of                  
              cooperating individuals.  The initial phase of this research effort            
              will be an outgrowth of the analysis of stochastic equilibria in               
              economies with indivisible commodities.  The project also continues            
              the analysis of the role of government tax policies in the                     
              intertemporal allocation of resources, including their role in                 
              economies in which there is market uncertainty.                                
                                                                                             
              Economic actors must make decision in face of uncertainty.  Some               
              of this uncertainty is the result of uncertainty about economic                
              fundamentals-- tastes, endowments, production possibilities, and               
              even government policies.  This type of uncertainty is successfully            
              modelled by conventional general economic equilibrium theory.  This            
              project addressed another, significant source of uncertainty which             
              individuals actually face.  This is market uncertainty, uncertainty            
              generated within the economy itself, uncertainty about the economic            
              outcomes (such as prices, net trades, employment, and the inflation            
              rate) given the fundamental parameters.  Businessmen, for example,             
              wonder whether consumers' confidence will be high or low, whether              
              credit will be loose or tight, whether the dollar will be strong               
              or weak, and so forth.  Market uncertainty is a subject of obvious             
              social importance.  Macroeconomists, for example, ask what policies            
              should the government take to counteract disturbances generated by             
              the economy itself.  When we design organizations -- or, more                  
              generally choose mechanisms -- we shall want to know how                       
              uncertainty is created and transmitted by these new organizational             
              forms. This project contributes to our understanding of this type              
              of uncertainty by extending formal models of market uncertainty,               
              i.e., the so-called "sunspot equilibrium" models pioneered by the              
              investigator.
